";;£?' 


Kpf<n)t'n^i 


r^'-3 


j 

Thee 

Case,  __ 

Shelf, 

Book, 

OF  THE                                          T^COK-S 

)logical  .Seminary, 

PRINCETON,    N.J.        ^ 
".^.^vision        

$ection.        .     .          

- N» 

'^.^.^^  ^  ^^"^^ 


^  y^o  (^^^  -y^^^ 


^'  ^'-  .^ 


/^??/ 


PHYSLCO-THEOLOGY: 


'^' 


O  R,    A 


DEMONSTRATION 

O  F    T  H  E 

Being  and  Attributes  of  G  O  D, 


FROM     HIS 


Works  of  Creation. 

Being  the  Subftance  of 

Sixteen  SERMONS 

Preached  in  St.  Alary- Je-Boiv-Chiircb,  London -, 

At  the  Honourable   Mr.   BO  TLB's   Lectures, 

in  the  Years  171 1,  and  1712. 

With  large  Notes,  and  many  curious  Observations. 

By   W.  DERHAM,    Canon   of  Windfor^    Redor 
of  Upminfter  in  EJfex^  and  F.R.  S. 


Maid  CJ"  impia  confuetudo  eji  contra  Deos  difputare,  five  animo  id  Jit, 
five  fimulaie.     Cicer.  de  Nat.  Deor.  L.  2.  fine. 


The  Fifth  Edition,  more  CorreSl  than  aay  of  the  former. 


LONDON:  Printed  for  W.  and  J.  Innys,  at  the 

Pnnce'%'Arms  the  Wca  End  of  St.  Paul's.     17x0. 


T  O     T  H  E 


Moft  Reverend  Father  in  G  OD, 

fHO  MA  S, 

Lord  Archbifliop  of  Canterbury. 
Primate  of  all  ENGLAND,  &c. 


The  Surviving  Trustee  of  the  Honourable 
Mr.  BOTLE's  Lectures. 


May  it  pleafe  Tour  Grace, 

May  jullly put thefe  Lectures 
under  your  Graces  Patronage, 
their  Publication  being  wholly 
owing  to  You  :  For  having  the 
Honour  to  be  a  Member  of 
the  K  o  Y  A  L  Society,  as  well  as  a  'Divine ^ 
I  was  minded  to  try  what  I  could  do  towards 
the  Improvement  of  Thilojophical  Matters 
to  Theological  Ufes ;  and  accordingly  laid  a 

A  ^  Scheme 


The  Dedication. 

Scheme  of  what  I  have  here  publillied  a 
Part  of,  and  when  I  had  little  elfe  to  do,  I 
drew  up  what  I  had  to  fay,  making  it  ra- 
ther the  diverting  Exercifes  of  my  Leifure 
Hours,  than  more  ferious  Theological  Stti- 
)ites.    This  Work,  (although  I  made  acon- 
fiderable  Progrefs  in  it  at  firlt,  whiUt  a  No- 
velty ,  yet )  having  no  Thoughts  of  Pub- 
lilhing,  I  laid  afide,  until  your  Grace,  be- 
ing informed  of  my  Defign  by  fome  of  my 
Learned  Friends,  both  of  the  Clergy  and 
Laity,  was  pleafed  to  call  me  to  the  unex- 
pefted  Honour  of  Preaching  Mr.  Boyle's 
Lectures:  An  Honour  I  was  little  aware 
of  in  my  Country-Privacy,  and  not  much 
acquainted  with  Perfons  in  high  Stations, 
and  not  at  all,  particularly,  with  your  Grace. 
So  that  therefore  as  it  pleafed  your  Grace, 
not  only  to  confer  an  unfought  profitable 
Honour  upon  me  (a  Stranger)  but  alfo  to 
continue  it  for  Two  Years ,  out  of  Your 
good  Opinion  of  my  Performance,  in  fome 
meafure,  anfwering  Mr.  Boyle's  End ;  io  I 
can  do  no  lefs  than  make  this  publick,  grate- 
ful Acknowledgment  of  your  Grace's  great 
and  unexpected  Favour. 

But  it  is  not  my  felf  alone ;  but  the  whole 
Lecture  alfo  is  beholden  to  your  Grace's 
kind  and  pious  Endeavours.  It  was  You 
that  encouraged  this  noble  Charity,  and 
aflifted  in  the  Settlement  of  it,  in  the  Ho- 
nourable Founder's  Life-time ;  and  fmce  his 
Death,  it  was  You  that  procured  a  more 

certain 


The  Dedication. 

certain  Salary  for  the  Lecturers,  pt'\id 
more  conllantly  and  duly  than  it  was  be- 
fore *, 

Thefe  Benefits  as  I  my  felf  have  been  a 
Sharer  of,  fo  I  fliould  be  very  ungrateful 
ihould  I  not  duly  acknowledge,  and  repay 


*  It  may  not  only  gratify  the  Reader's  Curiofity,  but  al- 
fo  be  of  Ufe  for  preventing  Encroachments  in  Time  to 
come,  to  give  the  following  Account  of  Mr.  Boyle's  Lec- 
tures. 

Mr.  Boyle,  by  a  Codicil,  dated  July  18.  1691.  and  an- 
nexed to  his  Will,  charged  his  Mefi'uage  or  Dwelling-Houfe 
in  St.  Michael's  Crooked-Lane,  London,  with  the  Payment  of 
the  clear  Yearly  Rents  and  Profits  thereof,  to  forne  Lear- 
ned Divine  in  London,  or  wjtliin  the  Bills  of  Mortality,  to 
be  Eleded  for  a  Term  not  exceeding  Three  Years,  by  his 
Grace  the  prefcnt  Lord  Archbifliop  of  Canterbury  (then 
Dr.  TenifonJ  Sir  He};ry  uijliurfi ,  Six  John  Rotheram ,  and 
John  ETjelyn,  Efq;.  The  Bufir.eis  he  appomred  thofe  Lec- 
tures for,  was,  among  others,  to  be  ready  to  fat iifie  real  Scru- 
ples, and  to  anfwer  Juch  new  Objeclions  and  Difficulties,  as 
might  be  Jlarted  :  to  which  good  Anfzvers  had  not  been  made. 
And  alfo,  To  Preach  Eight  Sermons  in  the  Tear,  the  firfi 
Monday  (/January,  February,  March,  April  a/ii  May  , 
and  of  September,  Odober  and  November.  The  Subje<fl 
of  thefe  Sermons  was  to  be,  The  Proof  of  the  Chrijlian 
Religion  agatnft  notorious  Infidels,  Viz.  Atheijls,  Thetjls,  Pa- 
gans,  Jczus,  and  Mahometans,  not  defcending  lower  to  any 
Controverfies  that  are  among  Chrifttans  themjelves.  But  by 
Reaibn  the  Lefturers  were  feldom  continued  above  a  Year, 
and  that  the  Houfe  fometimes  ftood  empty,  and  Tenants 
brake,  or  failed  in  due  Payment  of  their  Rent,  therefore 
the  Salary  fometimes  remained  long  unpaid,  or  could  not 
be  gotten  without  fome  Difficulty  :  To  remedy  which  In- 
convenience, his  prefcnt  Grace  of  Canterbury  procured  a 
Yearly  Stipend  of  50/.  to  be  paid  Quarterly  forever,  charg- 
ed upon  a  harm  in  the  Parifli  of  Brill,  in  the  County  of 
Bucks:  Which  Stipend  is  accordingly  very  duly  paid  when 
demanded,   without  Fee  or  Reward. 

A  3  with 


The  Dedication. 

with  my  repeated  Thanks  and  good  Wilhes, 
And  that  the  infinite  Rewarder  of  well-do- 
ing may  give  Your  Grace  a  plentiful  Re- 
ward of  thefe,  and  Your  many  other,  both 
Publick  and  Private  Benefadions,  is  the 
hearty  Wifh  of. 


Your  G  R  A  c  e'5 


MqB  Humble  and  Thankful 


Son  and  Servant^ 


W.  D  E  R  H  A  M. 


TO 


T  O    T  H  E 


RAEDER. 


S  the  noble  Founder  of  the  Lectures 
/  have  had  the  Honour  of  Treach- 
mg,  was  a  great  Improver  of  Na- 
tural Knowledge,  fo^  in  all  Troba* 
litj',  he  did  it  out  of  aptous  End^  as  well  as 
in  Turfuit  of  his  Genius.  For  it  was  his 
fettled  Opinion,  that  nothing  tended  more  to 
cultivate  true  Religion  and  Tiety  in  a  Man's 
Mind,  than  a  thorough  Skill  in  Thilofofhy, 
Andfuch  Ejfe6i  it  manifeflly  had  in  him,  as 
is  evident  from  divers  of  his  publifhed  Tie- 
ces;  from  his  conjlant  T)e/^ortment  in  ne- 
ver mentioning  the  Name  of 
God  without  a  Paule,  and  vi-  ^^t J/s.^r"'' ' 
fible  Stop  in  his  Dilcourfe ;  ^«^ 
from  the  noble  Foundation  of  his  LeBures 
for  the  Honour  of  God,  and  the  generous 
Stipend  he  allowed  for  the  fame. 


A  4 


And 


To  the  Reader. 

And  forafmuch  as  his  Leisures  were  ap- 

fointedby  him  for  the  Proof  of 

Vtd  Mr.  BoyleV    j.^^  Chriftian  Religion    asainft 

Will.  A     1      -n  II'  " 

Atheilts  and  other  notorious  In- 
fidels, I  thought,  when  I  had  the  Honour  to 
be  made  his  LeBurer,  that  I  could  not  better 
come  uf  to  his  Intent,  than  to  attemft  a  ^e- 
monftration  of  the  Being  and  Attributes  of 
God,  in  what  I  may  call- Mr.  Boyie'j  own, 
that  is  a  Phyfico-Theological,  fVay.  And,  be- 
Jides  that  it  was  for  this  very  Service  that  I 
was  called  to  this  Honour,  I  was  the  more 
induced  to  follow  this  Method,  by  reafon  none 
of  my  learned  and  ingenious  Vredeceffors  in 
thefe  LeBures,  have  done  it  on  purpofe,  btd 
only  cafually,  in  a  tranjient,  piecemeal  man- 
ner ;  they  having  made  it  their  Bufinefs  to 
prove  the  great  ^Points  of  ChriJIianity  in  ano- 
ther IV ay,  which  they  have  accordingly  ad- 
mirably done.  But  confidering  what  our  Ho- 
nourable Founder'j-  Opinion  was  of  Natural 
Knowledge,  and  that  his  Intent  was.,  that 
thofe Matters  bypaffing  through  divers  Hands, 
and  by  being  treated  of  in  dtjjerent  Methods, 
fhould  take  in  moft  of  what  could  be  faid  up- 
on  the  Subje5f,  I  hope  my  ^Performance  may 
he  acceptable,  although  one  of  the  meaneft. 

As  for  others,  who  have  before  me  done 
fomething  of  this  kind\  as  Merfenne  on  Ge- 
nefis ;  i>r.  Cockburne  in  his  EfTiys ;  Mr. 
Ray  iw/'/.f  Wifclomof  God,C9<^.  and  1  may  add 
the  firfi  of  Mr.  BoyleV  LccSlurcrs,  the  mofl 
karned'Dr.  Bcnily  *//  his  BoyleV  Ledurc?,  the 
"■     '  eloquent 


To  the  Reader. 

eloquent  Arch-Bijloop  of  Cambray,   (and  1 
hear,  the  mgemous  Monf.  Perault  hath  fome- 
thing  of  this  k'tnd^  hut  never  faw  it :)  I  fay^ 
as  to  thefe  lec^rned  and  ingenious  Authors^ 
as  the  Creation  is  an  amfle  SubJeB,  fo  I  in- 
duftrioufly  endeavoured  to  avoid  doing  over 
Vi'hat  they  before  had  done ;  and  for  that  Rea- 
fon  did  not,  for  many  Tears,  read  their  Books 
until  I  hadjinijh'd  my  own.    But  when  I  came 
to  compare  what  each  of  us  had  done,  1  found 
my  fe  If  in  many  Things  to  have  been  ant  ic  if  a- 
ted  by  fome  or  other  of  T hem,  efpe daily  by  my 
Friend,  the  late  great  Mr. 'Kvj.    And  there- 
fore in  fome  T^ laces  I  jhorten  d  my  "Difcourfe^ 
and  referred  to  them ;   and  in  a  few  others, 
where  the  Thread  of  my  T^ifcourfe  would 
have  been  interrupted,  I  have  made  ufe  of 
their  Authority,   as  the  bejt  Judges ;   as  of 
Mr.  RayV,  for  Injiance,  with  Relation  to 
the  Mountains  and  their  T'lajits,  and  other 
^rodu^s.     If  then  the  Reader  Jhould  meet 
with  any  Thing  mentioned  before  by  others, 
itnd  not  accordingly  acknowledged  by  me,   I 
hope  he  will  candidly  think  vie  no  'Plagiary, 
becaufe  I  can  affure  him  I  have  alonq^,  (where 
I  was  aware  of  it,)  cited  my  Authors  with 
their  due  Traife.     And  it  is  fcarce  pojffible, 
when  Men  write  on  the  fame,  or  a  Subje^  near 
akin,  and  the  Obfervatinns  are  obvious,  but 
that  they  miift  often  hit  upon  the  (avie  Thinq^ : 
And  f  equently  this  may  happen  from  Terfons 
7?iaking  Ob  fit  vat  ions  about  one,  and  the  fame 
Thing,  without  knowing  what  each  other  hath 
done ;  which  indeed,  when  thejirfl  Edition  of 

my 


To  the  Reader. 

my  Book  was  nearly  printed  off,  I  found  to  he 
my  own  Cafe,  having  (for  wajit  oflDr.  HookV 
Micrography  being  at  hand,  it  being  a  very 
fcarce  Book,  and  many  Tears  Jince  I  read  it, J 
given  ^efcriptions  of  two  or  three  Things, 
which  1  thought  had  not  been  tolerably  well 
obferv'd  before,  but  are  defer ib'd  well  by  that 
curious  Gentleman. 

One  is  a  Feather,  the  Mechanifm  of  which 
we  in  the  main  agree  in,  except  in  his  Re- 
prefentation  in  Fig.  i.  Scheme  ii.  which  is 
fomewhat  different  from  what  1  have  repre- 
fented  in  my  Fig.  i8,  &c.  Btit  1  can  ft  and  by 
the  Truth,   though  not  the  Elegance  of  my 
Figures.     But  as  to  the  other  ^differences, 
they  are  accidental,  occafion'd  by  our  taking 
the  Tarts  in  a  different  View,  or  in  a  diffe- 
rent Tart  of  a  Vane  ;  and  to  fay  the  Truth, 
(not  flattering  my  f elf,  or  detratlingfrom  the 
admirable  Obfervations  of  that  great  Man, J 
I  have  hit  upon  a  few  Things  that  efcafdhim, 
being  enabled  to  do  fo,  not  only  by  the  Help  of 
fuch  Microfcopes  as  he  made  ufe  of\  but  alfo 
by  thofe  made  by  Mr.  Wilfbn,  which  exceed 
all  I  ever  faw,  whether  of  Engliili,  Dutch, 
or  Italian  7nake ;  feveral  of  which  Sorts  I 
have  fecn  and  examined. 

The  other  Thing  we  have  both  of  us  fi- 
gured and  defcrib  d,  is.  The  Sting  of  a  Bee 
or  Wafp ;  in  which  we  differ  more  than  in 
the  la(t.  But  by  a  careful  Rc-examination, 
I  find,  that  although  T>r,  HookV  Obferva- 
tions 


To    the    R  F.  A  D  F  R. 

tions  are  more  critical  than  ofiy  'were  before^ 
yet  they  arc  not  Jo  true  as  mine.  For  as  to 
the  Scabbard,  (as  he  calls  ity)  I  could  never 
difcover  any  Beards  thereon  ;  and  I  dare  be 
confident  there  are  none,  but  'what  are  on  the 
fJi'o  Shears.  And  as  to  the  T'oint  of  the 
Scabbard,  he  hath  rcprefented  it  as  tubular j 
or  blnntifli  at  the  Tof ;  but  it  really  termt- 
7iates  in  a  Jharp  Toint^  and  the  two  Spears 
and  the  Toy  Jon  come  out  at  a  Slit^  or  longijh 
Hole,  a  little  below  the  Top  or  Toint.  And 
as  to  the  Spears,  he  makes  them  to  be  but 
one,  and  that  the  Toint  thereof  lies  always 
out  of  the  Scabbard.  But  by  a  ftriti  Exa- 
mination, they  will  be  found  to  be  two,  as  I 
have  faid,  and  that  they  always  lie  within 
the  Scabbard,  except  in  flinging  ;  as  I  have 
reprefented  them,  in  Fig.  xi.  Jrom  the  tran- 
fparent  Sting  of  a  IVafp.  And  as  to  the 
Spear  being  made  of  Joynts,  and  parted  in- 
to two,  as  his  Fig.  x.  Scheme  i6.  reprefents^ 
I  could  never  upon  a  Review,  difcover  it  to 
be  fo^  but  imagine,  that  by  feeing  the  Beards 
lying  upon,  or  behind  the  Spears,  he  might 
take  them  for  Joynts,  and  by  feeing  the  Toint 
of  one  Spear  lie  before  the  other,  he  might 
think  the  Spear  was  parted  in  ti^o.  But 
leji  the  Reader  Jhould  think  himfclf  impofed 
upon  both  by  'T)r.  Hook  and  my  Self,  it  is 
necefjary  to  be  obferv'd,  that  the  Beards  for 
Tenrcrhooks  as  'Dr.  Hook  calls  them)  lie 
only  on  one  Side  of  each  Spear,  not  all  round 
them  ;  and  are  therefore  not  to  be  fecn,  uti- 
le Cs  they  are  laid  in  a  due  Tofiur^  in  the 

Micro- 


To  the  Reader. 

Mkrofcope,  viz.  Jideways,  not  tinder,  or  a- 
top  the  Sfear. 

The  lajt  Thing  (which  fiarce  defervcs 
mention)  is  the  Mcchanifm  of  the  Hair, 
^hich  T)r.  Hook  found  to  be  /olid,  like  a 
long  Tiece  of  Horn,  not  hollow,  as  Malpighi 
found  it  in  fome  Animals.  And  I  have  found 
both  thofe  great  Men  to  be  in  fome  Meafure 
in  the  Right,  the  Hair  of  fome  Animals,  or 
in  fome  farts  of  the  Body  being  very  little, 
if  at  all  tubular  ;  and  in  others,  f  articular- 
iy  Mice,  Rats  and  Cats,  to  be  as  I  have  re- 
frefented  in  my  Fig.  14.  ^c. 

And  now  if  my  Inadvertency  in  other 
Things  hath  no  worfe  EffeB  than  it  hath  had 
in  thefe,  namely,  to  confirm,  correal,  or  clear 
others  Ob fer  vat  ions,  I  hope  the  Reader  will 
excufe  it,  if  he  meets  with  any  more  of  the 
like  kind.  But  not  being  confcious  of  any 
fuch  Thing  (although  probably  there  may  be 
many  fuch)  I  am  more  follicitous  to  beg  the 
'  Reader's  Candour  and  Favour,  with  Rela- 
tion both  to  the  Text  and  Notes  :  In  the  for- 
mer of  which,  I  fear  he  will  think  I  have 
as  much  under- done,  as  in  the  latter  over- 
done the  Matter :  But  for  my  Excufe,  I  de- 
Jtre  it  may  be  confided d,  that  the  textual 
^art  being  Sermons,  to  be  deliver  d  in  the 
'Fuljpit,  it  was  neccjfary  to  infifi  but  briefly 
ftpon  many  of  the  Works  of  God,  and  to  leave 
cut  many  Things  that  might  have  been  admit- 
ted in  a  more  free  Difcourfe.     So  that  I  wifh 

it 


To  the  Rfader. 

/.''  may  not  be  thought  I  have  faid  too  much 
rather  than  too  little  for  Jiich  an  Occafion 
and  ^lace.  And  indeed^  I  had  no  J^all 
Trouble  in  expunging  fomc  Things^  altering 
tnany^  and  foftening  the  mojl^  andy  in  a  vjord, 
giving  in  fome  Meafure  the  IVhole  a  diffe- 
rent ^Drefs  than  what  1  had  at  firfl  drawn 
it  uf  in^  and  what  it  now  appears  in. 

And  as  for  the  Norcs,  which  7nay  be  thought 
too  large,   I  confefs  I  might  have  Jhortcn'd 
them,  and  had  Thoughts  of  doing  it,  by  cafl^ 
ing  Jbme  of  them  into  the  Text,   as  an  inge^ 
nious,   learned  Friend  advis'd.     But  when 
I  began  to  do  this,  I  found  it  was  in  a  Man- 
ner to  new-make  all,  and  that  I  jhould  be  ne- 
ceffitated  to  tranfcribe  the  greateft  'Part  of 
the  Book,  which  f having  no  AffiftantJ  would 
have  been  too  tedious  for  me,   being  pretty 
well  fat igu'd  with  it  before.     I  then  thought 
it  beft  to  pare  off  from  fome,   and  to  leave 
out  others,   and  accordingly  did  fo  in  many 
Places,  and  would  have  done  it  in  more,  par- 
ticularly, in  many  of  the  Citations  out  of  the 
Ancients,  both  Poets  and  others,  as  alfo  in 
many  of  the  anatomical   Obfervations,    and 
many  of  my  own  and  others  Obfervations : 
But  then  I  confidefd  as  to  the  Firft,   that 
thofe  Citations  do  (many  of  them  at  leaf) 
Jhew    the   Senfe  of  Mankind  about   God's 
IVorks,  and  that  the  mojl  of  them  may  be  ac- 
ceptable to  young  Gentlemen  at  the  IJniver- 
Jities,  for  whofe  Service  thefe  Lefiures  are 
greatly  intended.     And  as  to  the  anatontical 
Notes,  and  fome  others  of  the  like. Nature, 

mojt 

5 


To  the  Reader. 

moji  of  them  ferve  either  to  the  Confirmati- 
on^ or  the  Illiiflrationy  or  Explication  of  the 
Text^  if  not  to  the  learned^  yet  to  the  un^ 
skilful,  lefs  learned  Reader  ;  for  whofe  fake^ 
if  I  had  added  more,  I  believe  he  would  for^ 
give  me.  And  laftly^  as  to  the  Obfervations 
of  7ny  felf  and  fome  others,  where  it  happens 
that  they  are  long^  it  is  commonly  where  a 
Necejfity  lay  upon  me  of  fully  exprejfing  the 
Author's  Senfe,  or  my  own,  or  where  the 
Thing  was  new,  and  never  before  Tubliflfd*, 
in  which  Cafe,  it  was  neceffdry  to  be  more 
Exprefs  and  Particular,  than  in  Matters 
better  known,  or  where  the  Author  may  be 
referred  unto. 

In  the  former  Editions  I  promifed  another 
Part  I  Had  relating  to  the  Heavens,  if  I  was 
thereunto  encouraged.  And  two  large  Im- 
prefflons  of  this  Book,  having  been  fold  offy 
fo  as  to  admit  of  a  Third  before  the  Tear  was 
gone  about ;  and  hearing  that  it  is  tranflated 
into  two,  if  not  three  Languages  -,  but  efpe- 
daily  being  importuned  by  divers  learned 
Terfons,  both  known  and  unknown,  I  have 
thought  my  felf  fajfciently  engaged  to  per- 
form that  T^romife  ;  and  have  accordingly 
pub lijhed  that  Tart, 

So  that  I  have  now  carry  d  my  Survey 
through  mofl  Tarts  of  the  vifible  Creation^ 
except  the  Waters,  which  are  for  the  moft 
Tart  omitted;  and  the  Vegetables,  which, 
for  want  of  Timc^  I  was  forced  to  treat  of 

in 

6 


To  the  Rf,adf.r. 

/;/  a  ferfunEiory  Manner,^  And  to  the  %• 
dertakiiig  of  the  former  of  tbcfcy  having  re- 
ce'ivd  divers  SoUicitations  frorn  Terjons  un- 
hioiL'U  as  "oi'ell  as  kncuL'Jiy  I  think  my  felf 
bound  in  Civility  to  oii'u  their  Favour^  and 
to  return  them  my  hearty  thanks  for  the 
kind  Opinion  they  have  Jhe'wn  of  my  other 
^erformanccsy  that  they  have  encouraged  me 
to  undertake  this  other  Task.  And  accord- 
ingly I  have  begun  it,  and  (as  far  as  my 
Affairs  mill  permit)  have  made  Jome  ^ro- 
grefs  in  it :  But  Age  and  Avocations  gro'wing 
upon  me,  I  begin  to  fear  1  Jhall  fcarce  he  able 
to  Jinijh  it  as  I  izoiild,  and  therefore  mnfl 
recommend  that  ample  and  noble  Subject  to 
others,  who  have  more  leifure,  and  would 
do  it  better  than  L 

As  to  Additions,  'Thave  been  much  follici- 
ted  thereto  by  divers  cmiotis  and  learned 
'Per fins,  wfiqj,^€uld  have  had  me  to  infer t 
fome  of  their.  Oi'Jervatii^js.;  and  many  more 
of  my  own  :  J^  ina  U'pk  of  this  Nature^ 
this  would  have  heeu^eiidlefs  ;  and  although 
the  Book  would  t^ertby  be  lender' d  much 
better,  and  more  co'mpleat,  yet  I  could  by  no 
Means  excufe  fo  great  an  Injuftice  to  the 
Turchafers  of  the  former  Editions.  And 
therefore  (except  tn  the  fecond  Edition, 
where  it  was  not  eafy  to  be  avoided)  few 
Additions  or  Alterations  have  been  made,  be- 
fides  what  were  Typographical.,  or  of  [mall 
'  Confideration.  Only  in  the  tbitd  Edition  I  a- 
PI  en  ded  t  he  fir Ji  T  ar  ag7  aph  of  KoiQ  I .  Chap.  5-. 

Book 


To  the  Reader. 

Book  I.'  concerning  Gravity ;  and  in  the 
Fourth^  Page  i6.  and  i8.  /  inferted  two 
^ajfages  out  of  Seneca ,  that  were  inad- 
*vertently  left  out^  and  corre died  many  Things^ 
that  nfon  a  careful  Review^  feeni'd  to  want 
amendment. 

And  laftly^  as  to  the  following  Analyfis, 
it  was  added  at  the  Re  que  ft  of  fome  of  my 
learned  and  ingenious  Friends ;  and  although 
it  might  have  been  contradfed^  they  would 
not  fuffer  it  to  be  fo. 


AN 


(  o 

Hi'    -ii.    S^^   P^   s^^   s^   s^   s^   -J^    #•    #-    ^-    ■$-  ' 


A    N 


ANALYSIS 


O  F     T  H  E 


T 


Following  Book. 

H  E  Works  of  the  Creation  relating  to  our  Terraqueous 
Globe,  are  fuch  as  are  viliblc  in  the 


(  Outworks  or  Appendages  of  the  Globe,  viz.  thefe  three : 
(  I.  The  Atmofphere 

rCompofed  of  Air  and  Vapours,  P.7^^4' 
Ufeful  to 

Rcfpiration  and  Animal  Life  5. 
Vegetation  of  Plants  9. 
Conveyance  of 
CThe  winged  Tribes. 
"^Sound  II. 

The  Fundions  of  Nature. 
Reflcfting  and  Refrading  Light  11. 
^^Containing  the 

rWinds,  which  are  of  great  Ufc  and  NeceflUy 

To  the  Salubrity  and  Pleafure  of  the  Air  14. 
^  <^  In  various  Engines  18. 
In  Navigation. 

Clouds  and  Rain  :  Of  great  Ufe  to  the 
Refrefliment  of  the  Earth  and  the  things  therein  z:. 
Origine  of  Fountains,  according  to  fomc  13. 
Light.     Its 
TFountain  26. 

I  Wonderful  Neceffity  and  Ufe.  • 

I  Improvement  by  Glafles  z8. 
I  Velocity. 
i^Expanfion  29. 
\^3-  Gravity. 

b  Its 


{! 


If  Its  great  Benefit  33. 
1_<       " 


C^y 


{I 


Caufe  of  Levity,  which  is  of  great  Ufe  in  the  World  35. 
^Terraqueous  Globe  it  fell'l     Of  which  I  take  a  View  in 
f  Generaf  of. 

rits  Spherical  Figure,  which  is  the  moft  commodious  in  re- 
gard of, 
Light  40. 
Heat. 

Lodgment  of  the  V/atcts. 
The  Winds  41. 
Its  Bulk  43. 
Its  Motion  ihid. 
"^    TAnnua!. 
■<        (Diurnal. 

Its  Place  and  Djftancc  from  the  Sun,  and  other  heavenly 

Bodies  46. 
Its  Diftribution,  fo  as  to  caufe  all  the  Parts  of  the  Globe  to 
Balance  each  other  48. 
Be  helpful  to  one  another. 
{jrhQ  great  Variety  and  Quantity  of  all  things  ferving  for 
Food,  Phyfick,  Building,  and  every  Ufe  and  Occafion 
of  all  Ages,  Places,  and  Creatures  53. 
An  Objedion  anfwered  55. 
^Particular  of  the  Earth  :  of  its 
rConftituent  Parts,  viz.     Its 

'^Soils  and  Moulds,  neceffary  to  the 
TGrowth  of  various  Vegetables  61. 
"l^Various  Occafions  of  Man,  and  other  Animals  6il 
Various  Strata  or  Beds,  affording  Materials  for 
Tools. 
Firing. 
Building. 

Dying,  and  thoufands  of  other  things  64. 
Conveyance  of  the  fweet  Fountain-Waters  6$. 
Subterraneous  Caverns  and  Vulcano's;  of  great  Ufe  to  the 
Countries  where  they  are  67. 
(^Mountains  and  Valleys, which  are  not  rude  Ruins,but Works 

of  Defign,  inafmuch  as  this  Strudure  of  the  Earth  is 
TThe  molt  beauii-1'ul  and  pleafant. 

I  The  moft  Salubrious:  to  fome  Conftitutions,  the  Hills; 
to  fome,  the  Valleys  7r. 
Reft  to  (kreen  us,  and  other  things  71. 
{  Beneficial  to  the 

Produdlion  of  various  Vegetables. 
Harbour  and  Maintenance  of  various  Animals  73. 
Generation  of  Minerals  and  Metals  -j], 
^Abfolutely  necelTary  to  the  Conveyance  of  the  Rivers ; 
and  in  all  probability  to  the  Origine  of  Fountains  il>id. 

Con- 


j      Conclufion  againft  blaming  GOD  8r. 

I  Its  Inhabitants;  which   are   cither  Senfitive  or  Infknfit'tve. 

Concerning  the 
f  Senlitive,  fonie  things  are 

rCommon  to  all  the  Tribes,  particularly  thcfe  Ten  : 
n.  The  five  Senfes  and  their  Organs  ;  the  85. 

TEyc,  an  admirable  Piece  of  Mcchanifm  in  regard  of  it^ 
/'Forni,  for  the  moll  part  Spherical,  which  is  belt  for 
CThe  Reception  of  Objedts. 
"^Motion  of  the  Eye  90. 

Situation  in  the  molt  commodious  part  of  the  Bo- 
dy of  every  Creature. 
Motion,  in  fome  Animals, 


{Every  way. 
Fixed  ;    anc 


d  the    excellent  Provifion   in  that 
cafe  pr. 
Size :  which  is  in 

f  All  Crcatrures,  according  to  their  Occafions. 
^  Such  as  live  abroad  in  the  Light,  larger. 
(^Such  as  live  under  ground,  lefs. 
Number,  in  fome  Animals : 

{Two  94. 
More :  Together  with  the  wife  Provifion  to  pre- 
vent double  Vifion. 
Parts;  fome  of  which  are  viewed 

Tranfiently,  the  Arteries,  Veins,  and  fome  of 

the  Mufcles  and  Tunicks. 
More  ftriftly  fome  of  the 
TMufcles,  and  the  excellent  Provifion  made  fot 
their  peculiar  Ufes,  Equilibration,  crc.  96. 
Tunicks  :   Among  which  the   various  Aper- 
tures,  Forms,  and  Pofitions  of  the  Pupil 
are  particularly  noted  99. 
Humours,    efpecially  the  prodigious  Finery 
and  Compofition  of  the  CryltaUine,  accord- 
ing to  Mr.  Lezvenhoeck, 
^Nerves  loj. 
Optick. 
Motory. 
LGuard  and  Security,  provided  for  by 

The  Reparation  of  the  Aqueous  Humour. 
Covering  of  the  Eye  Lids. 
Strong  and  curious  Bones. 
Hard  and  firm  Tunicks. 
Withdrawing  them  into  their  Heads  ic»9. 
Of  ered  Vifion  in. 


(S 


b  1 


Heiring.' 


(4) 


Hearing.     Its 
rOrgan,  the  Ear,  113, 

TDouble,  enabling  us  to  hear  every  way,  and  a  good 
I      Provilion  for  the  LoJs  or  Hurt  of  one. 
•i  Situated  in  the  very  bcft  place  for  Information, 
I      Security,  and  near  the  Eye  and  Brain. 
t.The  Fabrick  of  the 

rOutward  Ear,  which  is  in 

All  Creatures  formed,  guarded,  placed,  and 
every  way  accoutered  according  to  their  va- 
rious Places  and  Occafions  115. 
Man  fuitable  to  his  eredf  Pofture  ;  and  all  its 
Parts,  the  Hdix,  Tragm,  Concha,  &c.  admi- 
rably fuited  to  the  Reception  and  Meliorati- 
on of  Sounds,  and  the  Security  of  the  Part. 
(^Inward  Ear :  In  which  I  take  a  View  of  the  iii. 
"Auditory  PaHage,  curioufly  tunnelled,  tortu- 
ous, and  fmooth ;  and  being  always  open,  is 
lined  with  the  naufeous  Ear-wax  for  a  Guard. 
Tuba  Euftachiana  122. 
Bone,  particularly  hard  and  context  for  Guard, 

and  to  affift  the  Sound. 
Tympanum,  and  its  Membrane,  Mufcles,  and 
four  little  Bones  to  correfpond  to  all  kinds 
of  Sound. 
Labyrinth,  Semicircular  Canals,  Cochlea;  all 

made  with  the  utmoft  Art  127. 
^Auditory  Nerves,  one  of  which  is  ramified  to 
the  Eye,  Tongue,  Mufcles  of  the  Ear,  and 
to  the  Heart;  whence  a  great  Sympathy 
between  thofe  Parts  iz8. 
Object,  Sound.     Under  which  1  conlider, 
C  Thelraprovementsthereof  by  the  Wit  of  Man  129. 
<^  Its  great  Neceffity,  and  excellent  Ufes  13Z. 
\^  4  Its  Pleafure,  and  the  Power  of  Mufick  134. 
Smelling.  In  which  fenfethefe  things  are  remarkable;  the 
Noftrils, always  open,cartilaginous,and  endowed  with 

Mufcles  137. 
Laminae,  ferving  for 
("A  Guard  againft  noxious  Things  138. 
")^The  fpreading  of  the  Ojfadory  Nerves. 
Prodigious  Ufe  of  it  in  all,  efpecially  fome  of  the  Ir-' 
rationals  139. 
Tafte.    The  Things  moft  remarkable  in  which  Senfc 

are,  the 
rNerves  fpread  about  the  Tongue  and  Mouth,  with 

I      their  Guard.  <- 

The  Papillae,  neatly  made  140. 

Situ- 


( y ) 

I  Situation  thereof  to  be  a  CentincI  to  the  Stomach  and 
j       Food. 

^.Confcnt  thereof  with  the  other  Senfes.by  fome  Bran- 
ches of  the  fitch  Pair  141. 
^Feeling.     Page  141. 

{Whofe  Organ  is  the  Nerves   143. 
Which  is  difperJcd  through  every  Part  of  the  Body, 
and  the  admirable  Benefit  thereof. 
II.  Refpiration  the  grand  Adt  of  Animal  Life  14J. 
rMinidenng  to  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood  and  Diaflolc 
of  the  Heart. 
The  Parts  concerned  therein  are 

The  Larynx,  wirh  its  great  Variety  of  Mufcles,  crc. 

for  Refpiration,  and  forming  the  Voice  r48. 
r.  achea  and  Epiglottis, exquilitely  conlri  v'd  and  made. 
iJronchi   and   Lungs,   with  their    curious  Arteries, 

Veins  and  Nerves  150. 
Rib?,  Diaphragm,  and  the  fevcral  Mufcles  concerned. 
^Its  DefccPiS  in  the 

Foetus  in  the  Womb  153. 
Amphibious  Creatures  157. 
^  Some  Animals  in  Winter. 
Ill   The  Motion  of  Animals :  Concerning^which  Iconfider 
'Tranfieniiy  the 

Mulclcs,   and  their -Strudure,  their  Size,  Faftening 

to  the  Joynts,  Motions,  cr-c.   158. 
Bones,  and  tlieir  curious  Make. 
Joynts,  witli  iheir  Form,  Bandage  and  Lubricity  i6r. 
Nerves,  and  their  Origine,  Ramifications  and  Inof- 
culaiions. 
V,  More  particularly  the  Loco-Motive  A(ft  it  felf,  which  is 

t^Swift  or  flow,  with  Wing-S  Legs  many  or  few,  or  none 
at  all,  according  to  the  various  Occafions  and  Ways 
,      of  Animals  Lives.     As  particularly  in 

Reptiles,  whofe  Food  and  Habitation  is  near  at  hand. 
Man  and  Quadrupeds,  whofe  Occafions  require  a  lar- 
ger Range,  and  therefore  a  fwifrer  Motion  164. 
Birds,  and  Infccfts.whofe  Food,  Habitation  and  Safety 
I  require  yet  a  larger  Range,  and  have  accordingly 

I  a  yet  fwifter  Motion  and  dircdl  Conveyance. 

Geometrically  and  neatly  performed  by  theniceft  RuJes. 
(^Well  provided  for  by  ihe 

{Due  F.quipoife  of  the  Body  r6^. 
Motive  Parts  being  accurately  placed  with  regard  to 
the  Center  of  the  Body's  Gravity,  and  to  undergo 
their  due  Proportion  of  Weight  and  Exercifc. 

b  3  IV.  The 


(«) 


i 


\ 


IV.  The  Place  allotted  to  the  feveral  Tribes  of  Animal^ 
to  live  and  aft  in.     Concerning  which  I  oblerve  that 
Their  Organs  are  adapted  to  their  Place  167. 
All  Places  habitable  are  duly  flocked. 
Various  Animals  have  their  various  Places;  and  the 

Wifdom  thereof  168. 

V.  The  Balance  of  Animals  Numbers,  fo  that  the  World 
is  not 

rOverftocked  by  their  Increafe. 
')_Depopulated  by  their  Death. 
Which  is  efFefted  in 

The  feveral  Tribes  of  Animals  by  a  due  Proportion  in  the 

{Length  of  their  Life  169. 
Number  of  their  Young,  in 
J  Ufeful  Creatures  being  many. 
(_Pernicious  few. 
Man  very  remarkably  by  the 
Different  Length  of  his  Life. 
7  Soon  after  the  Creation  171. 
When  the  World  was  more,  but  not  fully  peo- 
pled 171. 
When  it  was  fufficiently  flocked,  down  to  the  pre- 
fent  time. 
Due  Proportions  of  Marriages,  Births  and  Burials  174. 
Balance  of  Males  and  Females  175. 
Vl.~The  Food  of  Animals.     In  which  the  Divine  Ma- 
nagement and  Providence  appears  in  the  179. 
TMaintainmg  fuch  large  Numbers  of  all  kinds  of  Ani- 
mals on  the  Land,  in  the  Seas,  and  divers  Places  too 
unlikely  to  aff'ord  fufficient  Food. 
Adjuftment  of  the  Quantity  of  Food  to  the  Number 
of  Devourers,  fo  that 

There  is  not  too  much,  fo  as  to  rot,  and  annoy 

the  World  i8r. 
The  moft  ufeful  is  moft  plentiful,  and  eafieft  pro- 
pagated jl^id. 
Delight  which  the  various  Tribes  of  Animals  have  to  the 
Varieties  of  Food,  fo  that  what  is  grateful  to  one,  is 
naufeous  to  another :  Which  is  a  wife  means  to  caufe 
C  All  Creatures  to  be  fufficiently  fupplied. 
-<^  All  forts  of  Food  to  be  confumed. 
^The  World  to  be  kept  fweet  and  clean  by  thofe 
means  183. 
Peculiar  Food,   that  particular  Places  afford  to  the 

Creatures  reliding  therein  184. 
Curious  Apparatus  in  all  Animals  for  Gathering,  an,d 
Digeftion  of  their  Food,  viz.  the 

Mouth 


(7) 

TMouth,  nicely  ftiaped  for  Food,  vc     In 
Some,  little  and  n.urow  189. 
Some,  with  a  large  deep  Incifiire. 
Infcds  very  notable  to  catch ,  hold  and  devour 
Prey ;  to  carry  Burdens,  to  bore  and  build  their 
Habitations  190. 
Birds  as  notable.  Horned  in  all.     In  fome 
Hooked  for  Rapine,  climbing,  crc.  191. 
Sharp  and  ftrong  to  pierce  Trees,  zj/c. 
Long  and  flender  to  grope. 
Long  and  broad  to  qu:\frer. 
Thick  and  fhup  edged  to  hufk  Grain. 
ComprefTed  to  raifc  Limpet; ,  crc. 
Teeth,  which  are  peculiarly  hard,  rtrmly  inferred  in 
the  Javvs,varioufly  Hiiped  in  the  (ame,  and  diflcieiit 
Animals,  deficient  young  Creatures,  ct-c.   194. 
Saliva)  Glands,  commodioufly  placed  for  Malticati- 

on  and  Dej^lutition  196. 
Mufcles  and  Tendons,  fcrving  to  Millication,  ftrong 

and  well  lodged. 
Gullet,  fized  according  to  the  Food  ;  with  curious 

Fibres,  zj-c  116. 
Stomach  ;   197. 

Which  hath  a  curious  Mechanifm  of  Fibres,  Tu- 

nicks.  Glands,  Nerves,  Arteries  and  Veins. 
Whofe  Faculty  of  Digeftion  by  fuch  fccming  weak 

Menllruums  is  admirable. 
Whofe   Size  and  Strength  is  conformable  to  the 
Nature  of  the  Food,  or  Occafions  of  Animals,' 
Which  is  in 

{Tame  Animals  but  one. 
Ruminants,  Birds,  crc.  more. 
Guts,  whofe  Tunicks,   Olands,   Fibres,  Valves,  and 

Periftaltick  Motion  deferve  Admiration  201. 
Ladleals,  together  with  the  Impregnations  fropa  the 
V.     Pancreas,  Gall,  Glands,  and  Lymphaedu(!^s. 
l^Sagacity  of  all  Animals  in  finding  out,  and  providing 
Food.     In 

{Man  lefs  remarkable  for  the  fake  of  hisUnderftanding  zoi 
Inferiour  Creatures.     In  inch  as  are 
^  Come  to  mature  Age,  and  are  able  to  help  thcmfclves, 
by  their 

Accurate  Smell  203. 
Natural  Craft. 

Hunting  and  groping  out  of  Sight. 
Seeing  and  Sraelhn^  at  great  Dill.uiccs  205.         [in. 
CIimbing;the  (IrongTendons  and  Mufcles  acting  there- 
Seeing  in  the  dark. 
Helplefs.     As  107.  b  4  Young 


(8) 


; 


r Young  Creatures. 

IrMan,    born  the  moft  helplcfs  of  any,  the  Parents 
3     Reafon,  Hands  and  AfFedion  fufficmg. 
)  Irrationals :  For  whofe  Young  the  Creator  hath  rnade 
I  C.     a  fufficient  Provifion  partly  by  the 
Parent- Animal's  own 

2T<>^yj)\  and  Diligence  in  Nurfing  and  Defend- 
ing them  2.07. 
Sagacity  and  Care  in  reporting  their  Eggs  and 
Young,  where  Food  and  all  NecefTaries  are 
to  be  found  209. 
Ability  of  the  Young  themfclves  to  (hi ft  for,  and 
help  themfelves,  with  the  little  Helps  of  their 
Dams  210. 

(.Creatures  deflitute  of  Food  at  fome  Seafons,  or  likely 
to  want  It,  who 

{Are  able  to  live  long  without  Food  iii. 
Lay  up  Food  before-hand. 

VII.  The  Cloathing  of  Animals,  which  is  214. 
f  Suited  to  the  Place  and  Occafions  of  all.     In 

'  Man,  it  is  left  to  his  own  Reafon  and  Art,  joined  with 
fufficient  Materials:   Which  is  belt  for  him, 
Becaufe  he  may  fute  his  Cloathing  to  his  Quality 

and  Bufmeis  218. 
For  Perfpiration  and  Health  fake. 
To  exercife  his  Art  and  Induftry. 
To  excite  his  Diligence  in  keeping  himfelf  fweet 

and  clean. 
In  being  the  Parent  of  divers  Callings  219. 
Irrationals:  Who  are  either 
Ready  furniflied  with  proper  Cloathing. 

On  the  dry  Land  with  Hair,  Fleeces,  Furrs,  Shells, 

hard  Skins,  «rc.  220. 
In  the  Air  with  Feathers,  light,  flrong  and  warm. 
In  the  Waters  with  Scales,  hard  for  Guard  ;  fmooth 
for  PafTage ;  or  with  ftrong  Shells  to  guard  fuch 
as  move  more  flowly  223. 
j^Provide  for  themfelves  by  their  Textrine,  or  Archi- 
techtonick  Art.    Of  which  under  the  next  Branch. 
l^Well  garniftied,   being   all  Workman-like,   compleat, 
in  its  kind  beautiful,  being  224. 
r  Adorned  with  gay,  various  and  elegant  Colours. 
2  If  fordid,  yet  with  exad  Symmetry,  and  full  of  cu- 
^     rious  Mechanifm. 

VIII.  The  Houfes  and  Habitations  of 


Man 


L 


(9) 

Man,  who  is  abundantly  furniflicd  with 
r  Contrivance  and  Art  to  build  and  garnifli  his  Habi- 
<^      tations  116. 
^Materials  of  all  forts  to  clTect  his  Works. 

Irrationals,  whole  marvellous  liilbndismanitened  by  tl^c 
Convenience  of  their  NeAs  and  Habitations  for  the 
j'Hnching  and  hducation  of  their  Young  iz8. 
^Giiard  and  Defence  of  thcmielves  and  their  Young, 
I'ahrick  of  their  Nerts,  fcarce  jmitable  by  Man,  and 
fiicwn  by  their  Contrivance  and  Make,  bein^  exai!t!y 
fuitabic  to  their  Occalions,  and  made  by 
Putting  only  a  few  ugly  Sticks,  Mofs,  Dirt,  o^f.  togc- 

tiier  231. 
i3ui!ding  Combs  according  to  the  beft  Rules  of  Mathe- 

inaticks. 
Weaving  Webs,  and  making  Cafes.  For  which  Service 
the  Parts  of  their  Bodies,  and  Materials  afforded  by 
them  are  very  confiderable. 
IX.  Animals  Self  Prefervation.     For  which  there  is  al- 
ways a  Guard  in  proportion  to  the  Dangers  and  Occa- 
fions  of  their  State.     Which  is  obfcrvabje  in 

Man,  whofe  Reafon  and  Ait  lupplies  the  Defe^  of 

Natural  Armature. 
Irrational  Creatures;  who 

As  they  aie  on  oneHand  fufficiently  guarded  by  their 
rShells,  Horns,  Claws,  Stings,  crc.  239. 
Changing  their  Colours. 
Wings,  Feet,  and  Swiftnefs. 
Divmg  in,  and  tinging  the  Waters. 
F.jecfting  Juices  out  of  their  Body. 
Accurate  Smell,  Sight  and  Hearing 
Natural  Craft  145. 

Uncouth  Noife,   ugly  Gelliculations,  and  Jiorrid 

Afpcdl. 
Horrible  Stink  and  Excrements. 
I^Soon  the  other  Hand  can  by  their  Strength,  Sagacity, 
or  natural  Artifices  entrap  and  captivate  what  is 
nece/Tary  for  their  Food  and  other  Occafiuns, 
A-  Animal's  Generation, 
riiquivocal,  is  denied  244. 
i_Univocal,  Which  of 

TMan,  is  ^V^£V«««  i,ck.x,  pafTed  wholly  hy 
\Irrational  Creatures,  which  is  remarkable  for  their 
f  Sagacity  in  chufing  the  fitteft  Place  for  their  E"»s 
I      and  Young  :  Where  it  is  obfervable  what  a 


<  < 


Com- 


(  lo  ) 


Compleat  Order  they  obferve.' 

Neat  Apparatus  their  Bodies  are  provided  with 

for  this  purpofe  148, 
Natural  Venom  they  injed  with  their  Eggs  into 

Vegetables  to  pervert  Nature,  and  produce  Balls, 

and  Cafes  250. 
Making  ufe  of  the  fitteft  Seafons,  either 

{All  Seafons  251. 
When  Provifions  are  moft  plentiful  and  eafieft  had. 
Due  Number  of  Young  252.. 
Diligence  and  Concern  for  their  Young,  in  point  of 


{Incubation  253. 
Saf 


fety  and  Defence  254. 
t. Faculty  of  Nurfing  their  Young,  by 

iuclding  them.     In  which  it  is  obfervable 
How  fuitable  this  Food  is. 

How  willingly  puted  with  by  all, even  themodfavage. 
"^  What  a  compieat  Apparatus  in  all  Creatures  of  Dugs, 

y  Putting  Food  in  their  Mouths,  with  their  proper  Parts 

/      for  catching  and  conveying  Food  255. 

V^  Neither  way,but  by  laying  in  Provifions  before-hand2s6. 


Having  in  the  Fourth  Book  thus  difpatched  the  Decad  of 
Things  in  common  to  the  Senfinve  Creatures,  I  take  a  view 
of  their  particular  Tribes,  vtz..  of 
C Man ;  whom  I  confider  with  relation  to  his 

rSoul.     Concerning  which  having  curforily  mentioned 
divers  things,  I  infift  upon  two  as  (hewing  an  efpe- 
cial  divine  Management,  the 
Various  Genii,  or  Inclinations  of  Men,  which  is  a  wife 


c 

)     Provifion  for  the  Difpatch  for  all  theWorld's  Affairs, 
and  that  they  ms 
iventive  Faculty. 


)     and  that  they  may  be  performed  with  Pleafure  263. 
C  Inventive  Faculty.     In  which  it  is  remarkable  that 


Its  Compafs  is  fo  large,  extending  to  all  things  of 
"{  Ufe,  and  occafioning  fo  many  feveral  Callings. 
^Things  of  greateft  Neceffity  and  Ufe  were  foon  and 
eafily  found  out ;  but  things  lefs  ufeful  later,  and 
dangerous  things  not  yet.  Here  of  divers  parti- 
cular Inventions,  with  an  Exhortation  to  exercife 
and  improve  our  Gifts. 
Body.     In  which  the  things  particularly  remarked  upon 

are  the 
rEreft  Pofture  282. 

The  moft  convenient  for  a  Rational  Being. 
Manifeftly  intended,  as  appears  from  the  Strufture 

of  fome  particular  Parts  mantioned  285. 
Nice  Structure  of  the  Parts  miniftring  thereto. 
Equilibration  of  all  the  Parts  286.  Figure 


(") 


^1 


Figure  and  Shape  of  Man's  Body  ir.ofl  agreeable  to 

his  Place  and  Bufinefs  287. 
Stature  and  Size,  which  is  much  the  belt  for  Man's 

St.ne  z88. 
Strucf^ure  of  the  Parts,  v.hich  are 
Without  Botches  and  Blunders. 
Of  due  Strength. 
Of  the  bed  Form. 

Vloft  accurately   accommodated  to  their  proper 
Offices. 
Lodgment  of  the  Parts,  as  the 
Five  Scnfes  197. 
Hand. 

Legs  and  Feet. 
Heart. 
^Vilcera. 

/Several  Bones  and  Mufcles,  u-c.  198. 
'>-  Covering  of  all  with  the  Skin. 
Provifion  in  Man's  Body  to 
Prevent  Evils  by  the 

Situation  of  the  Eyes,Ears,Tongue  andHand3oo 
Guard  afforded  all,  efpecially  the  prmcipal  Parts. 
Duplication  of  fome  Parts. 
Cure  Evils  by  means  of 
r"Proper  Emundories  30T. 

^Difeafcs  themlelves  making  Difcharges  of  things 
)     more  dangerous  303. 

^Pain  givingWarning,and  exciting  ourEndeavoutj 
J^Confent  of  the  Parts,  effcded  by  the  NcrvcSj  a  Sam- 
ple whereof  is  given  m  the  Fifth  Pair,  branched  to 
the  Eye,  Ear,  <^c. 
^Political,  fociable  State.    Vox  the  Prefervation  and  Se- 
curity of  which  the  Creator  hath  taken  care  by 
variety  of  Mens 
C  Faces  308. 
^  Voices. 
(  Hand-writing. 
Qiiadrupeds.     Of   which  I  take  no  notice,  but  wherein 

they  differ  from  Man,  viz. 
rProne  Poflure,  which  is  confiderable  for 

The  Parts  miniflering  to  it,  efpecially  the  Legs  and 
Feet,  n-.ed  and  made  in  foras  for 
rStrength  and  flow  Motion  315. 
Agility  and  Swiftnefs. 
Walking  and  Running. 
Walking  and  Swimming. 
Walking  and  Flying. 
Walking  and  Diggmg. 

Tra- 


(  t^  ) 


(I 


r       j    I  Travelling  the  Plains. 
I  LTraverfing  Ice,  Mountains,  o'c. 

v^Its  Ufefulnefs  to 
'Gather  Food  317. 
Catch  Prey. 

Chmb,  Leap  and  Swim. 
Guard  themfelves. 

Carry  Burdens,  Till  the  Ground,  and  other  Ufes 
Man. 

tParts  differing  from  thofe  of  Man. 
THead,  wherein  I  confider 

Its  Shape,  commonly  agreeable  to  the  Animal's  Mo- 
tion 319. 
The  Brain,  which  is, 
LefTer  than  in  Man  319. 
Placed  lower  than  the  Cerebellum. 
The  Niftitating  Membrane  3x1. 
«^arotid  Arteries,  and  Rete  Mirabile. 
Nites. 
Neck. 

{Anfwering  the  Length  of  the  Legs  312. 
Strengthened  by  the  Whitleather. 
Stomach,  314. 

{Correfponding  to  the  feveral  Species. 
Suited  to  their  proper  Food, whether  Flefli,  Grain,  c^c. 
Heart :  Its 

Ventricles  in  fome 
C  One  only  315. 
.^  Two. 

(^  Three,  as  fome  think. 

Situation  nearer  the  midil  of  the  Body,  than  in  Man. 
Want  of  the  Fallening  of  the  Pericardium  to  the 
Midriff  327. 
LNervous  kinds,  A  Sample  of  which  is  given  in  the  diffe- 
rent Correfpondence  between  the  Head  and  Heart  of 
Man  and  Bead,  by  the  means  of  the  Nerves  3Z9. 
Birds.     Concerning  which  I  take  a  View  of  their 
TBody  and  Motion  ;  where  I  confider 

^Ihe  Parts  concerned  in  their  Motion  333. 

^The  Shape  of  the  Body,  made  exadly  for  fwim- 
ming  in,  and  pafTing  through  the  Air. 
Feathers,  which  are 

Moft  exadtiy  made  for  Lightnefs  and  Strength, 
All  well  placed  in  every  Part,  for  the  Covering 

and  Motion  of  the  Body. 
Preened  and  drefled  334, 
Wings,  which  are 

fMade  of  the  very  beft  Materials,  viz,,  of  Bones 

light 


(  13   ) 

light  and  ftrong ;  Joynts  exadly  opening,  fliut* 
ting,  and  moving,  as  the  Occafions  of  Hight 
require  ;  and  the  Peroral  Mujcles,  of  the  great- 
eft  Strength  of  any  in  the  whole  Body. 
^Placed  in  the  nicell  point  of  the  Body  of  every 
Species,  according  to  the  Occafions  of  Ilight, 
fwimming  or  Diving. 
Tail,  which  is  well  made,  and  placed  to  keep  the 
Body  fteady,  and  aflift  la  its  Afccnts  and  Dc- 
fcents  337. 
LLegs  and  Feet,  which  are  made  light  for  Flight, 
and   incomparably  accoutred  for  their  proper 
Occafions*  of 
Swimming  338. 
Walking. 
Catching  Prey. 
Roofting. 
Hanging. 

Wading  and  Searching  the  Waters. 
Lifting  them  upon  their  Wings. 
Motion  it  felf. 

fPerformed  by  the  niceft  Laws  of  Mcchanicks. 
I    {_Anrwering  every  Purpofe  and  Occafion. 
LOther  Farts  of  the  Body,  viz..  the 

THead,  remarkable  for  the  commodious 
f  Shape  of  it  fclf  341. 
Forms  of  the  Bill. 
Site  of  the  Eye  and  Ear. 
Pofition  of  the  Brain. 
-<  Strudlure  of  the 
C  Larynx. 
^  Tongue. 
■        (^  Inner  Ear. 

i    l^Provifion  by  Nerves  in  the  Bill  for  tailing  and 
diftinguifliing  Food  344. 
Stomachs,  one  to 

Macerate  and  prepare  345. 
Grind  and  digeft 
Lungs  incomparably  made  for 
Refpiration  346. 
Making  the  Body  buoyant. 
^Neck,  which  is  made 
C  In  due  Proportion  to  the  Legs. 
-<J  To  fearch  in  the  Waccrs,  and 
^To  counterpoife  the  Body  in  Flight. 
Instate.     Of  wiuch  1  take  notice  of  three  Thing?,  ivz. 
ihcir 

Migration 


Lu 

{! 


(  14) 


fMigration  remarkable  for 
r^The  Knowledge  Birds  have  of 


)  CTheir  Times  of  Paflage  348. 

V 

Their  Accommodation  for  lon^  Flights  by  lon^ 


> 


The  Places  proper  for  them. 


or 


L 


eli'e  Ikong  Wings. 
Incubation,  which  is  confiderable  for 
The  Egg,  and  its  parts  351. 

Ad  itfelf;  that  thefe  Creatures  fliould  betake  them- 
felves  to  it,   know  this  to  be  the  Way  to  produce 
their  Young,  and  with  delight  and  Patience  fit  fuch 
a  due  Number  of  Days. 
The  Negled  of  it  in  any,  as  tire  Oftrich,  and  the  won- 
dertul  Provilion  for  the  Young  in  that  Cafe  354. 
Nidification.     Of  which  before. 
Infers.     Which,  altho'  a  defpifed  Tribe,  doth  in  fome  Re- 
fpeds  more  fet  forth  the  infinite  Power  and  Wifdom 
of  the  Creator,  than  the  larger  Animals. 
The  things  in  this  Tribe  remarked  upon  are  their 
rBody  359. 

rShaped,  not  fo  much  for  long  Flighrs,  as  for  their 
Food,  and  Condition  of  Life. 
Built  not  with  Bones,  but  with  what  ferves  both  for 

Bones  and  Covering  too. 
Eyes,  reticulated  to  fee  all  ways  at  once  360. 
Antennae,  and  their  Ufe  361. 
Legs  and  Feet  made  for 
Creeping  363. 
Swimming  and  Walking. 
Hanging  on  fmooth  Surfaces. 
Leaping. 
Digging. 

Spinning  and  Weaving  Webs  and  Cafes. 
Wings,  which  are 

Nicely  diftended  with  Bones  365. 
Some  incomparably  adorned  with  Feathers  and  ele- 
gant Colours. 
Some  joynted  and  folded  up  in  their  Elytra,  and 

diftended  again  at  pleafure. 
In  Number  either 
Two,  with  Poifes. 
Four,  without  Poifes. 
LSurprizing  Minutenefs  of  fome  of  thofe  Animals  them- 
felves,  efpecially  of  their  Parts,  which  are  as  nume- 
rous and  various  as.in  other  Animal  Bodies  367. 
State :  which  fets  forth  a  particular  Concurrence  of  the 
Divine  Providence,  in  the  wife  and  careful  Provifi- 
on  that  is  made  for  their 

Security 


{. 


( I? ) 

Security  againfl  Winter,  by  their 
r  Sublilling  in  a  different,  •w/.c.  their  Nympha  or  Au- 
I      reh'a  lUtc  369. 
Living  in  Torpitude,  without  any  Wafte  of  Body  or 

Spirits  370. 
Laying  up  Provifion  before-hand.. 
Prerervation  of  their  Species  by  their 
Chufing  proper  Places,  to  Jay  up  their  Eggs  and  Sperm, 

fo  that  the 
CEggs  may  have  due  Incubation  373. 
\Young  fufficient  Food. 

Care  and  Curiolity  in  repofiting  their  Eggs  in  neat  Or- 
der, and  with  the  proper  Part  uppermolt  382. 
Incomparable  Art  of  Nidification,by  being  endow'd  with 
Parts  proper  for,  and  agreeable  to  the  fcveral  Ways  of 

Nidification,  and  the  Materials  they  ufe  in  it. 
Archite»5^onick  Sagacity  to  build  and  weave  their  Cells, 
or  to  make  even  Nature  herfelf  their  Hand-maid  384. 
Reptiles.  Which  agreeing  with  other  Animals  in  fomething 

or  other  before  treated  of,  I  confider  only  their 
r  Motion, which  is  veryrcmarkablc,whetherweconfidcr  the 
Manner  of  it,  as 
rVermicular  394. 
.     Sinuous. 
«;  ^'<  Snail-like. 

^  I  CatterpiUar-like. 
\^MuItipedous. 
Parts  miniftring  to  it. 
^Poifon,  which  ferves  to 
C  Scourge  Man's  Wickednefs  398. 
■<^  Their  eafy  Capture  and  Maifery  of  their  Prey. 
4  Their  Digeftion. 
^Watery  Inhabitants  confiderable  for  their 
Great  Variety  401. 
Prodigious  Multitudes. 

Vaftbulkof  fome,and  furprizingminutcnefsofothers403 
Incomparable  Contrivance  and  Stru<fture  of  their  Bodies. 
Supplies  of  Food. 
Ilefpiration. 

Adjuftfnent  of  their  Organs  of  Vifion  to  their  Element. 
I'oife  and  Motion  of  the  Body  every  Way  402. 
i^Infti.ntive   Inhabitans.      Among  which  having  mentioned 
FofC\h  and  others,  I  infill  only  upon  Vegetables,  and  that 
in  a  curfory  manner  upon  their 

I/' Great  Variety  for  the  Icvcral  Ulcs  of  the  World  404. 
Anatomy. 
^  Leaves  407. 
IFJovvcrs  and  their  admirable'Gaiety. 
Seed,  remarkable  tor  its  Cc- 


(  i<5) 


Generation. 
Make. 

Containing  in  it  a  compleat  Plant  40S. 
i'refervation  and  Safety  in  the  Gems,  Fruit,  Earth,  o-c. 
i)Owing,  wh'ich  is  provided  for  by  Down,  Wings,  Springy 
Cafes,  carried  about  by  Birds,  fown  by  the  HulLand- 
man,  i^c  ^ix. 
Growing  and  Standing:  Some  by 
r  Their  own  Strength  417. 

<^  The  Help  of  others,  by  clafping  about,  or  hanging  upon 
^     them. 

,'LRemarkable  \Jk,  efpecially  of  fome  which  feem  to  be' pro- 
vided for  the  Good  of 
{All  Places  420. 
Some  particular  Places,  to 
{Heal  fome  Local  Diftempers. 
Supply  feme  Local  Wants. 
Practical   Inferences  upon   the  whole  are  thefe  Six,   viz,. 
That  GOD'S  Works. 

I.  Are  great  and  excellent  425. 

1.  Ought  to  be  enquired  into,  with  a  Commendation  of 
fuch  as  do  fo  42,7. 

3.  Are  manifefl  to  all,  and  therefore  Atheifm  unreafona- 
ble  418. 

4.  Ought  to  excite  Fear  and  Obedience  431. 

5.  Ought  to  excite  Thankfulnefs  431. 

6.  Sould  move  us  to  pay  God  his  due  Homages  and  Worfliip, 
particularly  that  of  the  Lords  Day  :  which  is  an  Appointment 

The  moft  antient  438. 

Wifely  contrived  for  Difpatch  of  Bufinefs,  and  to  pre- 
vent Carnality. 

Whole  proper  Bufinefs  i«,  to  ceafe  from  Worldly,  and 
to  foilov/  Spiritual  Employments ;  the  cliief  of  which  is 
the  Publick  Worniip  of  GOD. 


A 


SURVEY 


O  F    T  H  E 


Terraqueous    Globe. 

I  NTROT>VCTI  O  N. 


PP5^;N /y^/.cxi.2.  The  Pfalmift  aflcrts,  That 


the  {a)  Pf^orks  of  the  Lord  are  great  j  fought 
out  of  all  them  that  have  Pleafure  therein. 
^i  This  is  true  of  all  God's  Works^  particu- 
larly of  his  Works  of  Creation  :  Which,  vjhcn  fought 
out,  or,  as  the  Hebrew  Word  [b)  fignificth,  when 
heedfully  and  deeply  pried  into,  folicitoufly  obferv^d 
and  enquired  out,  efpecially  when  clearly  difcovere^ 


{a)  It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  Pfalmift  might  mean,  at  lead 
have  an  F.ye  to,  the  Works  oj  the  Creation  in  this  Text,  the 
Word  nu/yD  being  the  fame  that  in  Pfal.  19.  i.  is  tranflated 
God's  Ha?}dy-work,  which  is  manifeftly  apphcd  to  the  Works 
of  Creation,  and  properly  fignificth  Tatfum,  Opus,  Opijicium, 
from  nU/y  Fecit,  Paravit,  Aptavit.  And  faith  Ktrcher,  ftgni- 
ficat  talem  ajfetlioncm ,  qua  atiquid  exifiit  -velreaiiier,  zel  ornate, 
velut  ncn  fit  in  priftino  ftatu  quo  fdt.  Concord,  p   i.  col.  031. 

{i>)  vm  lojHxfivitjperquiJivit,  fcifcitatuseji,  Buxtor.  in  veib. 
Et  ftmul  importat  curam,  isr  folicitudinem'  Conrad.  Kirch,  ib. 
p.  I.  col.  1 174. 

B  to 


•L  Survey  of  the 

to  US;  in  this  Cafe,  I  fay,  wc  find  thofe  Works 
of  God  abundantly  to  deferve  the  Pfalmift's  Charac- 
ter of  being  Great  "s^xA  Noble  j  inafmuch  as  they  are 
made  with  the  moft  exquifite  Art,  {c)  contrived  with 
the  utmoft  Sagacity,  and  ordered  with  plain  wife  De- 
f^gn,  and  miniftring  to  admirable  Ends.  For  which 
rcrtfon  St.  Paul  might  well  affirm  of  thofe  noiyiy.oiJoc 
of  God,  {d)  That  the  inviftble  'Things  of  God,  even 
his  eternal  Power  and  Godhead,  are  underjlood  by  them. 
And  indeed  they  are  the  moll  eafy,  and  intelligible 
Demonftrations  of  the  Being  and  Attributes  of  God  j 
{e)  efpecially  to  fuch  as  are  unacquainted   with  the 


(c)  i^od  fi  omnes  tnundt  partes  ita  cenflltutA  funt,  nt  neque  ad 
ufutn  meltores  potuer'tnt  eJJ'e,  7ieq'ie  ad  Jpeciem  puLchriores  ;  videa- 
Tnn4  utrkm  ea  fortiiltafint,  an  eo  ftatu,  quo  cohdrere  nulla  mcdo 
totuerint,  ntji  fenfu  mnderante  divinaque  provtdentia.  Si  ergo 
fneliora.  funt  ea  qti&  NaturA,  quatn  ilia,  qua  Arte  perfeSla  fitnty 
nee  Ars  effiiit  quid  fine  rattone ;  ne  Natura  quidem  rationis  expert 
efi  habenda.  Glut  tgittir  convenit,  fignum,  aut  tabulam  pidiam 
cum  adfpexeris,  fcire  adhibitameffe  artem  ;  cumque procul  curfum 
navigii  z/ideris,  non  dubitare,  quin  id  ratione  atque  arte  movea- 
tur :  aut  chm  Solarium,  &c.  Miindum  autem,  quic^  has  ipfas 
artes,  CJ*  earum  artifices,  CT"  cun^a  compledlatur,  confiiti  CT*  ra- 
tionis ejJ'e  expert  em  put  are  ?  &iuod  ft  in  Scythiam,  aut  in  Britan- 
niam,  Sph^ram  aliquts  tulerit  hanc,  quam  nuper  familiaris  nofier 
ejfecit  PofidoniHs,  cujus  fiinguls,  converfiones  idem  efficiunt  in  Sole, 

^c. quod  cfficieur  in  ccslo  ftngulis  d:ebus  CT'  noClibus  ;  quis  in 

it'Idbarlarie  dnbiret,  quin  ea  Sph^ra  fit  perfet'ia  Ratione  ?  Hiau- 
te7ndubicant  de  Mundo,  ex  qnoo'  oriuntur,  c^  fiunt  omnia,  cafu- 
ne  ipfie  fit  effcchis, — ;in  Ratione,  an  Mente  divind?  Et  Archime- 
dem  arbitrantur  plus  valuijj'e  in  imitandis  Sph^rs  converfionibus, 
quam  Naturam  in  efiiciendis,  pr&fertim  cltm  '/nttltis  partibus  ftnt 
ilia  perfe£la,  quam  h&c  {imulata,  folertius,  &c.  Cic.  de  Nat. 
1.2.  c.  34,35- 

(d)  And  a  little  before  he  faith  or  Natureii^d?,  Omnemer- 
go  regit  Naturam  ipfc    [Deus]   ct'c. 

(e)  Alundus  codex  eji  Dei,  in  quo  jugiterlegere  debcmus,  Ber- 
nard. Serm. 

Arbitror  nullam  gentem,  neque  Hominum  focietatem,  apud 
que  J  ulla  Deorum  efi  religio,  quidquam  habere  facris  Eleufiniis 
a^i  Saii'^thraciis  fimile  :  Ea  tamen  obfcure  docent  qui  profiten- 
tuf  :  Natnr&  vero  opera  in  omnibus  animantibus  [tint  perjpicua. 
G;.len.  de  Uf.Part.  1.  17.  c.  r. 

Subtilties 


Terraqueous  Globe.  3 

Subtilties  of  Reafoning  and  Argumentation  j  as  the 
greatert  parr  oF  Mankind  arc. 

It  may  not  therefore  be  unfuitable  to  the  Nature 
and  Defign  of  Lcfturcs  (/)  founded  by  one  of  the 
greatell  Vertuofo's  of  the  lafl:  Age,  and  inllituted 
too  on  purpofe  for  the  Proof  of  the  ChriHian  Re- 
ligion againll  Athcifls  and  other  Infidels,  to  im- 
prove this  occafion  in  the  Dcmonrtrationof  the  i^^- 
ing  and  yjttributes  of  an  infinitely  wife  and  power- 
ful Creator,^from  a  Curfory  Survey  of  the  Works 
of  Creatiojiy  or  (as  often  called)  of  Nature. 

Which  Works  belong  either  to  our  terraqueous 
Globe.,  or  the  Heavens. 

I  {hall  begin  with  our  own  Globe,  being  neareft, 
and  falling  mod  under  our  Senfes.  Which  being  a 
Subjed  very  various  and  copious,  for  the  more  me- 
thodical and  orderly  proceeding  upon  it,  I  fhall  di- 
ftribute  the  Works  therein  : 

I.  Into  fuch  as  are  not  properly  Parts,  but  j^p- 
pendages  or  Out-works  of  the  Globe. 

II.  The  Globe  it  felf. 

{/J  Philofophia  eji  Catechlfmus  ad  Fidem.  Cyril,  i.  contr.  Jul. 


B  z  BOOK 


Survey  of  the 


B  O  O  K  I. 

Of  the  Out-Works  of  the  Terraqueous 
Globe  j  the  Atmofphere^  Light ^  and 
Gravity, 


C  H  A  P.    I. 

Of  the  Atmojphere  in  general. 

^iHE  Atmofphere,  or  Mafsof  Air,  Vapours 

I  and  Clouds,  which  furrounds  our  Globe, 

^/|  will  appear  to  be  a  matter  of  DeHgn,  and 

I§1  the  infinitely  wife  Creator's  Work,  if  we 

confider  its  Nature  and  Make  (a),  and  its  U/e  to  the 
World  (^). 

1 .  Its  Nature  and  Make,  a  Mafs  of  Air,  of  fub- 
tile  penetrating  Matter,  fit  to  pervade  other  Bodies, 
to  penetrate  into  the  inmoft  Recefles  of  Nature,  to 
excite,  animate,  and  fpiritualizc  j  and  in  fhort,  to 
be  the  very  Soul  of  this  lower  World.  A  thing 
confequently 

2,  Of  greateft  Ufe  to  the  World,  ufcful  to  the 
Life,  the  Health,  the  Comfort,  the  Pleafure,  and 
Bufinefs  of  the    whole  Globe.     It  is  the  Air  the 


(a)  Mttndi piri  ejl  Aer,  o" qft'tdem  necejfaria  :  Hie  eft enim qui 
fceliim  terrapujue  connetiit,  &c.   Senec.  Nat.  Qu.  1.  i.   c.  4. 

(^b)  Jpfe  Aer  nobtjcum  videt,  nobijcum  audit,  nobijcum  fonat ; 
nihil enimiorum fine  eo  fisripoteftt^z,  Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  1.  z. 

c-  33. 

whole 


Chap.  I,  Atmofphere.  $ 

whole  Animal  World  breatheth,  and  livech  by  ;  not 
only   the    Animals    inhabiting  the    Earth   {c)   and 


Air, 


(t)  As  the  Air  is  of  abfolute  NecelTity  to  Animal  Life,  fo  it 
is  neccirary  that  it  fhould  be  of  a  due  Temperament  or  Confi- 
ftcnce;  not  foul,  by  re-ifon  that  fuffocateth  :  net  too  r.\re  and 
thin,  becaufe  that  fufficeth  not  ;  with  Examples  of  each  of 
wiiich,  I  Hiall  a  little  entertain  the  Reader.  In  one  of  Mr. 
liazvkibee's  Compreffing  Engines,  I  clofely  fliut  up  a  Sparroiv 
withou*:  forcing  any  Air  in  ;  and  in  lefs  than  an  Hour  the  Bird 
began  to  pint,  and  be  concerned  ;  and  in  lefs  than  an  Hour  and 
half  to  be  fick,  vomit,  and  more  out  of  Breach  ;  and  in  two 
Hours  time  was  nearly  expiring. 

Another  I  put  in  and  comprelTed  the  Air,  but  the  Engine 
leaking,  I  frequently  renevved  the  ComprefTure  ;  by  which 
means,  (although  the  Bird  panted  a  little  after  the  firft  Hour,) 
yet  after  fuch  frequent  ComprefTures,  and  ImmifTion  of  frefli 
Air,  it  was  very  little  concerned,  and  taken  out  feemingly  un- 
hurt after  three  Hours. 

After  this  1  made  two  other  Experiments  in  comprefTed  Air, 
with  the  Weight  of  two  Atmofpheres  injected,  the  Engine  hold- 
ing tight  and  well;  the  one  with  the  Great  litmoufe,  the  other 
wich  z  Sparrow.  Eor  near  an  Hour  they  Teemed  but  little  con- 
cerned ;  but  after  that  grew  fainter,  and  in  two  Hours  lime 
fick,  and  in  three  Hours  time  died.  Another  thing  I  took  no- 
tice of,  was,  that  when  the  Birds  were  (ick  and  very  reftlefs, 
I  fancied  they  were  fomewhat  relieved  for  a  fliort  fpace,  with 
the  Motion  of  the  Air,  caufed  by  their  fluttering  and  ftiaking 
their  Wings,  (a  thing  worth  trying  in  the  Diving- Bell).  I  fliall 
leave  the  ingenious  Reader  to  judge  what  the  craife  was  of  both 
the  Birds  living  longer  in  comprelTed,  than  uncomprelfed  Air; 
whether  a  lels  quantity  of  Air  was  not  fooner  fouled  and 
rendred  unfit  for  Refpiration,  than  a  greater. 

From  thefe  Experiments  two  Things  are  manifefted  ;  one  is, 
th.Tt  Air,  in  fome  meafure  comprelTed,  or  rather  heavy,  is  ne- 
cefTary  to  Animal  Lire:  Of  which  by  and  by.  The  other,  that 
frelh  Air  is  alio  neceffary  :  For  pent  up  Air,  when  overcharged 
with  the  Vapours  emitted  out  of  the  Animal's  Body,  becomes 
unfit  for  Refpiration.  For  which  Reafon,  in  the  Diving- Bell,  af- 
ter fome  time  of  ffay  under  Water,  they  are  forced  to  come 
up  and  take  in  frcfii  Air,  or  by  fome  fuch  means  recruir  it.  But 
the  famous  Cornelius  Drebell  conir\\cd  not  only  aVelTelto  be 
rowed  under  Water,  but  alfo  a  Liquor  to  be  carried  in  that 
VelTel,  that  would  fupply  the  want  of  frefbAir.  The  VeflTel 
was  made  for  King  James  \.  It  carried  twelve  Rowers,  befides 
the  Paflengers.  It  was  tried  in  the  River  of  Thames ;  and  one 

B  3  Qi 


6  Survey  of  the  Book  I. 

of  thePerfons  that  was  in  that  fubmarine  Navigation  was  then 
alive,  and  told  it  one,  who  related  the  Matter  to  our  famous 
Founder,  the  Honourable,  and  moil  Ingenious  Mr.  Boyl.  As 
to  the  Liquor,  Mr.  Boyl  faith,  he  difcovered  by  a  Dodor  of 
Phyfick,  who  married  Drehell's  Daughter,  that  it  was  ufed  from 
time  to  time  when  the  Air  in  the  fubmarine  Boat  was  clogged 
by  the  Breath  of  the  Company,  and  thereby  made  unfit  for 
Refpiration  ;  at  which  time,  by  unftopping  a  VefTel  full  of 
this  Liquor,  he  could  fpeedily  reftore  to  the  troubled  Air  fuch 
a  proportion  of  vital  Parts,  as  would  make  it  again  for  a  good 
while  fit  for  Refpiration.  The  Secret  of  this  Liquor  Drebell 
would  never  dilclofe  to  above  one  Perfon,  who  himfelf  af- 
fured  Mr.  Boyl  what  it  was.  Vid.  Boyl,  Exp.  Phyf.  Mech. 
of  the  Spring  of  the  Atr,  Exp.  41.  in  the  Digref.  This  Story 
I  hAve  related  from  Mr.  Boyl,  but  at  the  fame  time  much 
quellion  whether  the  Virtues  of  the  Liquor  were  fo  efFedual 
as  reported. 

And  as  toogrofs,  fo  too  rare  an  Air  is  unfit  for  Refpiration. 
Not  to  mention  the  forced  Rarefadions  made  by  the  Air-Pump, 
in  the  following  Note ;  it  is  found,  that  even  the  extraordinary 
natural  Rarefadions,  upon  the  tops  of  very  high  Hills,  much 
afifed  Refpiration.  An  Ecclefiaftical  Perfon,  whohadvifited  the 
high  Mountains  of  Armenia,  (on  which  fome  fancy  the  Ark 
refted)  told  Mr.  Bo^jl^  that  whilft  he  was  on  the  upper  part  of 
them,  he  was  forced  to  fetch  his  Breath  oftner  than  he  was 
wont.  And  taking  notice  of  it  when  he  came  down,  the  People 
told  him,  that  it  was  what  happen'd  to  them  when  they  were  fo 
high  above  the  Plane,  and  that  it  was  a  common  Obfervation  a- 
moB3them.  T'he  like  Obfervation  the  fame  Ecclefiallick  made 
upon  the  top  of  a  Mountain  in  the  Ceve-anes.  So  a  learned  Tra- 
veller, and  curious  Perfon,  on  one  of  the  bighell  Ridges  of  the 
Pyrenees,  call'd  Pic  de  Midi,  found  the  Air  not  \o  fit  for  Re- 
fpiration, as  the  common  Air,  but  he  and  his  Company  were 
fain  to  brerih  iliortcr  and  oftner  than  in  the  lower  Air.  Vid. 
Phil.  TranfaSl.   No.  63,   or  Lowthorp\  Abridg.  Vol.  2..  p.  2i6. 

Such  anotbc:  Relation  the  learned  Jofeph  Aco/ia  gives  of 
himfeK  and  h^  Company,  that,  when  they  palfed  the  high 
Mountains  of  Peru,  which  they  call  Periacaca,  ^to  which  he 
faith,  the  Alp^  ihemfelves  fetmedto  them  but  as  ordinary  Houfesy 
in  regard  of  I'i'/h  Toivers,  )  He  and  his  Companions  were  furpri- 
Xed  with  fuch  extreme  Pangs  of  Straining  and  Vomiting,  (  not 
•without  cafting  up  of  Blood  too,)  and  with  fo  violent  a  Dijiemper, 
that  he  concludes  he  Jlyj-'iH  undoubtedly  have  died;  hut  that  this 
laftcd  KCt  above  three  or  four  Hours,  before  they  came  into  a  more 
convenient  and  natural  Temperature  oj  the  Air.  All  which  he 
concludes  proceeded  from  the  too  great  Subtilty  and  Delicacy 
of  the  4ir,  which  is  not  proportionable  to  humane  Refpirati- 
on, which  requires  a  more  grofs  and  temperate  Air,  Vid.  Boyl, 
uht  fupra. 

Thus 


Chap.  I.  Atmofphere.  J 

Air  {d)^  but  thofc  of  the  Waters  {e)  too.  Without  it 

moft 


Thus  it  appears,  that  an  Air  too  Subtile,  Rare  and  Light,  is 
unfit  for  Refpiration  :  But  the  Caufe  is  not  the  Subtilty  ortoo 
grot  Delicacy,  as  Mr.  £<>:>/ thinks,  but  the  too  great  Lightnefs 
iliereor,  which  renders  it  unable  to  be  a  Counterbalance,  or 
nn  Antngonift  to  the  Heart,  and  all  the  Mulcles  miniftring  to 
Refpiration,  and  the  Diafiole  of  the  Heart.  Oi  which  Ice 
IJouk  4.  (3hap.  7.  Note  i. 

And  as  our  Inability  to  live  in  too  rare  and  light  an  Air  may 
difcouragethofe  vain  Attempts  of  Flying  and  VVhimlies  of  paf- 
fing  to  the  Moon,  vc.  fo  our  being  able  to  bear  an  heavier 
State  of  the  Air  is  an  excellent  Provilion  for  Mens  Occalions 
in  Mines,  and  other  great  Depths  of  the  Earth  ;  and  thole  o- 
ther  greater  PrelTures  made  upon  the  Air,  in  the  Diving-Bell^ 
when  we  defcend  into  great  Depths  of  the  Waters. 

{d)  That  the  Inhabitantsof  the  Air,  (Birds  and  Infeds,)  need 
the  Air  as  well  as  Man  and  other  Animals,  is  manifelt  from 
their  fpeedy  dying  in  too  feculent,  or  too  much  rarefied  Air; 
of  which  fee  the  preceding  and  following  Note/.  Bui  yet 
Birds  and  Infedls  (fome  Birds  at  leaft)  can  live  in  a  rarer  Air  than 
Man.  Thus  Eagles,  Kites,  Herons,  and  divers  other  Birds,  that 
delight  in  high  Flights,  are  not  affedted  with  the  Rarity  of  the 
Medium,  as  thofe  Perfons  were  in  the  preceding  Note.  So 
Infeds  bear  the  Air-Pump  long,  as  in  the  following  Note/. 

{e)  Creatures  inhabiting  the  Waters  need  tlie  Air,  as  well  as 
other  Animals,  yea,  and  frefli  Air  too.  The  Hyrirocanthari 
of  all  Sorts,  the  Nympha  of  Gnats,  and  many  other  Water- 
Infeds,  have  a  lingular  Faculty,  and  an  admirable  Apparatus, 
to  raife  their  back  Parts  to  the  top  of  the  Waters,  and  take  in 
frclL  Air.  It  is  pretty  to  fee,  for  Inftance,  the  Hydrocanthari 
come  and  thruft  their  Tails  out  of  the  Water,  and  take  in  a 
Bubble  of  Air,  at  the  tip  of  their  V agin  &  ■and  TzWs,  and  then 
nimbly  carry  it  down  with  them  into  the  Waters;  and,  when 
that  is  fpent,  or  fouled,  to  afcend  again  and  recruit  it. 

So  Fillies  alfo  are  well  known  to  ufe  Refpiration,  by  paffing 
the  Water  through  their  Mouths  and  Gills,  But  C<j;/>j  will  hve 
out  of  the  Water,  only  in  the  Air;  as  is  manifeft  by  the  Expe- 
riment of  their  way  of  Fatting  them  in  Holland,  and  which 
hath  beenpradifed  herein  England,  viz..  they  hang  them  up  in 
a  Cellar,  or  fome  cool  Place,  in  wet  Mofs  in  a  fmall  Net,  with 
their  Heads  out,  and  feed  them  with  white  Bread  foaked  in  Milk 
for  many  Days.  This  was  told  me  by  a  Perfon  very  curious,  and 
of  great  Honour  and  Eminence,  whofc  Word  (if  1  had  leave  to 
name  him)  no  Body  would  queftion:  And  it  being  an  Inlhnce 

B  4  of 


8  Survey  of  the  Book  I. 

mofl  Animals  live  fcarce  half  a  Minute  (/)  j  and  o- 
thers,  that  are  the  moll  accullomed  to  the  want  of 
it,  live  not  without  it  many  Days. 

And 


of  theRefpiration  oF  Fifliesvery  fingular,  and  fomewhat  out  of 
the  way,  I  have  for  the  Reader's  Diverlion  taken  notice  of  it. 

(/)  By  Experiments  I  made  my  itM  in  the  Air  Pump,  in 
September  and  OSlober ,  1704;  I  obferved  that  Animals  whofe 
Hearts  have  tv^ro  Ventricles,  and  no  Foramen  Ovale,  as  Birds, 
Dogs,  Cats,  Rats,  Mice,  crc.  die  in  lefs  than  half  a  Minute 
counting  from  the  very  firll  Exfudion  ;  efpecially  in  a  fmall 
Receiver. 

A  Mole  (which  I  fufpefted  might  have  born  more  than  other 
Quadrupeds)  died  in  one  Minute  (without  Recovery)  in  a  large 
Receiver;  anddoubtlefs  would  hardly  have  furvived  half  a  Mi- 
nute in  a  fmall  Receiver,  A  Bat  (although  wounded)  fuftain- 
ed  the  Pump  two  Minutes,  and  revived  upon  the  re-admiffion 
of  the  Air.  After  that,  he  remamed  fourMmutes  and  a  half 
and  revived.  Laftly,  After  he  had  been  five  Minutes,  hecon- 
tinued  gafping  for  a  time,  and  after  twenty  Minutes  I  read- 
mitted  the  Air,  but  the  Bat  never  revived. 

As  for  Infeih :  IVafps,  Bees,  Hornets,  Graflioppers,  zx\d  Lady- 
Cows  feemed  dead  in  appearance  in  two  Minutts,  but  revived 
in  the  open  Air  in  two  or  three  Hours  time,  notvvichftanding 
they  had  been  in  Vacuo  twenty  four  Hours. 

The  Ear-zvig,  the  great  Staphylinus,  the  great  black  lowfy 
Beetle,  and  Ibme  other  Infedls  would  leem  unconcerned  at  the 
Vacuum  a  good  while,  and  lie  as  dead  ;  but  revive  in  the  Air, 
although  fome  had  lain  fixteen  Hours  in  the  exhaufted  Re- 
ceiver. 

Snails  bear  the  Air  Pump  prodigioufly,  efpecially  thofe  in 
Shells ;  two  of  which  lay  above  tv/enty  four  Hours,  and  feem- 
ed not  much  affeded.  The  fame  Snails  I  left  in  twenty  eight 
Hours  more  after  a  fccond  Exhauflion,  and  found  one  of  them 
quite  dead,  but  the  other  revived. 

Fro^%  and  Toads  bear  the  Pump  long,  efpecially  the  former. 
A  large  Toad,  found  in  the  Houfe,  died  irrecoverably  in  lefs. 
than  fix  Hours.  Another  Toad  and  Frog  I  puc  in  together, 
and  the  Toad  wasfeemingly  dead  in  two  Hours,  but  the  Frog 
juil  alive.  After  they  had  remained  there  eleven  Hours,  and 
feemingly  dead,  the  Frog  recovered  in  the  open  Air,  only 
weak,  but  the  Toad  was  quite  dead.  The  fame  Frog  being  put 
in  again  for  twenty  feven  Hours,  then  quite  died. 

The  Animalcules  in  Pepper-Water  remained  in  F<ic«o twenty 
four  Hours.  And  after  they  had  been  expofed  a  Day  or  two 
to  the  open  Air,  I  found  fome  of  them  dead,  fome  alive. 

(S)  That 


Chap.  I.  Atrnofphere,  9 

And  not  only  Animals  thcmfelves ,  but  even 
Trees  and  Plants,  and  the  whole  vcgcraMe  Race, 
owe  their  Vegetation  and  Life  to  this  ull. r..  VSz- 
mcnt  >  as  will  appear  when  I  come  to  fpcuK  -if 
them,  and  is  manifell  from  their  Glory  and  Ver- 
dure in  a  free  Air,  and  their  becoming  Pale  and 
Sickly,  and  Languifhing  and  Dying,  when  by  any 
means  excluded  trom  it  {g). 

Thus  ufeful,  thus  neccll'ary,  is  the  Air  to  the  Life 
of  the  animated  Creatures  j  and  no  lefs  is  it  to  the 
Motion  and  Conveyance  of  many  of  them.  All 
the  winged  Tribes  owe  their  Flight  and  Buoyan- 
cy (/;)  to  ir,  as  fhall  be  fhewn  m  proper  place  : 
And  even  the  watery  Inhabitants  themfelres  cannot 

afcend 


{£)  That  the  Air  is  the  principal  Caufe  of  the  Vegetation  of 
Plants,  Ecrelli  proves  in  his  excellent  Book  D«  Mot.  Animal. 
Vol.2.  Prop.  181.  Andin  the  next  I'ropofiiion,  he  alfurcth. 
In  plant  is  quoque  peragt  Aeris  refplrationem  quandam  impirfe- 
dam,  a.  qua,  tarum  vita  pendet,  cj-  ccnjervatur.  But  ot  this 
more  when  I  come  to  furvcy  Vegetables. 

Some  Lettice-Seed  being  fown  upon  [ome  Earth  m  the  open 
Air,  and  [ome  of  the  fame  Seed  at  the  fame  time  upon  other 
Earth  in  a  Glajf- Receiver  of  the  Pneumatick  Engine,  aftervjards 
exhaufted  of  Air  :  The  Seed  expofed  to  the  Air  was  grown  up 
an  Inch  and  half  high  wiihin  Eight  Days  ;  hut  that  in  the  ex~ 
haufted  Receiver  not  at  all.  And  Air  being  again  admitted  in- 
to the  fame  emptied  Receiver,  to  fee  whether  any  of  the  Seed 
would  then  come  up,  it  was  found,  that  in  the  Space  of  ons 
Week  it  zvas  grown  up  to  the  Height  of  two  or  three  Inches. 
Vid.  Phil.  Tranl'.  No.  23.   Lowth.  Abridg.  Vol.  2.    p.  206. 

(h)  In  volucrihus  pulmones  perforati  acrem  infpiratum  tn  toiant 
ventris  cavitatem  admiitunt.  Hujus  ratio,  ut  propter  ccrpcns 
truhcum  Aere  repletum  cr  quaf  extenjum,  ipja  magi-  r.olatilia 
evadant,  faciliufque  ab  aere  externo,  propter  mtimi  penum,  JU" 
jlenteniur.  Equidem  pifces,  quo  levms  in  aquis  natent,  i.-t  Abdth- 
mine  veficas  Aere  infiatas  gejlant :  pariter  <i^  volucres,  pro.  ter 
corporis  truncum  Aere  impletum  cr  qtiafi  inflatum,  nud-  Aeri 
incumbentes,  minus  gravantur,  proindeque  levius  c  expeditiUs 
volant.    Willis  de  Aniin.  Brut.  p.  i.  c.  3. 

(i)  Fifhts 


lo  Survey  of  the  Book  I. 

afcend  and  defccnd  into  their  Element,  well  with- 
out it  (/'). 

But 


(?)  Fifties  hy  reafon  of  the  Bladder  of  Air  within  thetn,  can 
fuftaWy  or  keep  t hem/elves  in  any  Depth  of  Waier  :  For  the  Air 
in  that  Bladder  betng  more  or  iefs  comprejj'ed,  according  to  the 
Depth  the  Fiji}  fu'itns  at,  takes  up  more  or  tejs  Space  ;  and  con- 
fequently,  the  B  idy  of  the  Ftjh,  part  (fwhofe  Bulk  this  Bladder 
is,  is  greater  or  Iefs  according  to  the  feveral  Depths ,  and  yet  re- 
tains the  fame  Weight.  Now  the  Rule  dc  Infidcntibus  humido 
»;,  that  a  Body,  that  is  heavier  than  fo  much  Waier,  as  is  equal 
in  §luantity  to  the  Bulk  of  it,  will  fink,  a  Body  that  is  lighter 
will  fwim;  a  Body  of  equal  Weight  tvill  reft  in  any  part  of  the 
Water.  By  this  Rule,  if  the  Fiftj ,  in  the  middle  Region  of  the 
Water t  be  of  equal  Weight  to  the  Water,  that  is  commenfurate 
to  the  Bulk  of  it,  the  Fiji)  will  re[l  there,  without  any  Tendency 
tfpvjards  or  downwards  :  And  if  the  Fifh  be  deeper  in  the  Wa- 
ter, the  Bulk  of  the  Fiflj  becoming  Iefs  hy  the  Comprejfion  of  the 
Bladder,  and  yet  retaining  the  fame  Weight,  it  will  fink,  and 
red  at  the  Bottom.  And  on  the  other  fide,  if  the  Fifty  be  higher 
than  the  middle  Region,  the  Air  dilating  it  (elf,  and  the  Bulk 
of  the  Fifty  confequently  increafing,  but  not  the  Weight,  the  Fifty 
will  rife  upwards  and  reft  at  the  top  of  the  Water.     Perhaps  the 

Tifli  by  fame  A£lion  can  emit  Air  out  of  its  Bladder ,  and, 

when  not  enough,  take  in  Air, and  then  it  zvill  not  be  won- 

dred,  that  there  fhould  he  always  a  fit  Proportion  of  Air  in  all 
Fifties  to  ferve  their  Vfe,  Scc.  Then  follows  a  Method  of  Mr. 
Boyl  to  experiment  the  Truth  of  this.  After  which,  in  Mr. 
Lozvthorp's  Abridgment,  follow  Mr.  Ray's  Obfervations.  / 
think  tly>at  — — —  hath  hit  upon  the  true  Ufe  of  the  Swimming- 
Bladders  in  Fif.ies.  For,  I.  It  hath  been  obferved,  that  if  the 
Swimming- Bladder  of  any  Fifty  be  pricked  or  broken,  fuch  a  Fifty 
finks  prefently  to  the  Bottom,  and  can  neither  fupport  or  raife  it 
felf  up  in  the  Water,  l.  Flat  Fifties,  as  Soles,  Plaife,&ZC.  tvhich 
lie  always  grovelling  at  the  Bottom,  have  no  Swimming- Blad- 
ders that  ever  1  could  find.  3.  In  mo  ft  Fifties  there  is  a  manifeft 
Chanel  leading  from    the   Gullet  <  to    the    faid  Bladder, 

which  without  doubt  ferve!  for  the  conveying  Air  thereunto. 

In  the  Coat  of  this  Bladder  is  a  mujculous  Power  to  contrail  it 
when  the  Fift)  lifts.  See  more  very  curious  Ohfervations  re- 
lating to  ihii  Matter,  of  the  late  great  Mr.  Ray,  as  alfo  of 
the  curious  .iiionymous  Gentleman  in  the  ingenious  Mr.  Low- 
thorp's  Abridgment,  before  cited,  /.  845.  from  Phil.  Jranf. 
N.  114,  II^ 

(k)  Among 


Chap.  I.  Atmofphere,  ii 

But  it  would  be  tedious  to  defccnd  too  far  into 
Particulars,  to  reckon  up  the  many  Benefits  of  this 
noble  Appendage  of  our  Globe  in  many  ufeful  En- 
gines ('^)i  in  many  of  the  Funftions  and  Otv-rati- 
ons  oF  Nature  (/)  in  the  Conveyance  of  Sounds; 
and  a  Thoufand  Things  befides.     And    I  fhall  but 

juft 


(i-)  Among  the  Engines  in  which  the  Air  :s  ufeful,  Pumps 
may  be  accounted  not  contemptible  ones,  and  divers  other  Hy- 
drauhcal  hngmcs,  which  need  not  to  be  particularly  inliilcd  on. 
In  thefe  the  Water  wa?  imagined  to  nfe  by  thepowerof  Suc- 
tion, to  avoid  a  r<JCM«w,  and  fuch  unintellroiblc  Stuff;  but  the 
julHy  famous  Mr.  Bo;y/  was  the  ftrrt  that  folved  ihefe  Phaenome- 
na  by  the  Weight  of  the  Atmo/pherc.  His  ingenious  and 
curious  Obfervations  and  Experiments  relating  hereto,  maybe 
feen  in  his  little  Traft,  Of  the  Cau/e  of  AttraiHion  Ly  Suction, 
and  divers  others  of  his  Trads. 

(/)  it  would  be  endlefs  to  fpecify  the  Ufcs  of  the  Atr  in 
Nature's  Operations  :  1  (IvUl  therefore,  for  a  Sample  only, 
name  its  great  Ufe  to  the  World  in  conferring  animated  Bo- 
dies, whether  endowed  with  animal  or  vegetative  Life,  and 
its  contrary  Quality  of  dilTolving  other  Bodies;  by  which  means 
many  Bodies  that  would  prove  Nuifanccs  to  tlie  World,  arc 
put  out  of  the  Way,  by  being  reduced  into  their  firH  Principles, 
(as  we  fay\  and  fo  embodied  with  the  Earth  agnin.  Of  its 
Faculty  as  a  Menftruum,  or  its  Power  to  difToive  Bodies;  I 
may  inllance  in  CryftalGlaircs,  which,  with  long  keeping, 
efpecially  if  not  ufed,  will  in  Time  be  reduced  to  a  Powder, 
as  1  have  feen.  So  divers  Minerals,  Earth.s,  Stone?,  Foffil- 
Shells,  Wood,  crc.  which  from  Noah's  Flood,  at  leafl:  for  ma- 
ny Ages,  have  lain  underGround,  lb  fecure  from  Corruption, 
that,  on  the  contrary,  they  have  been  thereby  made  much  the 
ftronger,  have  in  the  open  Air  foon  mouldered  away.  Of 
whith  lali,  Mr.  Boyl  gives  an  Inftance  (from  the  Dijfertation 
de  adm'trandis  Hungar.  Aijuis)  of  a  great  Oak,  like  a  huge 
Beam,  dugout  of  a  Salt  Mine  in  Tranfylvania,  fo  hard,  that 
it  would  not  eafily  he  luroughr  upon  by  Iron  Tools,  yet,  being 
expofed  to  the  Air  out  of  the  Aline,  it  became  fo  rotten  that  in 
four  Days  it  was  eafy  to  he  broken,  and  crumbled  betzvcen  one's 
Fingers.  Boyl'i  Sufpic.  about  fome  hid.  Qual.  in  the  Air, 
j>.  18.  So  the  Trees  turned  out  of  the  Earth  by  the  Breaches 
at  Weft-Thurrock  and  Dagenham,  near  me,  although  probably 
no  other  than  Alder,  and  interred  many  Ages  ago  in  a  rotten 
oazy  Mold,  were  fo  exceedingly  tough,  hard,  and  found  at 

fint. 


12-  Survey  of  the  Book  I, 

jull  mention  the  admirable  ufe  of  our  Atmofphere 
in  minifbing  to  the  enlightening  of  the  World,  by 
its  rtflcdmg  the  Light  of  the  heavenly  Bodies  to  us 
{m);  and  retracing  the  Sun-beams  to  our  Eye,  be- 
fore itevjr  furmounteth  our  Horizon  {n)  j  by  which 
means  ths  Day  is  protracted  throughout  the  whole 
Gl'  he-  i  a.id  the  long  aiid  difmal  Nights  are 
ihorten'd  in  the  frigid  Zones,  and  Day  fooner  ap- 

proacheih 


fiift»  rhat  I  could  make  but  little Impreflions  on  them  with  the 
Sr'Okv.s  of  an  Ax;  but  being  expofed  to  the  Air  and  Water, 
io'jn  h^.^mc  lb  roiten  as  to  be  crumbled  between  the  Fingers. 
See  my  OSiervacions  in  Philof.  Tranfa^.  N^  335. 

C"/?,  By  rcjieit'ivg  the  Light  cj  the  heavenly  Bodies  to  us,  I 
mea.i  that  VV'iTtenefs  or  Lightnefs  which  is  in  the  Air  in  the 
Day  time,  cauled  by  the  Rays  of  Light  ftriking  upon  the  Parti- 
CIC3  of  the  .'"urn  ■'■phere,  as  well  as  upon  the  Clouds  above,  and 
the  other  Objcftts  oeneath  upon  the  Earth.  To  the  lame  Caufe 
alfo  we  owe  the  Twilignt,  -viz.  to  the  Sun- beams  touching 
the  Uf'permoll  Particles  of  our  Atmofphere,  which  they  do 
when  tne  Sun  is  about  eighteen  Degrees  beneath  the  Horizon, 
Anuasthe  Beams  rtrach  more  and  more  of  the  airy  Particles, 
iu  iJ).uki!efs  goes  off,  and  Day  l;ght  comes  on  and  encreafeth. 
For  ail  Exemplificinon  of  this,  the  Experiment  may  ferve  of 
trar.iin'ttuig  a  few  Rays  of  the  Sun  through  a  fmall  Hole  into  a 
dark  R.jum  :  By  which  means  the  Rays  which  meet  with  Dul>, 
and  oti.cr  i'aiticirs  Hying  in  the  Air,  are  render'd  vifible;  or 
(which  ^mounts  to  the  lame;  thofe  fwimming  fmall  Bodies  are 
rendeied  vitirle,  by  thtir  rcfleding  the  Light  of  the  Sun- 
beams to  the  Eye,  which,  without  inch  Reflection,  would  it 
felf  f^'i  invillHle 

The  ;\7ureCoIou;"  of  the  Sky  Sir  Ifaac  Netvton  attributes  to 
Vapouis  bfginning  lo  condcnle,  and  that  are  not  able  to  re- 
ilc-'^  ihc  other  Col  jurs.   V.  Optic.  1. 1.   Par-.  3.  Prop.  7. 

!>•)  By  the  Refradive  Power  of  the  Air,  the  Sun,  and  the 
fith.!  hc-ivcnly  B'idies  feem  higher  than  really  they  are,  efpe- 
cialiv  neir  the  Horizon.  What  the  Refracftions  amount  unto, 
vhat  Vari.itions  they  have,  and  what  Alterations  in  time  they 
c.'uie.  may  be  btiefiy  feen  in  a  little  Book  called,  The  Artifi- 
cial Cl-'Ck  Maker,  Chnp.  11. 

j-iltho'igh  this  infletlive  &uality  of  the  Air  be  a  great  Incum- 

braiice  and  Confufun  of  Aftronom'tcal  Obfervations  ; yet  it 

is  not  without  fome  confiderable  Benefit  to  Navigation  ;  and  in- 
dued in  fome  Cafes,  the  Benefit  thereby  obtained  is  much  greater 

thar> 


Chap.  I.  Atmofphere.  13 

proacheth  them  j  yea  the  Sun  it  fdf  rifeth  in  Ap- 
pearance (when  really  it  is  ablcnt  from  thcmj  to 
the  great  Comfort  of  thofe  forlorn  Places  {p). 

But  palling  by  all  tlielc  Things  with  only  a  bare 
mention,  and  wholly  omitting  others  that  might 
have  been  named,  I  fliall  only  inlift  upon  the  ex- 
cellent Ufe  of  this  noble  circumambient  Companion 
of  our  Globe,  in  refpedtof  two  of  its  Meteors,  the 
Winds,  and  the  Clouds  and  Rain  (/>). 


thiXn  -.vo.di  he  the  Benefit  of  having  the  Ray  proceed  in  an  exa6l 
flra'ght  Line.  [Then  he  mentions  the  iienefit  hereof  to  the  Po- 
lar Parts  of  the  World]  But  this  by  the  by  (iaith  he.)  The  great 
Advantage  I  covftder  therein,  is  the  firfl  Difcovery  of  La>;d  up- 
on the  Sea  ;  for  by  means  hereof,  the  tops  of  Hills  and  Lands  art 
raifed  up  Into  the  Air,  fo  as  to  be  difcovera>'le  fever al  Leagues 
farther  off  on  the  Sea  than  they  would  be,  were  there  no  fuch 
Refrafiion,  which  is  of  great  Benefit  to  Navif^aibn  for  fleering 
their  Courfe  in  the  Night,  when  they  approach  near  Land ;  and 
iikewije  fjr  dlreHlni  them  In  the  Day-time,  mnch  more  certainly 
than  the  mofl  exatt  Celefllal  Obfervaiions  could  do  by  the  Help 
of  an  unlnflecled  Ray,  efpecially  in  fuch  Places  as  they  have  no 
Scundtngs.  [Then  he  propoies  a  Method  to  find  by  thefe  means 
the  Dulance  of  O'ojeds  at  Sea.]  V.  Dr.  if  wit's  Pofi.  Works. 
Le<ft   of  Navig.  p.  466. 

(0)  Cum  Belgs.  in  nova.  Zembla,  hybernarent,  Sol  lilts  apparuit 
iGdiebus  cliiUs,  quam  reveraln  Horiz-onte  exlfleret,  hoc  efl,  chm 
adhuc  infra  Huriz^ontem  deprefj'us  effet  quatuor   tirciter gradibus 
fjr  quidem  acre  fereno.     Varen.  Geog.  c.  19.  Prop.  ii. 

[Thefe  Hollinders]  found,  that  the  N"i,ht  in  that  place  fliort- 
ened  no  lefs  than  a  whole  Month ;  wrjtch  mufl  needs  be  a  very 
great  Comfort  to  all  fuch  Places  as  live  very  far  towards  the  North 
andSouth  Poles,  where  length  of  Night,  and  want  of  feel n"  the 
Sun,   cannot  chufe  but  be  very  tedious  and  irkfome.   Hook  Ibid. 

[By  nie.insof  the  Refradions]  we  fiund  the  Sun  to  rife  twenty 
Minutes  bifore  It  fJjonld  ;  and  in  the  livening  to  remain  above  the 
Horizon  twenty  Minutes  ( or  thereabouts )  longer  than  it  fl)ould. 
Captain  James's ]o\\\x\.  in  Boyl  of  Cold.  Tit.  18.  p.  190. 

ip)  Aer — In  Nubes  cogttur  :  humorem-]ue  colllgens  terram  attget 
imbrlbus:  turn  effiuens  hue  <:;r  illuc,  ventos  efficit.  Idem  annua$ 
frigorum  o"  calornm  facit  varletates:  idemque  (jTvolatus  Alttum 
fufllnet,  a-  fpirltu  duatts  alit  Q^  fuflentat  animames.  Cic.  dc 
Nat.  Deor.  1. 1.  c.  39. 

CHAP. 


14  Book  I. 

C  H  A  P.  II. 

Of  the  Winds  {a), 

TO  pafs  by  other  Confiderations,  whereby  I 
might  demonllrate  the  Winds  to  be  the  infi- 
nite Creator's  Contrivance,  I  fhall  infift  only  upon 
their  great  ufefuhiefs  to  the  World.  And  fo  great 
is  their  Ufc,  and  of  fuch  abfolute  Neceffity  are  they 
to  the  Salubrity  of  the  Atmofphere,  that  all  the 
World  would  be  poifoned  without  thofe  Agitations 
thereof.     We  find  how  putrid,  fetid,  and  unfit  for 

Rcfpiration, 


(<z)  Ventus  eft  aer  fiuens,  is  Seneca's  Definition,  Na.^.  I.  5. 
And  as  Wind  is  a  Current  of  the  Air,  fo  that  which  excites  or  al- 
ters its  Currents  may  be  jurtly  faid  to  be  the  Caufe  of  the  Winds, 
An  iSquipoife  of  the  Atmofphere  produceth  a  Calm  ;  but  if  that 
^quipoife  be  more  or  lefs  taken  off,  a  Stream  of  Air,  or  Wind, 
is  thereby  accordingly  produced  either  ftronger  or  weaker,  fwif- 
ter  or  flower.  And  divers  things  there  are  that  may  make  fuch 
Alterations  in  the  ^Equipoife  or  Balance  of  the  Atmofphere,^/;^. 
Eruptions  of  Vapours  from  Sea  or  Land  ;  Rarefactions  and 
Condenfations  in  one  Place  more  than  another ;  the  falling  of 
Rain,  prelTure  of  the  Clouds,  ctt,  Pltny,  1.  i.  c.  45.  tells  us  of 
a  certain  Cavern  in  Dalmatian  called  Senta,  in  quem,  faith  he, 
deje^o  levi  pondere,  quamvis  tranqudlo  die,  turb'tni  fimUts 
etnicat  procella.  But  as  to  Caves  it  is  obferved,  that  they 
often  emit  Winds  more  or  lefs.  Dr.  Connor,  taking  notice  of 
this  ma!:ter,fpecifiesthere,/»r^^«o  Neapolitano  ex  immanl  Cuman& 
SihylU  antra  tenuem  ventum  efftueutem percept.  The  like  he  ob- 
ferved at  the  Caves  at  Ba'is,,  and  in  fome  of  the  Mines  of  Ger-r 
nmny^  and  in  the  large  Salt- Mines  of  Cracow  in  Poland.  Ubi, 
faith  he,  op'tfices,  c  ipfe  fod'ins.  domtnm  Andreas  Morftln^  Nob. 
Polonus,  mihi  ajferuerunr,  quod  tanta  altquando  Ventorum  tem- 
pefias  ex  ambagiofis  hujus  fod\n&  recejJibHs  furgere  folebat,  quod 
laborantes  fojj'ores  burnt  profternebat,  nee  non  portas  c  domici- 
lia  (qu£  fibi  in  hac  fodink  artifices  exftruunt)  penitus  evertebat. 
Bern.  Connor.  Differt.  Med.  Phyf.  p.  33.  Artie.  3. 

And  as  great  Caves,  fo  great  Lakes  fometimes  fend  forth 
Winds.  So  Gajfendus  faith  the  Lacus  Legnim  doth,  E  quo  dum 
txoritHr  ftimus»  nubti  hat^d  dnh'ti  creanda  eftt  quA  fit  brevi  in 

ttmpefiatem 


Chap.  II.  Of  the  Winds.  15- 

Refpiration,  as  well  as  Health  and  Pleafure,  a  (lag- 
nating,  confined,  pent  up  Air  is.  And  if  the  whole 
Mafs  of  Air  and  Vapours  was  always  at  Reft,  and 
without  Motion,  inltead  of  refrefhing  and  animat- 
ing, it  would  fuftocate  and  poifon  all  the  World  : 

But 


tempeftatem  fizilfmam  exoneranda.   Gaffend.  Vit.  Peiresk.  1.  5. 
p.  417. 

but  the  mort  univcrfal  and  conftant  Alterations  of  the  Ba- 
lance of  the  Atmofphere  arc  from  Heat  and  Cold.  This  ii 
manifeft  in  the  General  Trade- Winds,  blowing  all  the  Year 
between  the  Tropicks  from  Eaft  to  Weft  :  if  the  Caufe  there- 
of be  (as  fome  ingenious  Men  imagine)  the  Sun's  daily  Pro- 
grefs  round  that  part  of  the  Globe,  and  by  his  Heat  rarefy- 
ing one  part  of  the  Air,  whilft  the  cooler  and  heasier  Air  be- 
hind preffcth  after.  So  the  Sea  and  Land  Breezes  in  Note  d. 
And  fo  in  our  Climate,  the  Northerly  and  Southerly  Winds 
(commonly  eftecmed  the  Caufes  of  cold  andwarm  Weather), 
are  really  the  l.rTeds  of  the  Cold  or  Warmth  of  the  Atmo^ 
fphere  :  Of  which  I  have  had  lb  many  Confirmations,  that 
1  have  no  doubt  of  it.  As  for  Inftance,  it  is  not  uncommon 
to  fee  a  warm  Southerly  Wind,  fuddenly  changed  to  the 
North,  by  the  fall  of  Snow  or  Hail  ;  to  fee  the  Wind  in  a 
frofty,  cold  Morning  North,  and  when  the  Sun  hath  well 
warmed  the  Earth  and  Air,  you  may  obferve  it  to  wheel  a- 
bout  towards  the  Southerly  Quarters  ;  and  again  to  turn  Nor- 
therly or  Eafterly  in  the  cold  Evening.  It  is  from  hence  alfo, 
that  in  Thunder-Showers  the  Wind  and  Clouds  are  often- 
times contrary  to  one  another,  (efpecially  if  Hail  falls)  the 
fukry  V\'eathc*r  below  direding  the  Wind  one  way;  and  the 
Cold  above  the  Clouds  another  way.  I  took  Notice  upoa 
March  the  rof'^  171V,  (and  divers  fuch  like  Inftances  I  have 
had  before  and  fince)  that  the  Morning  was  warm,  and  what 
Wind  llirred  was  Weft-South-Weit,  but  the  Clouds  were  thick 
and  black  (as  generally  they  are  when  Snow  enfues) :  A  little 
before  Noon  the  Wind  veered  about  to  North  by  Weft,  and 
fometinies  to  other  Points,  the  Clouds  at  the  fame  time  flying 
fome  North  by  Weft,  fome  South-Well :  About  one  of  the 
Clock  it  rained  apace,  the  Clouds  ftymg  fometimcs  North- 
Eaft,  then  North,  and  at  laft  both  Wind  and  Clouds  fettled 
North  by  Weft  ,  At  which  time  Sleet  fell  plentifully,  and  it 
grew  very  cold.  From  all  which  I  obferve,  i.  That  al- 
though our  Rtj.ion  below  was  warm,  the  Region  of  the 
Clouds  was  cold,  as  the  black,  fnowy  Clouds /hewed,  i.  That 

the 


1 6  Of  the  Winds.  Book  I. 

But  the  perpetual  Commotions  it  receives  from  the 
Gales  and  Storms,  keep  it  pure  and  healthful  {h). 

Neither  are  thofe  Ventilations  beneficial  only  to 
the  Health,  but  to  the  Pleafure  alfo  of  the  Inhabi- 
tants of  the  Terraqueous  Globe  J  witnefs  the  Gales 
which  fan  us  in  the  heat  of  Summer  j  without 
which,  even  in  this  our  temperate  Zone,  Men  are 
fcarce  able  to  perform  the  Labours  of  their  Calling, 

or 


the  ftruggle  between  the  warmth  of  ours,  and  the  cold  of  the 
cloudy  Region,  flopped  the  airy  Currents  of  both  Regiors. 
3.  That  the  falHng  of  the  Snow  through  our  warmer  Air 
melted  into  Rain  at  firft;  but  that  it  became  Sleet  after  the 
fuperiour  Cold  had  conquered  the  inferiour  Warmth.  4.  That, 
as  that  Cold  prev^iiled  by  Degrees,  fo  by  Degrees  it  wheeled 
about  both  the  Winds  and  Clouds  from  the  Northwards  to- 
ward- the  South. 

H.^-pocrptes,  1.  z.  De  Vi(^.  Orat.  Omnes  Ventos  vel  a.  nive, 
glacte,  'vehement't  gelu,  fluminibus,  &:c.  fpirare  neceJJ'e  judicat, 
Bartholin,  de  ufu  Nivis,  c.  i. 

(b)  It  is  well  obferved  in  my  Lord  Howard'^  Voyage  to  Con- 
flantinople,  that  at  Vienna  they  have  frequent  Winds,  which 
if  they  ceafe  long  in  Summer,  the  Plague  often  enfues  :  So  that 
it  is  now  grown  into  a  Proverb,  that  if  Auftria  be  not  windy y 
it  is  fubjetl  to  Contagion.     Bohun  ot   Wind,  p,  113. 

From  fome  fuch  Commotions  of  the  Air  I  imagine  it  is, 
that  at  Grand  Cairo  the  Plague  immediately  ceafes,  as  foon  as 
the  A'//^  begins  to  overflow  ;  although  Mr.  Boy/ attributes  it 
to  nitrous  Corpufcles.     Determ.  Nat.  of  Iffiuv.  Chap.  4. 

Nulla  enim  propemodum  regio  eft,  qu£  non  habeat  aliquem  fia- 
tum  ex  fe  nafcentem,  cr  circa  fe  cadentem. 

Inter  cxteraitaq;  ProvidentiA  opera,  hoc  quoq;  aliquis,  ut  dig' 
num  admiratione  fufpexerit.  Non  enim  ex  una,  causa,  Ventos 
aut  invenit,  nut  per  diver/a  difpofuit :  fed  primum  ut  aera  non 
finerent  pigrefcere,  fed  affidua  vexations  utilem  redderent,  vita- 
lernq;  trailuris.     Sen.  Nat.  Quaeft.   1.  5.  c.  17,  18. 

All  this  is  more  evident,  from  the  Caufe  afl^gned  to  malig- 
nant epidemical  Difeafes,  particularly  the  Plague,  by  my  in- 
genious, learned  Friend,  Dr.  Mead;  and  that  is,  an  hot  and 
moift  Temperament  of  the  Air,  which  is  obferved  by  Hippo- 
crates, Galen,  and  the  general  Hiftories  of  Epidemical  Difea- 
fes, to  attend  thofe  Diflempers.  Vid.  Mead  of  Poifons,  EJJdy  ^. 
p.  i6r.  But  indeed,  whether  the  Caufe  be  this,  or  poifo- 
nous,  malignant  Exhalations  or  Animalcules,  as  others  think, 

the 


Chap.  11.  Of  the  Winds,  xy 

or  not  without  Danger  of  Health  and  Life  {c). 
But  elpccially,  witncls  the  perpetual  Gales  which 
throughout  the  whole  Year  do  fan  the  Torrid  Zone, 
and  make  that  Climate  an  healthful  and   pleafanc 

Habitation, 


the  Winds  are  however  very  falutifcrous  in  fuch  Cafes,  in 
cooling  the  Air,  and  dilperling  and  driving  away  the  moilt 
or  peltit'erous  Vapours. 

(c)  July  8.  1707,  (called  for  fome  time  after  the  Hot  Tuef' 
d^y,)  was  fo  cxceflively  hot  and  fuJocating,  by  reafon  there 
was  no  Wind  flirring,  that  divers  Perfons  died,  or  were  in 
great  Danger  of   Death,    in   their   Harveft-Work.     Particu- 

j  Luiy  one  who  had  formerly   been  my  Servant,    a  healthy, 
hirty,  young  Man,  was  killed    by  the   Heat :    And  feveral 
Horfcs  on  the  Road  dropped  down  and  died  the  fame  Day. 
In  the  foregoing  Notes,  having  Notice  of  fome   Things 

I  relating  to  Heat,  although  it  be  fomewhat  out  of  the  way,  I 
hope  the  Reader  will  excufe  me,  if  I  entertain  him  wiuifome 
Obfervations  I  made  about  the  Heat  of  the  Air  under  the 
Line,  compared  with  the  Heat  of  our  Bodies.  J.  Patncky 
who,  as  he  is  very  accurate  in  making  Barometrical  and  Ther- 
moinetrical  Inllruments,  had  the  Curiofuy  for  the  nicer  ad- 
julling  his  Thermometers,  to  fend  two  abroad  under  the  Care 
of  two  very  fenlible,  ingenious  Men  ;  one  to  the  Nonhcra 
Lat.  of  81  ;  the  other  to  the  Parts  under  the  i^quinodial :  Itx 
thefe  two  different  Climates,  the  Places  were  marked  where 
the  Spirits  Hood  at  the  feverelT:  Cold  and  greateft  Heat.  And 
according  to  thele  Obfervations  he  graduates  his  Thermome- 
ters. With  his  Standard  I  compared  my  Standard  Thermo- 
meter, from  all  the  Degrees  of  Cold,  I  could  make  with  Sal 
jirmoniack,  &c.  to  the  greateft  Degrees  of  Heat  our  Ther- 
mometers would  reach  to.  And  with  the  fame  Thermome- 
ter (of  mine)  I  experimented  the  greateft  Heat  of  my  Body, 
in  July  1709.  Firft  in  an  hot  Day  without  F.xercife,  by  put- 
ting the  Ball  of  my  Thermometer  under  my  Armpits,  and 
•ther  hotteft  Parts  of  my  Body.  By  which  means  the  Spirits 
were  raifed  184  Tenths  of  an  Inch  above  the  Ball.  After 
that,  in  a  much  hotter  Day,  and  indeed  nearly  as  hot  as  any 
Day  with  us,  and  after  I  had  heated  my  my  felf  with  ftrong 
Exercife  too,  as  much  as  I  could  well  bear,  I  again  tried  the 
fame  Experiment,  but  could  not  get  the  Spirits  above  2.88 
Tenths ;  which  1  thought  an  inconfiderable  Difference,  forfo 
fcemingly  a  very  different  Heat  of  my  Body.  But  from  fome 
J^xperiments  I  have  made  (altho'  I  have  unfortuaalely  forgor- 


i8  Of  the  Winds.  Book  I. 

Habitation,  which  would  otherwife  be  fcarce  habi- 
table. 

To  thefe  I  might  add  many  other  great  Conve- 
niencies  of  the  Winds  in  various  Engines,  and  vari- 
ous Bufinefles.  I  might  particularly  infill  upon  its 
great  Ufe  to  tranfport  Men  to  the  fartheft  diftant 
Regions  of  the  World  {d)  and  I  might  particular- 
ly fpeak  of  the  general  and  coafting  Trade-Winds, 
the  Sea,  and  the  Land- Breezes ;  {e)  the  one  ferving 
to  carry  the  Mariner  in  long  Voyages  from  Eaft  to 
Well }  the  other  ferving  to  waft  him  to  particular 

Places  J 


ten  them)  in  veryjcold  Weather,  I  imagine  the  Heat  of  an  heal- 
thy Body  to  be  always  much  the  fame  in  the  warmeft  Parts 
thereof,  both  in  Summer  and  Winter.  Now  between  thofe 
very  Degrees  of  184  and  z88,  the  Point  of  the  equatorial 
Heat  falleth.  From  which  Obfervation  it  appears,  that  there 
is  pretty  nearly  an  equal  Contemperament  of  the  Warmth  of 
our  Bodies,  to  that  of  the  hotteft  Part  of  the  Atmofphere  in- 
habited by  us. 

If  the  Proportion  of  the  Degrees  of  Heat  be  defired  from 
the  Freezing-Point,  to  the  Winter,  Spring,  and  Summer  Air, 
the  Heat  of  Man's  Body,  of  heated  Water,  melted  Metals, 
and  fo  to  adlual  Fire  ;  an  Account  may  be  met  with  of  it, 
by  my  moft  ingenious  Friend,  the  great  Sir  ifaac  Newton,  in 
Phil.  TranfaSl.  N".  Z70. 

{d)  In  hoc  Providentia  ac  Difpofitor   Hie  Mundi  Deus,  aera. 

"Ventis  exercendum  dedit, —  non  ut  nos  clajfes  partem  freti  oc- 

cupaturas  compleremus  mtlite  armato,  8cc.  Bedit  Hie  ventos  ad 
cuftodiendam  cceli  terrarumq;  tetnperiem,  ad  evocandas  fuppri" 
fnendafq;  aquas,  ad  alendos  fat(num  atq;  arborum  friiSlus ; 
quos  ad  maturltatem  cum  allis  caufis  adducit  ipfa  ja£fatto,  at- 
trahens  cibum  in  fnmma,  er  ne  torpeat,  promovens.  Dedit  ven- 
tos ad  ulteriora  nofcenda :  fuijfet  enim  imperitum  animal,  ^Jine 
magna  experientia  rentm  Homo,  fi  circumfcriberetur  natali%  foli 
fine.  Dedit  -ventos  tit  commoda  cujufq;  regionis fierent  communia  ; 
non  ut  legiones  equilemq;  geftarent,  nee  ut  perniciofa  gentibui 
arma  tranfveherent.      Seneca,  ibid. 

{e)  Sea- Breezes  commonly  rife  in  the  Morning  about  nine  a 
Clock.  •  They  firfi  approach  the  Shore  gently,  as  if  they  were 

afraid  to  come  near  it.  ——  It  comes  in  a  fine,  fmall,  black 
Curie  upon  the  Water,  whereas  all  the  Sea  between  it  and  thi 
shore  {not  'jet  reached  by  it)  is  as  fmooth  and  even  as  Glafs  ir, 
X  Comparifon 


Chap.  IT.  Of  the  Winds.  19 

Places;  the  one  ferving  to  carry  him  into  his  Har- 
bour, the  other  to  bring  him  out.  But  I  fhould  go 
too  Far  to  take  notice  of  all  Particulars  (/).  Leaving 
therefore  the  Winds,  I  proceed  in  the  next  Place 
to  the  Clouds  and  Rain. 


Comparifon.  In  half  an  Hours  Time  after  it  has  reached  the 
shore,  it  fans  pretty  briskly,  and  fo  encreafeth  gradually  till 
tzvelve  a  Clock;  then  it  is  commonly  flrongefl,  and  lajis  fo  till 
two  or  three,  a  very  brisk  Gale.  —  ^fter  three  it  begins  to  die 
aivay  again,  and  gradually  withdrazvi  its  force  till  allis  ffent  ; 
and  about  five  a  Clock  — —  it  is  lulled  ajleep,  and  comes  no  more 
till  next  Morning. 

And  as  the  'Sca  Breezes  do  blow  in  the  Bay,  And  reft  in  the 
Kight;  fo  on  the  contrary  [The  Land-Breezes]  blow  in  the 
Hight,  and  reft  in  the  Day,  alternately  fucceeding   each  other. 

They  fpring  up  betzvecn  fix  and  twelve  at  Night,  and  laft 

till  fix,  eight,  or  ten  in  the  Morning.  Dampier'f  Difc.  of 
Winds,  ch.  4. 

(f)  One  Thing 'more  I  believe  fome  of  my  Friends  will 
exped  from  me  is,  that  1  lliew  the  RefuU  of  compaing  my 
own  Obfcrvations  of  the  Wmds,  with  others  they  know  I 
have  from  Ireland,  Switzerland,  Italy,  France,  New-England, 
and  fome  of  our  Parts  of  England.  But  the  Obfcrvations  be- 
ing fome  of  them  but  of  one  Year,  and  moll  of  the  reft  of 
but  a  few  Years,  1  liave  not  been  able  to  determme  any- 
great  Matters.  The  chief  of  what  I  have  oblerved  i',  that 
the  Winds  in  all  thefe  Places  feldom  agree,  but  when  they 
moft  certainly  do  fo,  it  is  commonly  when  the  Winds  are 
ftrong,  and  of  long  continuance  in  the  fame  Quarter  :  And 
more  1  think  in  the  Northerly  andEafterly,  than  other  Points. 
Alfo  a  ftrong  Wind  in  one  Place,  is  oftentimes  a  weak  one 
in  another  Place,  or  moderate,  according  as  Places  have  been 
nearer  or  farther  diftant.  Vid.  Phil.  Tranf  N".  zp?,  and  3zr. 
But  to  give  a  good  and  tolerable  Account  of  this  or  any 
other  of  the  VVeaiher,  it  is  nccefTary  to  have  good  Hiftories 
thereof  from  all  Parts;  which,  as  yet  we  have  but  few  of, 
and  they  imperfed,  for  want  of  longer  and  fuflBicient  Obfer- 
vations. 


C  1  CHAP, 


^o  ■-  Bookie 

CHAP.   in. 

Of  the  Clouds  and  Rain. 

TH  E  Clouds  and  Rain  {a)  we  fhall  find  to  be 
no  lefs  ufeful  Meteors  than  the  laft  mentioned  5 
as  is  manifelt  in  the  refrefhing  pleafant  Shades 
which  the  Clouds  afford,  and  the  fertile  Dews  and 
Showers  which  they  pour  down  on  the  Trees  and 

Plants, 


id)  Clouds  and  Rain  are  made  of  Vapours  raifed  from  Wa- 
ter, or  Moiilure  only.  So  that  I  utterly  exclude  the  Notion 
of  Dry,  Terrene  Exhalations,  or  Fumes,  talked  much  of  by 
mofl:  Philofophers ;  Fumes  being  realty  no  Other  than  the  hu- 
mid Parts  of  Bodies  refpedively  Dry. 

Thefe  Vapours  are  demonftratively  no  other  than  fmall  Bub- 
bles, or  Veiiculse  detached  from  the  Waters  by  the  Power  of 
the  Solar,  or  Subterraneous  Heat,  or  both.  Of  which  fee 
Loch  2..  Chap.  5.  I^lote  {b).  And  being  lighter  than  the  Atmo- 
fphere.  are  buoyed  up  thereby,  until  they  become  of  an 
equal  Weight  therewith,  in  fome  of  its  Regions  aloft  in  ths 
Air,  or  nearer  the  Earth  ;  in  which  thofe  Vapours  are  form- 
ed into  Clouds,  Rain,  Snow,  Hail,  Lightning,  Dew,  Mifts, 
and  other  Meteors, 

In  this  Formation  of  Meteors  the  grand  Agent  is  Cold, 
which  commonly,  if  not  always,  occupies  the  fuperior  Regi- 
ons of  the  Air ;  as  is  manifeft  from  thofe  Mountains  which 
exalt  their  lofty  Tops  into  the  upper  and  middle  Regions, 
and  are  always  covered  with  Snow  and  Ice. 

This  Cold,  if  it  approaches  near  the  Earth,  prefently  preci- 
pitates the  Vapours,  either  in  Dews;  or  if  the  Vapours  more 
copioufly  afcend,  and  foon  meet  the  Cold,  they  are  then  con- 
denfed  into  Mifi'mg,  or  elfe  into  Showers  oi  fmall  Rain,  fall- 
ing in  numerous,  thick,  fmall  Drops :  But  if  thofe  Vapours 
are  not  only  copious,  but  alfo  as  heavy  as  our  lower  Air  it 
felf,  (by  means  their  Bladders  are  thick  and  fuller  of  Water,) 
in  this  Cafe  they  become  vilible,  fwim  but  a  little  Height 
above  the  Earth,  and  make  what  we  call  a  Mijl  or  Jog.  But 
if  they  are  a  Degree  lighter,  fo  as  to  mount  higher,  but  not 
any  great  Height,  as  alfo  meet  not  with  Cold  enough  to  con- 
denfe  them,  nor  Wind  to  diffipate  them,  they  then  form  aa 
heavy,  thick,  dark  Skjf  lafting  oftentimes  for  feveral  Weeks 

without 


Chap.  Iir.    Of  theClouas  and  Rain.  ^l 

Plants,  which  would  languifli  and  die  with  perpe- 
tual Drought,  but  arc  hereby  made  Verdant  and 
Flourifliing,  Gay  and  Ornamental  ;  fo  that  fas  the 

Pfalmifi: 


without  either  Sun  or  Rain.  And  in  this  Cafe,  1  have  fcarce 
ever  known  it  to  Rain,  till  it  hath  been  fi'rjl  Fair,  ami  the?i 
Foul.  And  Mr.  Clarke,  (an  ingenious  Clergyman  of  Norfolk, 
who  in  his  Life-time,  long  before  me,  took  notice  of  it,  and 
kept  a  Regider  of  the  Weather  for  thirty  Years,  which  his 
learned  Grandibn,  Dr.  Samuel  Clarke  put  into  my  Hands,  he, 
I  fay)  faith,  he  fcarce  ever  obftrved  the  Rule  to  fail  inaJl  that 
Time  ;  only  he  adds,  //  the  Wind  be  in  fame  of  the  eaflerly 
Points.  But  I  have  obferved  the  fame  to  happen,  be  the 
Wind  where  it  will.  And  from  what  hath  been  faid,  the 
Cafe  is  eafily  accounted  for,  "viz.  vvhilfl  the  Vapours  re- 
main in  the  fame  State,  the  Weather  doth  fo  too.  And  fuch 
Weather  is  generally  attended  with  moderate  Warmth,  and 
with  little  or  no  Wind  to  didurb  the  Vapours,  and  an  heavy 
Atmofphere  to  fupport  them,  the  Barometer  being  common- 
ly high  then.  But  when  the  Cold  appioacheth,  and  by  con- 
denfiiig  drives  the  Vapours  into  Clouds  or  Drops,  then  is  way 
made  for  the  Sun-beams,  till  the  fame  Vapours,  being  by 
further  Condenfatidn  formed  into  R;iin,  fall  down  in  Drops. 

The  Cold's  approaching  the  Vapours,  and  confequently  the 
Alteration  of  fuch  dark  Weather  1  have  beforehand  perceiv- 
ed, by  fome  few  fmall  Drops  of  Ra!n,  Hail,  or  Snow,  now 
and  then  falling,  before  any  Alteration  hath  been  m  the 
Weather;  which  I  take  to  be  from  the  Cold  meeting  fome 
of  the  draggling  Vapours,  or  the  uppermoft  of  them,  and 
condenfing  them  into  Drops,  before  it  arrives  unto,  and  ex- 
erts it  felf  upon  the  main  Body  of  Vapours  below. 

I  have  more  largely  than  ordinary  infilled  upon  this  part  of 
the  Weather,  partly,  as  being  fornewhat  out  of  the  way; 
but  chiefly,  becaufe  it  gives  Light  to  many  other  Phxnomens 
of  the  Weather.  Particularly  we  may  hence  difcover  the 
Original  of  Clouds,  Rain,  Hail  and  Snow;  that  they  are  Va- 
pours carried  aloft  by  the  Gravity  of  the  Air,  which  meet- 
ing together  fo  as  to  make  a  Fog  above,  they  thereby  form 
a  Cloud  .  If  the  Cold  condenfeth  them  into  Drops,  they  then 
fal!  in  Rain,  if  the  Cold  be  not  intenfe  enough  to  freeze 
then;  :  But  if  the  Cold  freezeth  them  in  the  Clouds,  or  in 
tjieir  Fall  through  the  Air,   they  then  become  Hail  or  Snciv. 

As  to  Lightning,  and  other  efikindled  Vapours,  I  need  fay 

little  in  this  Place,  and  fliall  therefore  only  obfervc,  that  they 

owe  alfo  their  Rife  to  Vapours ;  but  fuch  Vapours  as  are  de- 

C  3  tacb^d 


%%  Of  the  Clouds  and  Rain.       Book  I. 

Pfalmift  faith,  Pfal  Ixv.  12,13.)  The  little  Hills  re- 
ioice  on  every  ftde^  and  the  Falleys  Jhout  for  Joy^  they 
aljo  fmg. 

And, 


tached  from  mineral  Juices,  or  at  leaft  that  are  mingled  with 
them,  and  are  fired  by  Fermentation. 

Another  Ph&nomenon  refolvable  from  what  hath  been  faid 
is,  why  a  cold,  is  always  a  wet  Summer,  "viz..  becaufe  the 
Vapours  rifing  plentifully  then,  are  by  the  Cold  foon  colled- 
ed  into  Rain.  A  remarkable  Inft^nce  of  this  we  had  in  the 
Summer  of  1708,  part  of  which,  efpecially  about  the  Solfiice., 
was  much  colder  than  itfually.  On  June  ii,  it  was  fo  cold, 
that  my  Thermometer  was  near  the  Point  of  hoar  Frott,  and 
in  fome  Places  I  heard  there  was  an  hoar  Froft;  and  during  all 
the  cool  Weather  of  that  Month,  we  had  frequent  and  large 
Rains,  fo  that  the  whole  Month's  Rain  amounted  to  above 
two  Inches  Depth,  which  is  a  large  Quantity  for  Upm'tnjlerf 
even  in  the  wetteft  Months.  And  not  only  with  us  at  Upmin- 
fier,  but  in  other  Places,  particularly  at  Zurich  in  Switzer- 
land, they  feem  to  have  had  as  unieafonable  Cold  and  Wet  as 

"we.     Fuit  hie  menfis pr&ter  modum  humidus,  c*  magna 

quidem  vegetabilibus  hominihufque  damno.  Multum  computru- 
it  Faenitmy  &c.  complains  the  induftriousand  learned  Dr.  J.  J, 
Scheuchzer :  Of  which,  and  other  Particulars,  I  have  given  a 
larger  Account  in  Phil.  Tranf,  N".  311. 

In  which  TranfaSlion  I  have  obferved  farther,  that  about 
the  Equinoxes  we  (at  Upminjier&i  leaft)  have  oftentimes  more 
Rain  than  at  other  Seafons.  The  Reafon  of  which  is  mani- 
feft  from  what  hath  been  faid,  -viz.  in  Spring,  when  the  Earth 
and  Waters  «,re  loofed  from  the  brumal  Conftipations,  the 
Vapours  arife  in  great  Plenty  :  And  the  hke  they  do  in  Au- 
tumn, when  the  Summer  Heats,  that  both  diffipated  them, 
and  warmed  the  fuperior  Regions,  are  abated ;  and  then  the 
Cold  of  the  fuperior  Regions  meeting  them,  condenfeth  them 
into  Showers,  more  plentifully  than  at  other  Seafons,  when  ei- 
ther the  Vapours  are  fewer,  or  the  Cold  that  is  to  condenfe 
them  is  lefs. 

The  manner  how  Vapours  are  precipitated  by  the  Cold,  or 
reduced  into  Drops,  I  conceive  to  be  thus  :  Vapours  being, 
as  I  faid,  no  other  than  inflated  VeficuU  of  Water  ;  when 
they  meet  with  a  colder  Air  than  what  is  contained  in  them, 
the  contained  Air  is  reduced  into  a  lefs  Space,  and  the  wa- 
tery Shell  or  Cafe  rendered  thicker  by  that  means,  fo  as  to 
become  heavier  than  the  Air,  by  which  they  are  buoyed  up, 
and  confequently  inuft  needs  fall  down.    Alio  many  ot  thofc 

thickned 


Chap.  III.     Of  the  Clouds  and  Ram.  a  3 

And,  if  to  thcfe  Ufes,  we  Ihould  add  the  Ori- 

gine  of  Fountains  and  Rivers,  lu  Vapours  and  the 

Rains, 


thickned  VeficuU  run  into  one,  and  fo  form  Drops,  greater 
or  fmaller,  according  to  the  Quantity  of  Vapours  colkdcd 
together. 

As  to  the  Rain  of  ;difFcrcnt  Places,  1  have  in  fome  of  our 
Tr<j»/.jt//oMial]igncd  the  Quantities ;  particularly  in  the  laft  ci- 
ted TranJacHon,  I  have  alilgned  thele,  viz.  tiie  Depth  of  the 
Rain  one  Year  with  another,  in  Engltjlj  Meal'urc,  if  it  was  to 
ftagnate  on  the  Earth,  would  amount  unto,  at  Tozvnely  in 
Lancajhire,  41 -|-  Inches ;  at  Upminjier  in  tpx  rp-^-  Inches;  at 
Zurich  in  Switzerland^!. '^  Inches;  at  i^ //a  in /f  4/^43 -^  Inches; 
at  Paris  in  France  19  inches ;  and  at  Lijle  in  Flanders  14.  Inches. 

It  would  be  endlefs  to  reckon  up  the  bloody  and  other  pro- 
digious Rains  taken  notice  of  by  Hiliorians,  and  other  Au- 
thors, as  praeternatural  and  ominous  Accidents;  but,  if  ftndl- 
ly  pried  mto,  will  be  found  owing  to  natural  Caufes  :  Of 
which,  for  the  Reader's  Satisfadion,  I  will  give  an  Inlhnce 
or  two.  A  bloody  Rain  was  imagined  to  have  fallen  in  France, 
which  put  the  Country  People  into  fo  great  a  Fright,  that  they 
left  their  Work  in  the  Fields,  and  in  great  hafte  flew  to  the 
Neighbouring  Houfes.  Feirifc  (then  in  the  Neighbourhood) 
Ihidtly  enquiring  into  the  Caufe,  found  it  to  be  only  red 
Drops  coming  from  a  fort  of  Butterfly  that  flew  about  in 
great  Numbers  at  that  Time,  as  he  concluded  from  feeing  fuch 
red  Drops  come  from  them  ;  and  becaufe  thefe  Drops  were 
laid,  Kon  fupra  Adificia,  non  in  deve.xis  lapidum  fnperficiebus,  u- 
ti  dcbuerat  contingere,  fi  e  coelo  fangtiine  pluijfct ;  Jedin  fubcavis 
potim  CT*  in  forarninibus.  ■■■  Accifftt,  quod  parietes  lis  tinge- 
bantur,  r.on  qui  in  wediis  oppidis,  Jed  qui  agrorum  vicini  erant 
neque  fecundum  partes  elattores,  fed  ad  tnediocrem  foiurn  altitu- 
dinem,  quantam  volitare  PapiUones  folent.  Gaflend  in  vit. 
Peiresk,  L.  i.  p.  156. 

So  Dr.  Merret  faith  alfo,  Pluvia  Sanguinis  quam  certijfime  con- 
fiat  ejfe  tantitm  Infetlorum  e/crementa  :  Pluvia  Tritici  quam  ni- 
hil aliud  ejfe  quam  HederA  hacciftrA  grana  a  Stumis  devorata  ex- 
cretaque  comparanti  liquidijjimepatet.  Pinax  rerum,  ere.  p.  izo. 

The  curious  Worm  tells  of  the  raining  of  Brimftone,  An.  1646. 
Maii  \6.  Hie  HafntA  cum  ingenti  pluvia.  tota  urbs,  cmnefque  it  a 
inundarentur plattA,  ut  grej]us  hominum  impediret,  Sulphureoque 
odort  aerem  inficeret,  dilapjis  aliquantulum  aquis,  quibujdam  tn 
locis  colltgere  licuit  Sulphureum  pulverem,  cujus  portion:m  fervo^ 
colore,  odore,  v  aliis  verum  Sulphur  ferentem.  Muf.  Worm. 
L.  I.  c.  II.  Sed.  I. 

C  4  Togfthcx 


14  Of  the  Clouds  and  Rain.      Book  I. 

Rainsj  as  fome  of  the  moil  eminent  modern  Philo- 

fophers 


Together  with  the  Rain  we  might  take  notice  of  other  Me- 
teors, particularly  Snow ;  which  although  an  irkfome  Gueft, 
yet  hath  its  great  Ufes,  if  all  be  true  that  the  famous  T.  Bar- 
thol'm  faith  of  it,  who  wrote  a  Book  de  Nhis  ufu  Medico. 
In  which  he  fliews  of  what  great  Ufe  Snow  is  in  trudifying 
the  Earth,  preferving  from  the  Plague,  curmg  Fevers,  Co- 
licks,  Head-Aches,  Tooth-Aches,  Sore  Eyes,  Pleurifies,  (for 
which  Ufe  he  faith  his  Country- Women  of  Denmark  keep 
Snow-Water  gathered  in  March),  alfo  in  prolonging  Life, 
(of  which  he  inftanceth  in  the  Alpine  Inhabitants,  that  Uve  to 
a  great  Age,)  and  preferving  dead  Bodies ;  Inftancesof  which 
he  gives  in  Ferlbns  buried  under  the  Snow  in  palTing  the  ^Z/);, 
which  are  found  uncorrupted  in  the  Summer,  when  the  Snow 
is  melted;  which  fad  Spedlade  he  himfelf  was  an  Eye-Wit- 
cefs  of  And  at  Spitz,berg  m  Greenland,  dead  Bodies  remain 
entire  and  uncorrupted  tor  thirty  Years,  And  lafily,  concer- 
ning fuch  as  are  fo  prelerv'd  when  flain,  he  faith  they  remain 
in  the  fame  Pofture  and  Figure  :  Of  which  he  gives  this  odd 
Example,  Vifum  id  extra  urhem  nofiram  [Hafniam]  quutn, 
II  leb.  i6^g.  oppugnantes  ho/les  repellerenfur,  magnaque  flrage 
occumberent ;  alii  enim  rigidi  iratum  ■vultum  oftendebant,  alii  o- 
culos  elatos,  alii  ore  didu6lo  ringentes,  alii  brachiis  extenfis  Gla- 
dium  minari,  alii  alio  fitu  projirati  jacebant.  Barthol.  de  ufu 
Niv    c.  11. 

But  although  Snow  be  attended  with  the  Eifeds  here  named, 
and  others  fpecified  by  the  learned  Bartholin;  yet  this  is  not  to 
be  attributed  to  any  peculiar  Virtue  in  the  Snow,  but  fome 
other  Caufe.  Thus  when  it  is  faid  to  fru6lif<^  the  Earth,  it 
doth  fo  by  guarding  the  Corn  or  other  Vegetables  againft  the 
intenfer  cold  of  the  Air,  efpecially  the  cold  piercing  Winds; 
which  the  Husbandmen  obferve  to  be  the  moil:  injurious  to 
their  Corn  of  all  Weathers.  So  for  Conferring  dead  Bodies,  it 
doth  it  by  conftipating  fuch  Bodies,  and  preventing  all  fuch 
Fermentations  or  internal  Conflids  of  their  Particles,  as  would 
produce  Corruption. 

Such  an  Example  as  the  preceding  is  faid  to  have  happened 
fome  Years  ago  at  Paris,  in  digging  in  a  Cellar  for  fuppofed 
hidden  Treafure;  in  which,  after  digging  fome  Hours,  the 
Maid  going  to  call  her  Mafter,  found  them  all  in  their  digging 
Poftures,  but  dead.  This  beingnoifed  abroad,  brought  in  not 
only  the  People,  but  Magiftrates  alfo,  who  found  them  accord- 
ingly ;  llle  qui  ligone  terrameffoderat,  csf  focius  qui  pala  fjfoffam 
ierram  removerat,  ambo  pedibus  ftabant,  quafi  fuo  quifquc  op^ri 
affixHS  incnhuijfet ;  uxor  unius  qtiaji  ab  opere  defejfn  in  fcamno^ 

folifm 


I 


Chap.  in.    Of  the  Clouds  and  Rain,  15- 

fopheis  {b)  have  done,  \vc  fliould  have  another  In- 
ftancc  of  the  great  Uleand  Benefit  of  that  Meteor. 
And  now,  if  we  reflect  upon  this  neccfl'iry  Appen- 
dage of  the  Terraqueous  Globe,  the  Atmo[pherc  j  and 
confider  the  abfolute  Neceflity  thereof  to  many  Ufcs 
of  our  Globe,  and  its  great  Convenience  to  the 
whole:  And  in  a  Word,  that  it  anfwereth  all  the 
Ends  andPurpofcs  that  we  can  fuppofc  there  can  be 
for  fuch  an  Appendage:  Whocan  butownthistobc 
the  Contrivance,  the  Work  of  the  great  Creator  ? 
W  ho  would  ever  (liy  or  imagine  fuch  a  Body,  fo  dif- 
ferent from  the  Globe  it  fcrves,  could  be  made  by 
Chance,  or  be  adapted  fo  exa(!:tly  to  all  thofe  fore- 
mentioned  grand  Ends,  by  any  other  Efficient  than 
by  the  Power  and  Wifdom  of  the  infinite  God! 
Who  would  not  rather,  from  fo  noble  a  \Vork, 


folicuo  quodiim  viihu,  ferlebat,  incUvato  in  palmam  manits  ge- 
nibui  innitentis  capite;  psierulus  laxatis  braccis  tn  margmeexcA'- 
•pat A  fovea  dcfixis  tn  terram  oculis  alvrim  exonerabac ;  omnes  /» 
naturali  fittty  carneAtanqnam  jlatuz  rigiJi,  apertis  oculis  o'vid- 
tu  viiarn  qitafi  rcfpirante,  exanimes  J/abant.  Dr.  Bern.  Con- 
nor, Diffcrt.  Med.  Phyf.  ;>.  15. 

The  Dodor  attributes  all  thi?  to  Cold ;  but  I  fcarce  think  there 
couM  be  Cold  enough  to  do  all  this  at  Paris,  and  in  a  Cellar  too. 
But  Is  following  Stories  are  not  improbable,  of  Men  and  Cat- 
tle k.lled  with  Cold,  that  remained  m  the  very  fame  Pollure  in 
which  they  died;  of  which  he  gives,  from  a  Spanijli  Captain, 
this  Inflance,  that  happened  two  Yc:irs  before,  of  a  Soldier 
who  unfortunately  ftraggled  from  his  Company  that  were  fo- 
raging, and  was  killed  with  the  Cold,  but  was  thought  to  have 
fallen  mto  the  Enemies  Hands.  But  foon  after  their  return  to 
their  Quarters,  they  faw  their  Comrade  returning,  fit'.ing  on 
Horfeback,  and  coming  to  congratulate  him,  found  him  dead, 
and  that  he  had  been  brought  thither  in  the  fame  Pcfturc  on 
Horfeback,  notwithRanding  the  jolting  of  the  Horfe.  Ibid.piS. 

(b)  Of  this  Opinion  was  my  late  molt  ingenious  and  learned 
Friend,  Mr.  Ray,  whofe  Reafonsfee  in  his  Phyftco-Theclcg.  Bif- 
fourfes,  Difc.  z.  ch.  z.  p.  89,  c~r.  So  alfo  my  no  lefs  learned 
and  ingenious  Friends,  Dr  HalUy,  and  the  latp  Dr.  Hook,  ma- 
py  of  the  French  Vcrtuofo's  alfo,  and  divers  other  very  con- 
iiderablc  Men  before  them,  too  many  to  be  fpecificd  here. 


readily 


26  Of  Light.  Book  I. 

readily  acknowledge  the  Workman  {c)  and  as  eafily 
conclude  the  Atmofphere  to  be  made  by  God,  as  an 
Inftrument  wrought  by  its  Power,  any  Pneumatick 
Engine,  to  be  contrived  and  made  by  Man ! 


CHAP.    IV. 

Of  Light. 

THUS  much  for  the  firft  Thing  miniftring  to  the 
Terraqueous  Globe,  the  Atmofphere  and  its 
Meteors  5  the  next  Appendage  is  X/g/-^/.  ia)  Con- 
cerning which  I  have  in  my  Survey  of  the  Heavens 
(^)  ihewed  what  admirable  Contrivances  the  infinite- 
ly vyife  Creator  hath  for  the  affording  this  noble,  glo- 
rious, 


(c)  An  Polycletum  quidem  adm'irab'tmur  propter  parthtm  Sta- 
tuA—convenient'tam  ac proportionem?  Naturam  autem  nonmodo 
non  laudabimus,  fed  omni  et'tam  arte  privahimus,  qua  part'tum 
proportionem  non  foltitn  extrinfecus  more  Statuariorum,  fed  in 
profundo  etiam  fervavit  ?  Nonne  c*  Polycletus  ipfe  NaturA  eji  i- 
tnitator,  in  quibus  faltem  earn  potuit  imitari .?  Potuit  autem  in 
folis  externispartibus  in  quibus  artem  confideravit.  With  much 
more  to  the  like  Purpole,  Galen.  deUf  Part.  I.  17.  c.  i. 

{a)  It  is  not  worth  while  to  enumerate  the  Opinions  of  the 
Artfiotelians,  Cartefians,  and  others,  about  the  Nature  of 
Light,  Arifiotle  mzkingit  zQn^lity;  C4r«;  a Pulfion,  or  Mo- 
tion of  the  Globules  of  the  fecond  Element,  Vid.  Cartes  Prin- 
(ip.  p.  3.  §.  55,crc.  But  with  the  Moderns,  I  take  Li^^^tocon- 
M  of  material  Particles,  propagated  from  the  Sun,  and  other 
luminous  Bodies,  not  inftantaneoufly,  but  in  time,  according 
to  the  Notes  following  in  this  Chapter.  But  not  to  infift  upon 
other  Arguments  for  the  Proof  of  it,  our  noble  Founder  hath 
proved  the  Materiality  of  Light  and  Heat,  from  adlual  Expe- 
riments on  Silver,  Copper,  Tin,  Lead,  Spelter,  Iron,  Tute- 
nage,  and  other  Bodies>^xpofed  (both  naked  and  clofely  (hut 
up)  to  the  Fire:  All  which  were  conftantly  found  to  receive  an 
Increment  of  Weight.  I  wifti  he  could  have  met  with  a  fa- 
vourable Seafon  to  have  tried  his  Experiments  with  the  Sun- 
beams as  he  intended,  vid,  Boyl  Exp.  to  make  Fire  and  Flame, 
ponderable. 

{b)  Aftro-Theol.  Book  7. 

{e)  Gen. 


Chap.  IV.  Of  Light.  If 

rioiis,  and  comfortable  Benefit  to  other  Globes,  as 
well  as  oursi  theProvifionhe  hath  made  by  Moons, 
as  well  as  by  the  Sun,  for  the  Communication  of  it. 

And  now  let  us  briefly  confider  the  great  Nccefli- 
ty  and  Ufe  thereof  to  all  our  Animal  World.  And 
this  we  fhall  find  to  be  little  lefs  than  the  very  Life 
and  Pleafure  of  all  thofe  Creatures.  For  what  Bene- 
fit would  Life  be  of,  what  Pleafure,  what  Comfort 
would  it  be  for  us  to  live  in  perpetual  Darknefs? 
How  could  we  provide  our  felves  with  Food  and  Ne- 
ceflaries  ?  How  could  we  go  about  thelcaft  Bufinefs, 
correfpond  with  one  another,  or  be  of  any  Ufe  in  the 
World,  or  any  Creatures  be  the  fame  to  us,  without 
Light,  and  thofe  admirable  Organs  of  the  Body, 
which  the  great  Creator  \i\\.\i  adapted  to  the  Percep- 
tion of  that  great  Benefit? 

But  now  by  the  help  of  this  admirable,  this  firfl- 
made  (0,  becaufe  moft  necellliry,  Creature  of  God, 
by  this,  I  fiiy,  all  the  Animal  World  is  enabled  to 
go  here  and  there,  as  their  Occafions  callj  they  can 
tranfacl  their  Bufinefs  by  Day,  and  refrefliand  recruit 
themfelves  by  Night,  with  Reft  and  Sleep.  They 
can  with  Admiration  and  Pleafure,  behold  the  glo- 
rious Works  of  God  j  they  can  view  the  Glories  of 
the  Heavens,  and  fee  the  Beauties  of  the  flowry 
Fields,  the  gay  Attire  of  the  feathered  Tribe,  theex- 
quifitc  Garniture  of  many  Qtiadrupcds,  Infefts,  and 
other  Creatures  i  they  can  take  in  the  delightfome 
Landskips  of  divers  Countries  and  Places  j  they  can 
with  Admiration  fee  the  great  Creator's  wonderful 
Art  and  Contrivance  m  the  Parts  of  Animals  and  Ve- 
getables :  And  in  a  word,  behold  the  Harmony  of  this 
lower  World,  and  of  the  Globes  above,  and  furvey 
God's  exquifite  Workmanfliip  in  every  Creature. 


(0  Gen.  1.3.  jiKdCodja,d,  Let  there  le  Light,  and /here  wm 
Ui'nt. 


To 


2.8  Of  Light.  Book  I. 

To  all  which  I  might  add  the  Improvements 
which  the  Sagacity  of  Men  hath  made  of  this  noble 
Creature  of  God,  by  the  Refradions  and  Refleftions 
of  GlafTes.  But  it  would  be  endlefs  to  enumerate  all 
its  particular  Ufesand  Benefits  to  our  World. 

3ut  before  I  leave  this  Point,  there  are  two  Things 
concerning  Light,  which  will  deferve  an  efpecial 
Remark  j  and  that  is,  its  fwift  and  almoft  inftanta- 
neous  Motion,  and  its  vaft  Extenfion. 

I ,  It  is  a  very  great  A6t  of  the  Providence  of 
God,  that  fo  great  a  Benefit  as  Light  is,  is  not  long 
in  its  Pafilige  from  Place  to  Place.  For  was  the  Mo- 
tion thereof  no  fwifter  than  the  Motion  of  the  fwifc- 
eft  Bodies  on  Earth,  fuch  as  of  a  Bullet  out  of  a 
great  Gun,  or  even  of  a  Sound  {d)  (which  is  the 
fwifceil  Motion  we  have  next  Light),  in  this  Cafe 
Light  would  take  up,  in  its  Progrefs  from  the  Sun 
to  us  above  thirty  two  Years  at  the  rate  of  the  firft, 
and  above  feventeen  Years  at  the  rate  of  the  latter 
Motion. 

The  Inconveniencies  of  which  would  be,  its  E- 
nergy  and  Vigour  would  be  greatly  cooled  and  aba* 

ted  J 


{i)  It  may  not  be  ungrateful  to  the  Curious,  to  take  notice 
of  the  Velocity  of  thefe  two  Things. 

According  to  the  Obfervations  of  Merfennas,  a  BuIIet-ftiot 
Q\^X  of  a  great  Gun,  flies  pz  Fathom  in  a  Second  of  Time, 
(vtd.  Merfen.Balift.)  which  is  equal  10589-!  Feet  Englijh,  and 
according  to  the  Computation  of  Mr.  Huygens,  it  would  be 
a 5  Years  in  paffing  from  the  Earth  to  the  Sun.  But  accord- 
ing to  my  own  Obfervations  made  with  one  of  her  Majefty's 
Sakersy  and  a  very  accurate  Pendulum- Chronometer,  a  Bullet, 
at  its  firft  Difcharge,  flies  510  Yards  in  five  half  Seconds,  which 
is  a  Mile  in  a  little  above  17  half  Seconds.  And  allowing  the 
Sun's  Diftance  to  be,  as  in  the  next  Note,  a  Bullet  would  be 
yr^  Years  in  flying  with  its  utmoft  Velocity  to  the  Sun. 

As  to  the  Velocity  of  Sound,  {ee  Book  i\.  Chap.  1.  Notei^. 
according  to  which  rate  there  mentioned,  a  Sound  would  be 
near  17  v  Years  in  flying  as  far  as  the  difl:ance  is  from  the 
Earth  to  the  Sun.  Confer  here  the  Experiments  of  the  4i 
ead,  dd  Ciment,  p.  X40,  &c» 
-  ■  ■  ■'  '■"        .  (♦)  M^i 


Chap.  IV.  Of  Light.  19 

ted  i  its  Rays  would  be  Ids  penetrant  ;  and  Dark- 
ncfs  would  with  greater  Difficulty  and  much  Slug- 
giflincfs,  be  dillipatcd,  cfpccially  by  the  fainicr 
Lights  of  our  Tublunary,  luminous  Bodies.  Butpaf- 
ling  with  fuch  prodigious  Velocity,  with  nearly  the 
inllantaneous  Swihnels  of  almoil:  Two  hundred  thou- 
fand  En^UjJ)  Miles  in  one  Second  of  Tunc,  {e)  or 
(which  is  the  fame'i'hing)  being  but  about  levcn  or 
eight  Minutes  of  an  Hour  in  coming  from  the  Sun 
to  us,  therefore  with  all  Security  and  Speed,  we  re- 
ceive the  kindly  Eftc£ls  and  Influences  of  that  noble 
and  ufeful  Creature  of  God. 

2.  Another  Thing  of  great  Confederation  about 
Light  is,  its  vail  Expanfion,  it's  almoil  incompre- 
henfible,  and  mconceivable  Extenlion,  which  as  a 


(0  Mr.  Romer's  ingenious  Hypothefis  about  the  Velocity  of 
Light,  hath  been  ellabliQied  by  the  Roy.il  Acafnedy,  and  in 
the  Obfervatory  for  eight  Years,  as  our  Phil.  Iranf.  i\°.  136. 
obfervc  from  the  Joarn.  des  Scavans ;  ourmoft  eminent  Allro- 
nomers  alfo  in  England  admit  it  :  But  Dr.  Hook  thinks  with 
Moniieur  Cartes,  the  Motion  of  Light  Inllantancous,  Hook 
Pojl.  Works t  pag.  77.  And  this  he  endeavours  to  explain,  pag. 
130,  &c. 

What  Mr.  Romer's  Hypothefis  is,  may  be  feen  in  the  Phil. 
TraTjJacl.  before- cned  :  As  alio  in  the  before  commended  Sir 
J/aac  Nezvton's  Optichs :  Light  h  propagated  from  luminous  to- 
dies in  time,  and  fpends  about  feven  or  eight  Minutes  of  an 
Hour  in  pajfing  from  the.  Sun  to  the  Earth.  This  zvas  firft  ob- 
fervcd  by  Romcr,  and  then  by  others,  by  means  of  the  EcUpfes 
of  the  Satellites  of  Jupiter.  For  theje  Eclipfes,  when  the  Earth 
ts  between  the  Sun  and  Jupiter,  happen  about  /even  or  eight  Mi- 
nutes fooner  than  they  ought  to  do  by  the  Tables  ;  and  'cvhen  the 
Earth  is  beyond  the  ©,  they  happen  about  feven  or  eight  Mi- 
nutes later  than  they  ought  to  do  :  The  reafon  being,  that  the 
Light  of  the  Satellites  hath  farther  to  go  in  the  latttr  Cafe  than 
in  the  former,  by  the  Diameter  of  the  Earth's  Orbit.  Newt. 
Opt.  L.  1.     Part.  3.  Prop.  11. 

Now  forafmuch  as  the  Dilhnce  between  the  Sun  and  the 
Earth  (according  to  the  Computations  in  my  Aflro-lheology^ 
B.  I.  ch.  3.  Note  z.)  is  86051398  Englifj  Miles  ;  therefore, 
at  the  rate  of  7  4-  Minutes,  or  450  Seconds  in  palling  from 
the  Sun,  Light  will  be  found  to  fly  above  1912Z5  Miles  in 
one  Second  of  Time. 

late 


50  Of  Light.  Book  I. 

late  ingenious  Author  (/)  faith,  "  Is  as  boundlefs 
*'  and  unlimited  as  the  tJniverfe  it  felf,  or  the  Ex- 
"  panfum  of  all  material  Beings :  The  vaftnefs  of 
"  which  is  fo  great,  that  it  exceeds  the  Comprehen- 
"  fiono  of  Man's  Underftanding.  Infomuch  thatve- 
"  ry  many  have  aflerted  it  abfolutely  infinite,  and 
"  without  any  Limits  or  Bounds. 

And  that  this  noble  Creature  of  God  is  of  this 
Extent,  ig)  is  manifeft  from  our  feeing  fome  of  the 
farthefl  diftant  Obje61:s,  the  heavenly  Bodies,  fome 


(/)  Dr.  Hook  Poft.  Works.  Le<fi.  of  Li^ht,  pag.  7  6. 

{g)  For  the  proof  of  this  vafl:  Extent  of  Light,  1  (liall  take 
the  Computation  of  the  fame  great  Man,  pag.  77.  If,  faith 
he,  we  conjider  firft  the  vaft  Di/iance  between  us  and  the  Suff, 
which  from  the  hefl  and  lateft  obfervations  in  Ajironotny^  is 
judged  to  be  about  loooo  Diameters  of  the  Earth,  each  of  which 
is  about  'jgt^  Enghfh  Miles;  therefore  the  Sun's  difiance  is 
"jgi^ooo  Miles  ;  and  if  we  confider  that  according  to  the  Ob- 
fervations, which  1  publiflud  to  prove  the  Alotion  of  the  Earth, 
[which  were  Obfervations  of  the  Parallax  of  fome  of  the  fixt 
Stars  in  the  Head  oi  Draco,  made  in  1699]  the  whole  Diameter 
of  the  Orb,  viz.  2.0000,  made  the  Subtenfe  but  of  one  Minute  to 
one  of  the  fixt  Stars,  which  cannot  therefore  be  Icfs  difiant  than 
3438  Diameters  of  this  great  Orb,  and  confec^uentlj  6876000Q 
Diameters  of  the  Earth :  And  if  this  Star  be  one  of  the  near- 
eji,  and  that  the  Stars  that  are  of  one  Degree  lejfer  in  Mag- 
nitude (/  mean  not  of  the  Second  Alagnitude,  becaufe  there  may 
be  fnany  Degrees  between  the  firft  and  fecond)  be  as  much  far- 
ther ;  and  another  fort  yet  ^mailer  be  three  times  as  far;  and 
a  fourth  four  times  as  far,  and  fo  onward,  poffibly  to  fome 
100  Degrees  of  Magnitude,  fuch  as  may  be  difcovered  by  longer 
and  longer  Telefcopes,  that  they  may  be  100  times  as  far;  then 
certainly  this  material  Expanfion,  a  part  of  which  we  are,  muft 
he  fo  great,  that  'tzvill  infinitely  exceed  our  fljallow  Conception 
to  imagine.  Now,  by  what  J  la/i  mentioned,  it  is  evident  that 
Light  extends  it  felf  to  the  utmoft  imaginable  Parts,  and  by  the 
help  of  Telefcopes  we  collefi  the  Rays,  and  make  them  fenfible  to 
the  Eye,   zvhich  are  emitted  from  fome  of  thealmoft  inconceivably 

remote  Obje6ls,   &CC. Nor  is   it  only   the  great  Body   of  the 

Sun.  or  the  vaft  Bodies  of  the  fixt  Stars,  that  are  thus  able  to 
difperfe  their  Light  through  the  vafl  Expanfum  of  the  Uni' 
vcrfe  ;  but  the  fmalleft  Spark  of  a  lucid  Body  muft  do  the  very 
fame  Things  even  the  fmalleft  Glohnle  ftrttck  from  a  Steel  by  a 
Flintf  &c. 

with 


Chap.V.  Of  Gravity.  31 

with  our  naked  Eye,  fomc  with  the  help  of  Optical 
Inftrumcnts,  and  others  in  all  Probability  farther  and 
farther,  with  better  and  better  Inlhuments:  And 
had  we  Inlbuments  of  Power  equivalent  to  the  Ex- 
tent of  Light,  the  luminous  Bodies  of  the  utmort: 
Parts  of  the  Univerfc,  would  for  the  fame  Reafon 
bevifiblc  too. 

Now  as  Light  is  of  greateft  Ulc  to  impower  us  to 
fee  Objects  at  all,  fo  the  Extenfion  thereof  is  nolefs 
ufeful  to  enable  us  to  fee  Objeds  afui  off.  By  which 
means  we  are  afforded  a  Ken  of  thofe  many  glorious 
Works  of  the  infinite  Creator,  vifible  in  the  Hea- 
vens, and  can  improve  them  to  fome  of  the  noblefl 
Sciences,  and  mod  excellent  Ufes  of  our  own  Globe. 


C  H  A  P.  V. 

Of  Gravity. 

THE  laft  Thing  fubfervient  to  our  Globe,  that 
I  (hall  take  notice  of,  is  Gravity  (a),,  or  that 
Tendency  which  Bodies  have  to  the  Centre  of  the 
Earth. 

In 


(a)  That  there  is  fuch  a  Thing  as  Gravity,  is  manit'eft  from 
its  Mftedis  here  upon  Earth  ;  and  that  the  Heavenly  Bodies  at- 
tradt  or  gravitate  to  one  another,  when  placed  at  due  Diftan- 
ces,  is  made  highly  probable  by  Sir  Ifaac  Newton,  This  at- 
tradive  or  gravitating  Fewer,  I  take  to  be  congenial  to  Mat- 
ter, and  imprinted  on  all  the  Matter  of  the  Univerfe  by  the 
Creator's  Flat  at  the  Creation.  What  the  Catife  of  it  is,  the 
Newtonian  Philofophy  doih  not  pretend  to  determine  for  want 
of  Phaenomena,  upon  which  Foundation  it  is  that  that  Philofo- 
phy is  grounded,  and  not  upon  chimerical  and  uncertain  Hypo- 
thcfes  :  But  v/hatever  the  Caufe  is,  that  Caufe  penetrates  ezen 
to  the  Centers  of  the  Sun  and  Planets,  zvithont  any  Diminution 
cf  its  Virtue;  and  it  aileth  not  according  to  the  Superjicies  of  BO' 
dies  {as  Mechanical  Caufes  do)  but  in  proportion  to  the  Gluanti- 
ty  of  their  folid  Matter  ;  and  laftly,  //  a:hth  all  round  it  at 
immtnfe  B'tjiances,  decrtajing  in   duplicate  proportion   to  thofe 

Dijiances, 


32,  ^  Of  Gravity,  Book  I. 

In  my   Jflro-I'heology^  Book   6.   Ch.  l.     I  have 
fhewn  of  what   abfolute    NecefTityj    and  what  a 

noble 


D'lfiantes,  as  Sir  Ijaac  Newton  faith,  Prlncip.  pag.  ult.  What 
uleful  Dedudions,  and  what  a  rational  Philofophy  have  been 
drawn  from  hence,  may  he  fcen  in  the  fame  Book. 

This  Attraction,  or  Gravity,  as  its  Force  is  in  a  certain  pro- 
portion, fo  makes  the  Defcent  of  Bodies  to  be  at  a  certain 
rate.  And  was  it  not  for  the  Refiiknce  of  the  Medium,  all 
Bodies  would  defcend  to  the  Earth  at  the  fame  rate;  the  light- 
eft  Down,  as  fwiftly  as  the  heavieft  Mineral :  As  is  manife-lHn 
the  Air-Putnp,  in  which  the  lighteft  Feather,  Duft,  er<r.  and  a 
piece  of  Lead,  drop  down  feemingly  in  the  fame  Time, 
from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  a  tall  exhaufted  Receiver. 

The  rate  of  the  Defcent  of  heavy  Bodies,  according  to 
GaliUo,  Mr.  Hwygensy  and  Dr.  Halley  (after  them)  is  i6  Feet 
one  Inch  in  one  Second  of  Time;  and  in  more  Seconds,  as 
the  Squares  of  thofe  Times.  But  in  fome  accurate  Experi- 
ments made  in  St.  Paul's  Dome,  June  9.  17 10,  at  the  Height 
of  22LO  Feet,  the  Defcent  was  fcarcely  14  Feet  in  the  firft 
Second.  The  Experiments  were  made  in  the  Prefence  of 
fome  very  confiderable  Members  of  the  Royal  Society,  by 
Mr.  Havjksbee,  their  Operator,  with  glafs,  hollow  Balls,  fome 
empty,  fome  filled  with  Quick- filver,  the  Barometer  at  297,  the 
Thermometer  60  Degrees  above  Freezing.  The  Weight  of  the 
Balls,  their  Diameters,  and  Time  of  the  Defcent  is  in  this 
Table. 


Bal 

is  filled  with 

?. 

Empty  Balls. 

Weight. 

1  )iainrt'  r. 

Time. 

i'Secds.' 

Weight. 

Diameter. 

Time. 

Grains. 
908 

■f         I'P          :'CI^ 

Urams. 

!nch.|  Tenth. 

4- Seeds. 

b 

8 

510 

5 

I 

17 

993 

8 

8  lefs. 

642 

S 

2 

16 

866 

8 

8 

599 

S 

I 

16 

747 

74 

8  more. 

SrS 

5  nearly 

1 64 

808 

8          ' 

483 

5:  nearly 

17 

784 

74 

8  more. 

641 

5     1     i 

16 

The  Reafon  why  the  heavy,  full  Balls  fell  in  half  the  Time 
of  the  hollow  ones,  was  the  Refiftence  of  the  Air :  Which 
Refiftence  is  very  ingeniouily  and  accurately  alTigned  by  Dr. 
Wallts,  in  Philof.  Tranf.  N^.  1 86.  And  the  caufe  of  the  Re- 
fiftence of  all  Fluids,  (as  Sir  Ifaac  Ne-vton,  Opt.  Q.  lo.)  is 
partly  from  the  Fri£lion  of  the  Parts  of  the  Fluid,  partly  from 
the  Lnia  thereof.  The  Refiftence  a  fpherical  Body  meets 
with  from  Fiidion,  is  as  the  right  Angle  under  the  Diameter, 

ana 


Chap.  V.  Of  Gravity.  n 

noble  Contrivance  this  of  Gravity  is,  for  keeping 
the  tcvcral  Globes  of  the  Univerfe  from  fhattcring 
to  Pieces,  as  they  evidently  muft  do  in  a  little  Time 
by  their  fwifc  Rotation  round  their  own  Axes  {by 
The  Terraqueous  Globe  particularly,  which  circum- 
volvcsac  the  rate  of  above  icoo  Miles  an  Hour  (c)^ 

would 


and  the  Velocity  of  the  moving  Body  :  And  the  Rcfidence 
from  the  Vu  inertts,  is  as  the  Square  of  that  Pre  dudt. 

For  a  farther  Accoimt  of  the  Properties  and  Proportions, 
CT-c.  of  Gravity  in  the  Fall  or  Projection  of  Bodies,  I  <liail 
tcfer  to  the  larger  Accounts  of  (jaiiuus,  Tornceliiit'.,  htrj- 
gens.  Sir  IJaac  Newton,  8cc.  of  to  the  fliurtir  Accounts  of  Dr. 
Hatley  in  Philof.  Tranf.  abridged  by  Mr.  Lorvthorp,  Vol.  T. 
p.  561.  or  Dr.  Clarkr  in  his  Notes  on  Rohaulr,  Phy'.^.  c.  iS. 
§.13,  16.  And  for  the  Relilleiice  of  Fluids,  I  refer  to  Dr. 
IVallis  before-cited,  and  the  yld.  Erndit.  Lipf.  May  1693. 
where  there  is  a  way  to  find  the  Force  of  Mediums  upon  Bo- 
dies of  different  Figures. 

{b)  That  the  heavenly  Bodies  move  round  their  own  Axe?» 
is,  beyond  all  doubt,  manifell  to  our  Eye,  in  fqmc  of  them, 
from  the  Spots  vifible  on  them.  The  Spots  on  the  Sun  (ea- 
fily  vifible  with  an  ordinary  Glafs)  do  manifefl  him  to  revolve 
round  his  own  Axis  in  about  25-5:  Days.  The  Spots  on  % 
and  f  prove  thofe  two  Planets  to  revolve  alfo  from  Eaft  to 
Wcfl,  as  Dr.  Hook  difcover'd  in  1664,  arxi  i66j.  And  $  al- 
fo (although  near  the  ftrong  Rays  of  the  Sun)  haili,  uom 
fome  Spots,  been  difcovered  by  Mr.  Caffmt,  in  1666,  and 
X667,  to  have  a  manifelt  Rotation.  V.  Lvwth.  Ahndg.VoX.  i. 
p.  381,  and  4x3,  425.  And  futh  Uniformity  hath  the  Crea- 
tor obl'crvd  in  the  Works  of  Nature,  that  what  is  obfervable 
in  one,  is  generally  to  be  found  in  all  others  of  the  fame 
kind.  So  that  fince  'tis  manifefl  the  Sun,  and  three  of  his 
Planets  whirl  round,  it  is  very  reafonable  to  conclude  all  the 
reft  do  fo  too,  yea,  every  Globe  of  the  Univerfe. 

(c)  The  Earth's  Circumference  being  150314-  Miles,  (ac- 
cording to  Book  II  Chap.  2.  Note  a.)  if  we  divide  that  into 
^4  Hours,  we  ftiall  find  the  Motion  of  the  Earth  to  be  nearly 
X043  Miles  in  an  Hour.  Which,  by  the  by,  is  a  far  more 
teafonablc  and  lefs.  rapid  Rate,  than  that  of  the  Sun  would 
be,  if  we  fuppofc  the  Earth  to  Hand  flill,  and  the  Sun  to 
move  round  the  Earth.  For  accordmg  to  the  Proportions  ia 
Note  e,  of  the  preceding  Chapter,  the  Circumference  of  the 
Mafnut  Orbis  is  540686115  Kngitjl)  Miles,  which  divided  by 
^2^  Hours,  gives  Z2JZ8364  Miles  in  an  Hour-    But  what  is 


34  Q/*  Gravity.  Book  I. 

would  by  the  centrifugal  force  of  that  Motion,  be 
foon  diffipated  and  fpirtled  into  the  circumambient 
Space,  was  it  not  kept  together  by  this  noble  Con- 
trivance of  the  Creator,  this  natural  inherent  Pow- 
er, namely,  the  Power  of  Attra6tion  or  Gravity. 

And  as  by  this  Power  our  Globe  is  defended  a- 
gainft  Diffipation,  fo  all  its  Parts  are  kept  in  their 
proper  Place  and  Order.  All  material  Things  do  na- 
turally gravitate  thereto,  and  unite  themfelves  there- 
with, and  fo  preferve  its  Bulk  intire  {d).  And  the 
fleeting  Waters,  the  mod  unruly  of  all  its  Parts,  do 
by  this  means  keep  their  conflant  sequipoife  in  the 
Globe  (if),  and  remain  in  float  Place  ivhichj  the 
Pfalmift  faith,  God  had  founded  fof  ibem',  a  bound  he 
had  fet^  ijuhich  they  might  not  pafs  j  that  they  turn 
mt  again  to  cover  the  Earthy  Pfal.  civ.  8,  p.  So, 
that  even  in  a  natural  Way,  by  virtue  of  this  excel- 
lent Contrivance  of  the  Creator,  the  Obfervation, 
of  the  Pfamjft  is  perpetually  fulfilled,  Pfal.  Ixxxix, 
p.  Thou  rule  ft  the  raging  of  the  Sea  j  when  the  fVaves 
thereof  arife^  thou  fiilleft  them. 

To  thefe,  and  an  hundred  other  Ufes  of  Gravity 
that  I  might  have  named,  I  fhall  only  juft  menti- 
on another  Thing  owing  to  it,  and  that  is  Levity 


I 


this  to  the  Rapidity  of  the  fixt  Stars,  if  we  fuppofe  themj,' 
not  the  Earth,  to  move  ^  Which  is  a  good  Argument  for  the 
Earth's  Motion. 

(d)  Nihil  tnaJHS,  quam  quod  it  a  ftabilis  efl  Mitndus,  atque 
ita  cohjiret  ad  permanendum,  ut  nihil  ne  excogitari  quidem  pof- 
ftt  aptins.  Omnes  enim  partes  ejus  undique  medium  locum  ca- 
fejfe-iTteSy  nitmitur  dqualiter  :  maxim^c  autem  corpora  inter  fe 
junSla  permanent,  cum  quodam  qitafi  vinculo  circumdata  colli- 
gantur  :  quod  facit  ea  natura,  quA  per  omnem  mundum  omnia 
Mente,  osr  Ratione  conficiens,  funditur,  ZP"  ad  medium  rapit,  c?* 
convertit  extrema,  ClC.  de  Nat.  Deor.  1.2.    C.  45. 

(e)  Eadem  ratione  Mare,  cum  fupra  terram  fit,  medium  ta- 
men  terr&  locum  expetens,  conglobatHr  ttndique  &qualiter,  nequt 
rtdundat  unqnam,  neque  effunditur.     Id.  paulo  poft. 

(/}  that 


Chap.  V.  Of  Gravity,  ^T 

(/),  that,  whereby  what  we  call  liglit  Bodies fwim, 
a  Thing  no  Icfs  ufcful  ro  ihc  World  than  its  oppo- 
poHcc,  Gravity^  is  inmanyRefpefts,  to  divers  Tribes 
of  Animals,  but  pai  ticularly  fcrviccablc  to  thcraifing 
up  of  Vapours  {giy  and  to  their  Conveyance  abouc 
the  World. 


(/)  That  there  is  no  fuch  Thing  as  pojitive  Levity,  but 
that  Levity  is  only  a  lefs  Gravity,  is  abundantly  m:ifiitcl>cd 
by  the  acute  Setg.  Alph.  Borelli  He  Mot.  a  Grnv.  fetid,  cap.  4. 
See  alfo  the  Annotations  of  the  learned  and  ingenious  Dr. 
CUrk  on  Rohaultl  Phyf.  p.  r.  c,  1 6.  Note  3.  Alfo  the  Exper. 
of  the  Acad,  dil  Citncnto,  p.  118,  8cc.  Dr.  Walla's  Difc.  of 
Gravity  and  GravitalioH  before  the  Royal  Society,  Nov.  12. 
1674.  p.  28,  err. 

{g)  1  have  before  in  Note  a,  Chap.  3.  (lievi-n  whit  Vapours 
are,  and  how  they  are  rais'd.  That  which  I  Hull  here  note, 
is  their  Quantity  :  Concerning  which  the  before-commended 
Dr.  Halley  hath  given  us  fome  curious  Experiments  in  our 
Phd.  Tranfat'i.  which  may  be  met  with  together  in  Mr.  Loiv- 
thorp'%  Abridg.  Vol.  II.  p.  108.  and  Ii6.  Mr.  Sedilcau  alfo  at 
Paris  obferved  it  for  near  three  Years.  By  all  their  Obferva- 
tionsit  appears,  that  in  the  Winter  Months  the  Evaporations 
are  leall,  and  greatefl  in  Summer,  and  rnoft  of  all  in  windy 
Weather.  And  hy  Mcvfieur  Sedileans  Obfervations  it  appears, 
that  what  is  railed  in  Vapours,  exceeds  that  which  falleth  in 
Rain.  In  the  fcven  lalt  NIonths  of  the  Year  1688,  the  Eva- 
porations amounted  to  22  Inches  5  Lines ;  but  the  Rain  only 
to  Inches  6  j  Lines  :  In  1689,  the  Evaporations  were  32 
Inches  10  \  Lines;  but  the  Ram  18  Inches  i  Line  :  In  1690, 
the  Evaporations  30  Inches  11  Lines;  the  Ram  11  Inchet-j- 
of  a  Line.      Vid.  Mim.  de  Math.  Phyf.  Ann.  1692.  p.  25. 

If  it  be  demanded,  What  becomes  of  the  Overplus  of  Ex- 
halations that  defcend  not  in  Rain  .•*  I  anfwer,  They  are  part- 
ly tumbled  down  and  fpent  by  the  Windr,  2nd  partly  defcend 
in  Dews,  which  amount  to  a  greater  quantity  than  is  com- 
monly imagmcd.  Dr.  Halley  found  the  delcent  of  Vapours 
in  Dews  fo  prodigious  at  St.  Helena,  that  he  makes  no  c'.oubt 
to  attribute  the  Origine  of  Fountains  thereto.  And  I  my 
fclf  have  feen  in  a  Hill,  cool  Evening,  large  thick  Clouds 
hanging,  without  any  Motion  in  the  Air,  which  in  two  or 
three  Hours  Time  have  been  melted  down  by  Degrees,  by 
the  cold  of  the  Evening,  fo  that  not  any  the  Icaft  Remains 
of  them  havcbee  n  left. 


D  z  An4 


B^  0/ Gravity,  Book  I. 

And  now  from  this  tranfient  View  of  no  other 
than  the  Out- works,  than  the  bare  Appendages  of 
the  Terraqueous  Globe,  we  have  fo  manifefta  Sam- 
ple of  the  V/ifdom,  Power,  and  Goodnefs  of  the 
infinite  Creator,  that  it  is  cafy  to  imagine  the  whole 
Fabrick  is  oF  a  Piece,  the  Work  of  atleaft  a  skilful 
Artift.     A  Man  that  fliould  meet  with  a  Palace  (/:?}, 
befet  with  plcafant  Gardens,  adorned  with  (lately 
Avenues,  furniihed  with  v/ell-contrived  Aquedu6i:s5 
Cafcades,  and  all  other  Appendages  conducing  to 
Convenience  or  Pleafure,  would  eafily  imagine,  that 
proportionable  Architefture  and  Magnificence  were 
within  :  But  we  fhould  conclude  the  Man  was  out 
of  his  Wits  that  fhould  afleit  and  plead  that  all  was 
the  Work  of  Chance,  or  other  than  of  fome  wife 
and  skilful  Hand.     And  fo  when  we  furvey  the  bare 
Out-woiks  of  this  our  Globe,  when  we  fee  fo  vaft 
a  Body,  accouter'd  with  fo  noble  a  Furniture  of 
.  Aif,    Light  and   Gravity  5    with  every  Thing,  in 
iTiort,  that  is  neceflary  to  the  Prefervation  and  Se- 
curity of  the  Globe  it  fclf,  or  that  conduceth  to 
the  Life,  Health,  and  Happinefs,  to  the  Propaga- 
tion and  Increafe  of  all  the  prodigious  Variety  of 
Creatures  the  Globe  is  flocked  with  5  when  we  fee 
nothing  wanting,  nothing  redundant  or  frivolous, 
nothing  botching  or  ill-made,  but  that  everything, 
even  in  the  very  Appendages  alone,  exadtly  an- 
fwercth    all  its  Ends   and  Occafions  :    What  elfe 
can  be  concluded,  but  that  all  was  made  with  ma- 
nifeft  Defign,  and  that  all  the  whole  Strudure  is 
the  Work  of  fome  intelligent  Being  5  fome  Artift, 
of  Power  and  Skill  equivalent  to  to  luch  a  Work  ? 


(h)  See  Book  II.  Cba^.  3.   i^ttt  c,  .    f 

BOOK 


37 


B  O  O  K  II. 

Of   the   Terraqueous   Globe  it  felf 
in  general, 

j^^WS.^  ^^^  foregoing  Book  having  difparch'J 
jgryi^j  rhe  Ouc-works,  let  us  take  a  Survey  of  the 
^LJpi  Principal  Fabrick,  -viz.  the  terraqueous 
^^^MB^  Globe  it  fclfi  a  mofl:  Itupendious  Work 
in  every  particular  of  it,  which  doth  nolefsaggran-' 
dize  its  Maker  (^),  than  every  curious,  complete 
Work,  doth  its  Workman.  Let  us  call  our  Eyes 
here  and  there,  let  us  ranfack  all  the  Globe,  let  us 
with  the  grcatell  Accuracy  infpc6t  every  part  there- 
of, fearch  out  the  inmoll  Secrets  of  any  of  the  Crea- 
tures J  let  us  examine  them  with  all  our  Gauges, 
mcafurc  them  with  our  nicefl;  Rules,  pry  into  them 


(^a)  Licet oculis  quodammodo   contemplari  pulrhritud'metn 

earum  rcnitn,  quas  Divini  Provide>itia  dicimus  coa/Iiruta!.  Ac 
prir,cipio  lerra  univerfa   cernatur,   local  a  in  t}iefiiA  Tn::)hi:  fede^ 

jolida,  o"  ^lobofa vcjlita  florihus,  herb'ts,  ariori'oits,   fru^tbui. 

(S^ucnun  07nTnum  incredtbilts  mulntudn,  jnjatiabiit  vanetate  di- 
fttnguitur.  yldde  hue  Fontiutn  gelidai  perenr.itates  ,  ILjuores 
ptrlucidos  jimnium,  Riparum  vejiitns  'Vir'idifjnna,  Spel',incaruM 
concavas  ahitttdincs,  Saxorum  a/peritates,  irni'ehdentiu7»  A.'on- 
tiutn  altitudines,  tnimenfiiatefque    Camporum  :  Adde  etiarn  r;- 

conditas  ylnri venas-      ..^—ffha  verb,    c  quam  vaiia  genc' 

rA  Be/lifirun}  ? ohtt  Volttcrum  lapjus,  atijite  lanrus  ?  (fjuk 

Pecudiim  paftus  ? "iljtd  de  Homin:<7n  gfnere  .iicatn  '  <-^ti 

quaji  ciiUores  terrA  conjiUnti,  &:c.  -■  ■  ■  ■  tiVy*  /»,  nt  animis, 
Jic  oculis  videre  poffem^s,  netno  cunflAm  iyttuens  tfran,  de  D$- 
vinii  Rafions  dnbitartt,    Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  l.i.  c.  3?. 

P  3  Witb 


38      Of  theTerr aqueous Globe^  Sec.  Book  II. 

with  our  Microfcopes,  and  moft  exquifite  Inflru- 
ments  {b)  ftill  we  find  them  to  bear  Teftimony  to 
their  infinite  Workman  5  and  that  they  exceed  all 
humane  Skill  lb  far,  as  that  the  moft  exquifite  Co- 
pies and  Imitations  of  the  beft  Artifts,  are  no  other 
than  rude  bungling  Pieces  to  them.  And  fo  far 
are  we  from  being  able  to  efpy  any  Defe6t  or  Fault 
in  them,  that  the  better  we  know  them,  the  more 
we  admire  them  ;  and  the  farther  we  fee  into  them, 
the  more  exquifite  we  find  them  to  be. 
And  for  a  Oemonfiration  of  this ;  I  ihall, 

I.  Take  a  general  Profpe6b  of  the  Terraqueous 
Globe. 

II.  Survey  its  Particulars. 

I.  The  Things  which  will  fall  under  a  general 
Profpcct  of  the  Globe,  will  be  its  Figure,  Bulk,  Mo- 
tion.  Place,  Dijiribution  into  Earth  and  Waters,  and 
the  ^reat  Fariety  of  all  Things  upon  it  and  in  it. 

yp)  I  cannot  here  omit  the  Obfervations  that  have  been  made 
in  thefe  later  Times,  fince  we  have  had  the  Ufe  and  Improve- 
Pie?it  of  the  MicTOkope,  concerning  the  great  Difference,  vjhich 
by  the  helj?  of  that,  doth  appear  betwixt  Natural  and  Artificial 
Things.  Whatever  is  Natural,  doth  by  that  appear  adorned 
with  all  imaginable  Elegance  and  Beauty.  ••  Whereas  the  7noft 
iurious  Works  of  Art,  the  Jharpeji,  fineji  Needle  doth  appear 
as  a  blunt,  rough  Bar  of  Iron,  coming  from  the  Furnace  or  the 
Jorge.  The  7noft  accurate  Engravings  or  Emboffments  feem  fuch 
rude,  bungling,  deformed  Works,  as  if  they  had  been  done  with 
a  Mattock,  or  a  Trowel.  So  vaft  a  Difference  is  there  betwixt 
■the  Skill  of  Nature,  and  the  P.udenefs  and  Imperfe^ion  oj  Art. 
Bp,  Wilk,  Nat.  Rel.  L.  i.  Ch.  6. 


CHAP, 


39 

CHAP.    I. 

Of  the  Figure  of  the  Terraqueous  Globe. 

TH I  S  I  fuppofc  I  may  take  for  granted  to  be 
Spherical,  or  nearly  fo  [a).  AnJ  this  muflbc 
allowed  to  be  the  moll  commodious,  apt  Figure  for 
a  World  on  many  Accounts  •,  as  it  is  moll  capaci- 
ous, as  Its  Surface  is  equi-diilant  from  the  Center, 

noc 


{a)  Although  the  Terraqueous  Globe  be  of  an  orbicular 
Figure,  yet  it  is  not  ftrirtly  fo,  i.  On  account  of  its  Hills 
and  Vallies.  But  thefeare  inconfiderabie  to  the  Earth's  Semi- 
diameter;  for  they  arc  but  as  the  Dufl  upon  a  common 
Globe.  But,  z.  Our  modern  Allronomers  allign  a  much 
greater  Variation  from  a  globous  Form,  namely,  that  of  a 
prolate  Sphaeroid,  making  the  Polar  about  34  Miles  (horter  than 
the  E!quatorial  Diameter.  The  Caufe  of  which  they  make  to 
be  the  centrifugal  Force  of  the  diurnal  Rota;ion  of  the  Globe, 

This  Figure  they  imagme  is  in  '[Jupiter,  his  Polar  being  to 
his  Equatorial  Diameter,  as  39  \-  to  40  i.  But:  wheiher  it  be 
fo  or  no,  I  confel's  I  could  never  perceive,  alihough  I  have 
often  viewed  that  Planet  through  very  good,  and  long  GlafTes, 
particularly  a  tolerable  good  one  ui  71  I'eet  in  my  Hands: 
And  although  by  Reafon  of  cloudy  Weather,  and  (at  prefent) 
^Jupiter  ^  Proximity  to  the  Sun,  I  have  not  been  oi  late  able 
to  take  a  reviev/  of  that  Planet  ;  yet  Saturn  (fo  far  as  his  Ring 
would  permit,)  and  Man  appear  perfectly  round  thro'  Mr. 
Huygens'slong  Glafs  of  ii6Fcct,  which  by  Will  lie  bequeath- 
ed, with  its  whole  Apparatus,  to  our  R.  S.  by  whofe  Favour 
ir  is  now  in  my  Huids.  And  moreover,  I  believe  it  difTicuIr, 
next  to  impofiiblc,  to  meafure  the  two  Diameters  to  a  40*'^ 
Part,  by  reafon  of  the  fmallnefs  of  Jupiter's  apparent  Dia- 
meter, and  by  reafon  he  is  movmg  all  ihc  time  of  meafuring 
him. 

As  to  what  is  alledged  from  lengtliening  the  Pendulums  of 
Clocks,  to  make  them  keep  the  fame  Time  under  the  Fquator, 
as  they  do  in  our  Climes ;  1  have  fliewn  from  the  like  Vari- 
ations in  the  Air-Pump,  that  this  may  arife  from  the  rarirv  of 
the  Air  there,  more  ihan  here.  V.  Phil.  Tranf.  N°.  104.  But  if 
the  Degrees  of  a  Meridian  grow  larger,  the  more  we  go  to- 
wards the  Line,   (as  Mr,  Caijini  affirms  they  do,  by  an  i:iy^ 

U  4  i'«l 


4^  The  Figure  of  the  Book  II, 

not  only  of  the  Globe,  but  at  leafl  (nearly)  of  Gra-? 
vity  and  Motion  too,  and  as  fon^e  have  thought,  of 
the  central  Heat  and  Waters.  Butthefe,  and  divers 
other  Things  I  fhall  pafs  over,  and  infift  only  upon 
two  or  three  other  Benefits  of  thisglobous  Figure  of 
the  Earth  and  Waters. 

I .  This  Figure  is  the  mofl  commodious  in  regard 
of  Heat,  and  1  may  add  of  Light  alfo  in  fome  mea- 
fure.  For  by  this  means,  thofe  two  great  Benefits 
are  uniformly  and  equally  imparted  to  the  World : 
They  come  harmonioufly  and  gradually  on,  and  as 
gradually  go  off  again.  So  that  the  daily  and  year- 
ly Returns  of  Light  and  Darknefs,  Cold  and  Heat, 
Moill  and  Dry,  are  Regular  and  Workman-Uke, 
(we  may  fay,)  which  they  would  not  be,  efpecially 
the  former,  if  the  Mafs  of  Earth  and  Waters  were 
(as  fome  fancied  {b)  it)  a  large  Plain  j   or  as  others, 

like 


Part  in  every  Degree,  in  Phil.  Tranf  No.  178.)  then  there  is 
great  reafon  to  conclude  in  behalf  of  this  Sphseroidal  Form. 

The  natural  Caufe  ot  this  Sphericity  of  our  Globe,  is  (Re- 
cording to  Sir  Ifaac  Wezy/o»'s  Principles)  that  Attra^lion,  which 
the  infinite  Creator  hath  ftamp'd  on  all  the  Matter  of  the  U- 
niverfe,  whereby  all  Bodies,  and  all  the  Parts  of  Bodies 
mutually  attraft  themfelves  and  one  another.  By  which  means, 
as  all  the  Parts  of  Bodies  tend  naturally  to  their  Center,  fo 
they  all  betake  themfelves  to  a  globous  Figure,  unlefs  fome 
other  more  prevalent  Caufe  interpofe.  Thus  Drops  of 
Quick-filver  put  on  a  fpherical  Form,  the  Parts  thereof 
Itrongly  attracting  one  another.  So  Drops  of  Water  have 
the  fame  Form,  when  falling  in  the  Air;  but  are  Hemifphe- 
ncal  only  when  they  lie  on  a  hard  Body,  by  reafon  their  Gra- 
vity doth  fo  far  over-power  their  felf-attrading  Power,  as  to 
take  off  one  half  of  their  Sphericity.  This  Figure  is  com- 
monly attributed  to  the  PrelTure  of  the  circumambient  Air :, 
But  that  this  can't  be  the  caufe,  is  manifeft  from  the  Air- 
Pump ;  the  cafe  being  the  very  fame  in  an  exhauited  Receiver;, 
as  in  the  open  Air,  and  not  any  the  leaft  Alteration  of  tjie 
Figure  that  I  could  pevceivc,  in  all  the  Trials  I  have  made. 

{b)  It  would  be  frivolous  as  vrell  as  cndlefs  to  reckon  up  the 
various  Opinions  of  the  Ancients  about  the  Figure  of  theTer- 
lamiepHs  Globes  fqmeQf  them  n^ay  be  feen  in  Varen,Geogr, 


Chap.  I.        Terraqueous  Globe.  41 

like  a  large  Hill  in  the  mid  ft  of  the  Ocean  j  or  of  a 
multangular  Figure  j  or  fuch  like. 

2.  This  Figure  is  admirably  auapted  to  the  com- 
modious and  equal  Diftnbution  of  the  Waters  in  the 
Globe.  For  fince,  by  the  Laws  of  Gravity,  the 
Waters  will  poflcfs  the  loweft  Place  j  thcrefoic,  if 
the  Mafs  of  the  Earth  was  cubick,  prifmatick,  or 
any  other  angular  Figure,  it  would  follow,  that  one 
(too  vafta  Part)  would  be  drowned  j  and  another  be 
too  dry.  But  being  thus  orbicular,  the  Waters  arc 
equally  andcommodioufly  diftnbuted  here  and  there, 
according  as  the  Divine  Providence  faw  moftficj 
of  which  I  fhall  take  notice  by  and  by. 

^.  The  orbicular  Figure  of. our  Globe,  is  far  the 
moft:  beneficial  to  the  Winds  and  Motions  of  the 
Atmofphere.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  if  the  Earth 
was  of  fome  other,  or  indeed  any  other  Figure,  but 
that  the  Currents  of  Air  would  be  much  retarded, 
'H  not  wholly  flopped.  We  find  by  Experience 
what  Influence  large  and  high  Mountains,  Bays, 
Capes,  and  Head-lands  have  upon  the  Winds  >  how 
ihey  flop  fome,  retard  many,  and  divert  and  change 
(near  the  Shores )    even   the  general  and   coujlaut 


J.  I.  c.  3.  init.  or  Jon  [ton's  Thaum^.  c.  i.  Artk.  3.  But  a- 
mong  the  variety  of  Opinions  one  of  the  principal  was. 
That  the  vifible  Horizon  was  the  Bounds  of  the  Earth,  and 
the  Ocean  the  Bounds  of  the  Horizon,  that  the  Heavens  and 
Earth  above  this  Ocean,  was  the  whole  vilible  Univerfc  ;  and 
that  all  beneaih  the  Ocean  was  Hades,  or  the  mviJthU  WorU. 
Hence,  when  the  Sun  fct,  he  was  faid  t'ni^ere  je  Occauo  ; 
and  when  any  went  to  Hades,  they  mult  firfl  pafs  the  Oce-m. 
Of  this  Opinion  were  not  only  the  ancient  Poets,  and  others 
among  the  Heathens,  but  fome  of  the  Chnllian  Fathers  too, 
pixucuhrly  Latinntms,  St.  jiu^tijitne,  and  others,  who  thought 
their  Opinion  was  favoured  by  the  Pfalmift,  in  Pfal.  xxiv, 
i.  and  cxxxvi.  6.     SceB/.  VjJur's  Anf.to  a  Jef.  Chall.  p.  366. 


irinds 


42.  The  Figure  of  the^  &c.        Book  II. 

JVinds  (r),  that  blow  round  the  Globe  in  the  Tor- 
rid Zone.  And  therefore,  fince  this  is  the  efFe6t  of 
fuch  little  Excrefcences,  which  have  but  little  Pro- 
portion to  oar  Globe,  what  would  be  the  Confer 
quences  of  much  valler  Angles,  which  would  equal 
a  Quarter,  Tenth,  or  but  an  Hundredth  Part  of  the 
Globe's  Radius?  Certainly  thefe  muft  be  fuch  a  Bar- 
ricade, as  would  greatly  annoy,  or  rather  abfolutely 
flop  the  Currents  of  the  Atmofphere,  and  thereby 
deprive  the  World  of  thofe  falutiferous  Gales  that 
I  havefaid  keep  it  fweetand  clean. 

Thus  the  Figure  of  our  Globe  doth  manifeftit  to 
be  a  Work  of  Contrivance,  inafmuch  as  it  is  of  the 
moit  commodious  Figure  j  and  all  others  would  be 
liable  to  great  and  evident  Inconveniences. 


(c)  Neither  do  thefe  conflant  Trade-Winds  ufuaUy  blozv  near 
the  Shore,  but  enly  on  the  Ocean,  at  leaft  30  or  40  Leagues  ojf 
at  Sea,  clear  from  any  Land  ;  efpecially  on  the  Weft  Coaft,  or 
Side  of  any  Continent  :  For  indeed  on  the  Eaft  Side,  the  Eafter- 
ly  Wind  being  the  true  Trade-  Wind,  blows  almoft  home  to  the 
Shore,  fo  near  as  to  receive  a  check  from  the  Land-Wind.  Dara- 
pier'i  Winds,  Ch.  i. 

And  not  only  ih^general  Trade-Winds,  but  alfo  the  conflant 
coafting  Trade-Winds,  are  in  like  manner  afFeded  by  the  Lands. 
Thus,  for  Inftance,  on  the  Coaft  of  Angola  and  Peru.  But 
this,  faith  the  curious  Captain  Dampier.,  the  Reader  muft  take 
notice  of.  That  the  Trade-Winds  that  blow  on  any  Coaft,  except 
the  North  Coaft  of  Africa,  whether  they  are  conftant,  and  blow 
all  the  Year,  or  whether  they  are  ftiifting  Winds,  do  never  blow 
right  in  on  the  Shore,  nor  right  along  Shore,  but  go  ftanting, 
making  an  acute  Angle  of  about  zi  Degrees.  Therefore,  as  thi 
Land  tends  more  Eaft  or  Weft,  from  North  or  South  on  lh?  Coaft  i 
fo  the  Winds  do  after  accordingly.     Ibid/  Ch.  2,. 


CHAP,     i>« 


43 


CHAP.   II. 

Of  the  Bulk  of  ths  Terraqueous  Globe, 

THE  next  Thing  remarkable  in  the  Terraqueous 
Globe,  is  the  prodigious  Bulk  thereof  (^).  A 
IVlafs  of  above  160  Thoufand  Million  of  Aliles  fo- 
Jid  Content.  A  Work  too  grand  for  any  thing  Icfs 
than  a  God  to  make.  To  which  in  the  next  Place 
we  may  add, 


{a)  It  is  not  difficult  to  make  a  pretty  near  (-omputation  of 
the  Bulk  of  the  Terraqueous  Globe,  from  tliofo  accurate  Ob- 
Ifervations  of  a  Degree  made  by  Mr.  Norwood  in  England, 
and  Mr.  Picart,  and  Mr.  Cajfini  in  France.  Whofe  Meafures 
I  do  in  a  furprizing  manner  agree.  But  Mr.  CaJJlni's  feeming 
to  be  the  melt  accurate  (as  I  have  fiie  n  in  my  j^Jlro-Theolo- 
gy,  B.  I.  Ch.  z.  Note  a.)  1  have  there  made  ule  of  his  Deter- 
minations. According  to  which  the  Di.imetcr  ot  the  Earth 
Ibeing  7967, 7Z  Englijh  Miles,  its  Ambit  will  be 25031  4  Mjles; 
and  (fuppofing  it  to  be  Spherical)  its  Surface  will  be  199444120 
Miles  ;  which  being  Fnultiplied  into  j  of  its  Semidiameter, 
;ives  the  Solid  Content,  viz.  164856000000  Miles. 


CHAP,    III. 

The  Motions  of  the  Terraqueous  Globe. 

H  E  Motions  the  Terraqueous  Globe  hath,  arc 
round  its  own  Axis,  and  round  its  Fountain  of 
.ightand  Heat,  the  Sun  {a).     That  fo  va(l  a  Bo- 
\y  as  the  Earth  and   Waters  fhould  be  moved  ai 


{a)  With  the  Copemicans,  I  take  it  here  for  granted,  that 
^iie  Diurnal  and  Annual  Revolutions  are  the   Motions  of  the 

'crraqueous  Globe,  not  of  the  Sun,  c/c  but  for  the  Proof 
khereof  1  fnall  refer  the  Reader  to  the  Preface  of  my  jljiro- 

yhteh^y,  and  B.  4.  Chap.  3. 


44  Motions  of  the  Book  II. 

a!l  (^),  tliat  it  ihould  undergo  two  fuch  different 
Motions,  as  the  Diurnal  and  Annual  are,  and  that 
thefe  Motions  fhould  be  fo  conftantly  and  regular- 
ly [c)  performed  for  near  6000  Years,  without  any 
the  leaft  Alteration  ever  heard  of  (except  fome 
Hours  which  we  read  of  in  Jojlo.  x.  12, 13.  and 
in  Hezekiah's  Time,  which,  if  they  cannot  be  ac- 
counted for  fomc  other  way,  do  greatly  ^ncreafe 


(h)  Ever'j  thing  that  is  moved,  tntifl  of  Necefftty  be  mor'ed  hy  _ 
femething  elfe ;  and  that  thing   is  moved  by  Jomething  that  is  m 
tnoved  either  by  another  Thing,  or  not  by  another  Thing.  If  it  be  ■ 
moved  by  that  zvhich  is  moved  by  another,  we  mufi  of  Necejfiiy 
come  to  Jome  prime  Mover,  that  is  not  moved  by  another.     For 
it  is  impcjfible,  that  vjhat  moveth,    and  is  moved  by  another, 
Jhould  proceed  in  infinitum,     Ariftot.  Phyf.  1.  8.   c.  5. 

Solum  quod  feipfitm  jnovet,     quia   nunquam  deferitur   a  fe, 
ntujquam  ne  moveri  qnidem  definit  :  quinciiam  ceteris  qui  mo-  ij 
ventiir,  hie  fons  :  hoc  principium  eft  movendi.     Principii  a:item%^ 
nulla  eft  origo  :  nam  ex  principio   orinntur  omnia  ;  ipfum  autem 
Kullii  ex  re  alia  nafci*poteft  :  nee  enim   eft'et  id   principitim,  quod 
^igneretur  aliunde.  Cicer.  Tufc.  Quell.  1.  I.  c.  23. 

Cogitemus  qui  fieri  pojjlt,  ut  tanta  magnitudo,  ab  aliqiia  pof-r 
fit  natura,  tanto  tempore  circumferri  ?  Ego  igitur  ajjero  Denm 
caufam  ejj'e,  nee  aliter  pojfe  fieri.     Plato  in  Epinom. 

(c)  Among  the  Caufes  which  Cleanthes  is  laid   in  Tally  to 
sfiign  for  Men's  Belief  of  a  Deity,  one  of  the  chief  is,  JE- 
q'jabilitatem  motus,  convctftonem   Coeli,  Solis,   Lun&,  Siderum-  i 
que   omnium  diftintlionem,    varietatem,   puichriludincm,    ordi-' 
nem  :  quarumrerum  afpetTus  ipfe]fatis  indicaret,  nonejfe  eafortti- 
ita.     Vt  fiquis  in  domum   aliquam,   aut  in  gymnaftum,  ant  irt  \ 
forum  venerit;  cum   videat  omnium  rerum  rationem,    modum^ 
difciplinam,  non  pojfit   ea  fine  causa,  fieri  judicare,  fed  ejfe  all' 
quem  intelligat,  quipnfit,  ijr  cui  pareatur :   mtilto  magisin  tan-- 
sis  motibus,  tantifque  viciffttudinibus,  tarn  mult  arum  rerum  at^ 
que  tantarum  crdinibus,  in  quibus  nihil  unquam  immenfa  C;^  /»r 
finita  veiuftas  mentiia  fit,  ftatuat  neceft'e   eft  ab   aliqud  Mente\ 
tantos   naturA  motus    gubernari.     Cic.   de    Nat.   Deor.   1.   2» 

Homines  ccsperunt  Deum  agnofcere,  cum  viderent  Stellas,  tan-  • 
tarn  concinnitatem  efiicere;  ac  dies,  no^efqtie,   <ftate,  cy  hyetne^ 
fttos  fervars  ftatos  onus,  atque  obitus,   Plutarch  de  placit.  1.  \.,; 
c.C.  I 

the 


Chap.  III.      Terraqueous  Globe.  4^ 

the  Wonder  (^)  5  thefe  Things,  I  fiy,)  lio  manifcflly 
argue  fome  divine  infinite  Power  to  be  concerned 
therein  {e)\  But  efpecially,  if  to  all  this  we  add 
the  wonderful  Convenience,  yea  abfolute  Ncccllity 
of  thefe  Circumvolutions  to  the  Inhabitants,  yea  all 
the  Produ6ts  of  the  Earth  and  Waters.  For  to  one 
of  thefe  we  owe  the  comfortable  Changes  of  Day 
and  Night  \  the  one  for  Bufinefs,  the  other  for 
Rcpolci  (/)  the  one  for  Man,  and  moll  other  Ani- 


{il)  We  need  not  be  follicitous  to  elude  the  Hiftory  of  thefe 
Miracles,  as  it  they  were  only  poetical  Strains,  ^%MaimoiiideSy 
and  fome  others  fancy  ^^y/jw/i's  Day  to  have  been,  v'lx,,  only  aij 
ordinary  Sunimei's  D.iy;  but  fuch  as  had  the  Work  of  many 
Days  done  in  it;  and  therefore  by  a  poetical  Stretch  made, 
as  if  ilic  Day  had  been  lengthened  by  the  Sun  ftanding  Itill. 
Bur  in  the  Hillory  they  are  fcriouily  related,  as  real  Matters 
of  Fad,  and  with  fuch  Circumftances  asmanifelt  them  to  have 
been  miraculous  Works  of  the  Almighty  ;  And  the  Prophet 
Hahakkuk,  lii.  II.  mentions  that  of  Jojhua  as  fuch.  And  there- 
fore taking  them  to  be  miraculous  Perverfions  of  the  Courfe 
of  Nature,  inllcad  of  being  Objedlions,  they  are  great  Ar- 
guments of  the  Power  of  God:  For  in  Hezekiah's  Cafe,  to 
wheel  the  Earth  it  felf  backward,  or  by  fome  extraordinary 
Refusions,  to  bring  the  Sun's  Shadow  backward  loDegrees: 
Or  in  JoJIma's  Cafe,  to  flop  the  diurnal  Courfe  of  the  Globe 
for  fome  Hours,  and  then  again  give  it  the  fame  Motion;  tQ 
do,  I  fay,  thefe  Things,  required  the  fame  infinite  Power 
which  at  firft  gave  the  Terraqueous  Globe  its  Motions. 

{e)  Nam  cum  dtfpofitl  quififfem  faedera  Mundt^ 
PrAfcriptofque  Marts  fines,  Annique  meatus^ 
Et  Lucis,   No^ifque  vices :  tunc  omnia  rebar 
ConfiUo  firmata  Dei,  qui  lege  moveri 
Sidera,  qui  fruges  diverfo  tempore  nafci, 
Gjut  variam  Phoeben  alteno  jnjferit  igne 
Compleri,  Solemque  fuo  ;  porrexerlt  undit 
Littora  ;  Tellurem  medio  librarjerat  axe, 
Claudianin  Rufin.  L.  i.  initio, 

(/)  Diet  noaifque  vicijfitudo  confervat  animantes,  tribuem 
cliud  agendi  ttmpus,  aliud  quiefcendi.  Stc  undique  omni  ratione 
concluduur,  Mente,  Ctnfilioque  dtvino  omnia  tn  hoc  mundo  ad 
falutem  omnium,  confervat ionemqu$  admirabilitcr  adminijlrari. 
Ciccr.de  Nai.  Dcor^l.  z.  c.  53 

mals 

I 


46  T lace  and  Situation^  oCc.      600k  It 

mals  to  gather  and  provide  Food,  Habitation,  and  o- 
ther  Neceflaries  of  Life  5  the  other  to  re(t,  refrefh, 
and  recruit  their  Spirits  (g)^  wafted  with  the  La- 
bours of  the  Day.  To  the  other  of  thofe  Motions  we 
owe  the  Seafons  of  Summer  and  Winter,  Spring  and 
Autumn,  together  with  the  beneficial  Inftances  and 
EfFe6ts  which  thcfe  have  on  the  Bodies  and  State  of 
Animals,  Vegetables,  and  all  other  Things,  both  in 
the  Torrid,  Temperate,  and  Frigid  Zones. 

(£)  The  acute  Dr.  Cheyne,  in  his  ingenious  P^i/o/  Pr'tnc,  of 
Natural  Religion,  among  other  Ufes  of  Day  and  Night,  faith,- 
the  Night  is  moft  proper  for  Sleep;  becaufewhen  the  Sun  is 
above  the  Horizon,  Sleep  is  prejudicial,  by  reafon  the  Perfpi- 
rations  are  then  too  great.  Alfo  that  Nutrition  is  moftly,  if 
not  altogether,  performed  in  Time  of  Reft  ;  the  Blood  having- 
too  quick  a  Motion  in  the  Day  :  For  which  Reafon,  weak  Per- 
fons,  Children,  zs^c  are  nouriftied  moft,  and  recruit  beft  by 
Sleep. 


CHAP.   IV. 

Of  the  Tlace  and  Situation  of  the  Terraqueous 
Globe^  in  ref(e6i  of  the  Heavenly  Bodies, 

ANother  Thing  very  confiderable  in  our  Globe^ 
is  its  Place  and  Situation  at  a  due  Diftance 
from  the  Sun  (^),  its  Fountain  of  Light  and  Heat  j 


{a)  It  is  a  manifeft  Sign  of  the  Creator's  Management  and 
Care,  in  placing  the  Terraqueous  Globe  at  that  very  Diftance 
it  is  from  the  Sun,  and  contempering  our  own  Bodies  and  all 
other  Things  fo  duly  to  that  Diftance.  For  was  the  Earth 
farther  from  the  Sun,  the  World  would  be  ftarved  and  frozen 
with  Cold  :  And  was  it  nigher  we  fnould  be  burnt,  at  leaft  the 
moftcombuftible  Things  would  be  fo,  and  the  World  would  be 
vexed  with  perpetual  Conflagrations.  For  we  fee  that  a  few  of 
the  Rays  of  the  Sun,  even  no  more  than  what  fall  within  the 
Compafs  of  half  an  Inch  or  an  Inch  in  a  Burning-Glafs,  will 
fire  combuftible  Bodies,  even  in  our  ovyn  Climate. 

and 


Chap.V.  ^ijlribtion  of^  &;c.  47 

and  from  fts  neighbouring  Planets  of  the  folar  Sy- 
ftem,  and  from  the  fixe  Stars.  But  thcfc  Things  I 
have  fpokcn  more  largely  of  in  my  Survey  of  the 
Heavens  (/'),  and  therefore  only  barely  mention  them 
now  }  to  infill  more  largely  upon, 

ih)  Jftro-Theology,  Book  vii.  Chap.  7. 


CHAP.    V. 

The  T>iftr'ibut'ion  of  the  Earth  and  fFaters. 

TH  E  Diflribution  of  the  Waters  and  the  dry 
Land,  although  it  may  feem  rude  and  unde- 
figned  to  a  carelefs  View,  and  is  by  fome  taxed  as 
fuch  (^),  yet  is  admirably  well  adjufted  to  the  Ufes 
r.nd  Conveniences  of  our  World.  For 


{a)  The  moft  eminent  Author  1  have  met  with,  that  finds 

fault  with  the  Dilliibution  of  the  Earth  and  Wareis,  and  in- 

dcijd  with  the  whole  prcfent   Strucfluie  of  the  Globe,  is  the 

Ic.-ii  lied  and  eloquent  TJieorift,  Dr.  Burnet,  who  frequently  ex- 

'    ins  on  this  Point,  TelUs  fjo/lra,  ji  tot  ain  funtd  cowrie  claw  nr, 

ijl  ortiinata  ar  venujla    rerum  com^'ages fed  moles  aggef.a. 

:o,  incertoquc  fiii*  parthimy  nulla,  crdiuts  aut  venujlatis  ha- 

■  ratio)ie.    1  hcor.  Sacr.  1.  r.    C.  7.   t.cquis  autem  a  Deo  h&c 

i:u  faJlu?  c-:c.  lb.  §}joauiem  Herculeo  labore  cpus  efj'et  ad  exca- 

vandam  tcrmm  in  tantum  htaium  ? ii  imwtdiat):  a.   causa 

fr'tma  ejf'eclus  fuijjet  hie  alveus,  aliquctn  hliem  ordineM,  jnen- 
furam,  u'  proportionem  notare  voluijjct  in  ip/ius  fotma,  o*  par- 
tium  dijpcjitione  ;  — fed  confuja  anma,  &c.  ib.  c.  8.  Tellus  no- 
flra  cu>n  exigua  fit,  ejl  etiatn  rudis :  Kt  in  ill^  exiguitnte  multa 
fgnt  fuperfiua,  multa  inclegantia.  Ditnidiam  ttrrd  fiiperficiem 
mundat  Oceanus;  magna  ex  parte,  ut  mihi  videtur,  inutiUs. 
And  then  he  goes  on  to  Anew  how  this  Part  of  the  Creation 
ighibe  mended,  ib.  c.  10.  Ail  this  is  tome  liirprizing  from  an 
Author  of  great  Ingenuity,  who  feems  in  his  Book  to  have  a 
juft  Opinion  of,  and  due  Veneration  for  God,  But  certainly 
fuch  Notions  are  very  inconfiltent  with  the  Belief  of  God's 
creating,  cfpecially  his  governing  and  ordering  the  World. 
Sut  fuppofc  the  Terraqueous  Globe  was  fuch  a  rude,  confuf- 
d»  inconvenient  Mafs,  as  he  pretends,  yet  it  is  well  enough 
for  a  flnful  World,    But  bcfides,  what  others  have  long  ago  a- 

bundanily 
I 


48  T>iftrlbutton  of  th^         Book  IT- 

For  in  the  firfl  Place,  the  Diftribution  is  fo  well 
made,  the  Earth  and  Waters  fo  handfomely,  io 
Workman-like  laid,  every  where  all  the  World  over, 
thatthereisa  juftasquipoifeof  the  whole  Globe.  The 
Northern  balanceth  the  Southern  Ocean^  the  Jtlantick 
the  Pacifick  Sea.  The  American  dry  Land^  is  a  Coun- 
terpoife  to  the  European^,  Afiatick  and  African. 

In  the  next  Place,  the  Earth  and  the  Waters  are 
fo  admirably  well  placed  about  in  the  Globe,  as  to 
be  helpful  to  one  another,  to  minifter  to  one  ano- 
ther's Ufes.  The  great  Oceans,  and  the  lefler  Seas  and 
Lakes,  are  fo  admirably  well  diftributed  throughout 
the  Globe  [h)^  as  to  afford  fufficient  Vapours  {c)  for 

Clouds 


bundantly  anfwered,  the  following  Survey,  will,  I  hope,  fuf- 
ficiently  manifeft  it  to  be  the  Work  of  a  wife  and  beneficent, 
as  well  as  omnipotent  Creator. 

{b)  Some  have  objeded  againft  the  Diftribution  of  the  Earth 
and  Waters,  as  if  the  Waters  occupied  too  large  a  part  of  the 
Globe,  which  they  think  would  be  of  greater  Ufc,  if  it  was 
dry  Land.  But  then  they  do  not  confider  that  this  M'ould  deprive 
the  World  of  a  due  Quantity  of  Vapours  and  Rain.  For  if  the 
Cavities  which  contain  the  Sea,  and  other  Waters,  were  deep- 
er, although  the  Waters  were  no  lefs  in  Quantity,  only  their  f 
Surfaces  narrower  and  lefler,  the  Evaporations  would  be  fo 
much  the  lefs,  inafmuch  as  thofe  Evaporations  are  made  from, 
the  Surface,  and  are,  confequently,  in  proportion  to  the  Sur- 
face, not  the  Depth  or  Quantity  of  Water. 

(c)  I  took  notice  before  in  Book  I.  Cha^,  3.  i<lote  {a).  That 
the  Vapours  conftituting  Clouds  and  Rain,  are  VeftcuU  of  Wa- 
ter detached  by  Heat.  The  manner  of  which  I  conceive  to 
be  thus;  Heat  being  of  an  agile  Nature,  or  the  lighteft  of  all 
Bodies,  eafily  breaks  loofe  from  them;  and  if  they  are  humid, 
in  itsPaflage,  carries  along  with  it  Particles,  or  httle  Cafes  of 
the  Water;  which  being  Ughter  than  Air,  are  buoyed  up  there- 
by, and  fwimin  it;  until  by  knocking  againft  one  another,  or 
being  thickened  by  the  Cold,  (as  in  the  Note  before-cited,^ 
they  are  reduced  into  Clouds  and  Drops. 

Having  mentioned  the  manner  how  Vapours  areraifed,  and 
there  being  more  room  here  than  in  the  Note  before- cited,  I 
jlhall,  for  the  Illuftration  of  Nature's  Procefs,  take  notice  of 
three  Things  obfervable  to  our  purpofe,  in  Water  over  the 
Fire.    I.  That  the  Evaporations  are  proportional  to  the  Heat 

afcending 


Chap.V.        Earth  and  JVaters.  49 

'Clouds  rind  Rains,    to  temperate   the  Cold  {c)  of 
the  Northern  frozen  Air,  to  cool  and  mitigate  the 

Heats 


afcending  out  of  the  Water.     A  fmall  Heat tlirowsuff  but  few 
Vapours,   fcarce  vilible  :   A   greater  HeAt,  and   afctndtng  in 
greater  Quantities,  carries   off  grolTer,  larger,  and  more  nu- 
merous  VtficuLi^    whi>.h  we  call  a  Steam  :  And  if  the  Heat 
breaks  through  tlie  \yater  with  fuch  a  Fury,  as  to  lacerate  and 
ift  up  great  Quantities  or   Bubble    of  Water,  too  heavy  for 
he  Air  to  ca;iy  or  buoy  up,  it  caufeth  what  wc  call  Boyli;?^. 
And  the  Particles  of  Water  thus  mounted  up  by  the  Heat,  are 
vifible  Spherules  of  Water,  if  viewed  with  a  Microicope,  as 
hey  fwim   about  in  a  Ray  ot  the  Sun   let  into  a  dark  Room, 
/ith  warm  Water  underneath  ;  where  fome  of  the  Vapours 
ppear  large,  toine  Ima^ler  Sphaerules,  according  (no  dcubt) 
o  the  larger  and  leffer  Quantities  of  Heat  blowing  them  up 
nd  carrying  them  off.     i.   If  ihefe  Vapours  be  intercepted  in 
heir  Af.cnt  by  any  Context,  elpecially  cold  Body,  as  Giafs, 
Vlarble,crc.  they  are  thereby  reduced  into  Drops,  and  Mafles 
f  Water,  like  thofe  of  Rain,  c?c.     3.  Thefe  Vapours  in  their 
\fcent  from    the   Water,  may    be  oblerved,  in   cold   frolly 
iVeather,  either  to  rife  i)ura  little  above  the  Water,  and  there 
0  hang,  or  to  glide  on  a  little  above  its  Surface  :  Or  if  tha 
iVeather  be  very  cold,  after  a  little  afcent,  they  may  be  lien 

0  fall  back  again  into  the  Water ;  in  their  Ajccnt  and  De- 
cent delcribing  a  Curve  fomewhat  like  that  of  an  Arrow' 
rom  a  Bow.     But  in   a  warmer  Air,  and  ftill,  the  Vapours 

Ilfcend  more  nimbly  and  copioufly,  mounting  up  aloft,  tiil 
Jiey  are  out  of  Sight.  But  if  the  Air  be  warm  and  windy 
00,  the  Vapours  are  fooner  carried  out  of  Sight,  and  m.ikc; 
»ay  forothers.  And  accordingly  I  have  often  oblerved,  that 
ot  Liquors,  if  not  fet  too  thin^  and  not   frequently   llirrcf^, 

001  flower  in  the  grcateft  Froils,  than  in  temperate  Weather, 
fpecially  if  windy.  And  it  is  manifeft  by  good  Experiments, 
Wt  the  Evaporations  are  !efs  at  thole  times  than  thefe;  lels 
y  far  in  the  Winter  than  the   warmer  Months. 

(c)  As  our  Northern  Iflands  arc  obferved  to  be  more  teni- 
crate  than  our  Continents,  (of  which  we  had  a  notable  In- 
atice  in  the  great  Froll  in  170",  which  Ireltjnd  and  Scotland 
;lt  lefs  of,  than  moft  Parts  of  t'urope  hefides  ;  of  which  fee 
ookiV.  Chap.  II.  Note  c.)  fo  this  Temperature  is  owing  to 
le  warm  Vapours  afforded  chiefly  by  the  Sea,  which  by  the 
receding  Note  muft  necefTarily  be  warm,  as  they  Sre  Va- 
ours,  or  Water  inflated  by  Heat. 

The  Caufe  of  this  Heat  I  take  to  be  partly  that  of  the 
U0|  and  partly  Subterraneous.    That  it  is  not  wholly  that  of 

li  the 


fo  l^iflrihutton  of  the         Book  IL 

Heats  {d)  of  the  Torrid  Zone,  and  to  refrelh  the 
Earth  with  fertile  Showers  i  yea,  infomemeafureto 
niinifler  frcfli  Waters  to  the  Fountains  and  Rivers. 
Nay,  fo  abundant  is  this  great  Blefling,  which  the 
moll  indulgent  Creator  hath  afforded  us  by  means 
of  this  Dillribution  of  the  Waters  T  am  fpeaking  of, 
that  there  is  more  than  a  fcanty,  bare  Provifion,  or 
mere  Sufficiency  j  even  a  Plenty,  a  Surplufage  of 
this  u^'eful  Creature  of  God,  (the  frefh  Waters)  afford- 
ed to  the  World  ;  and  they  fo  well  ordered,  as  not  to 
drown  the  Nations  of  the  Earth,  nor  to  llagnate,. 
liink,  and  poifon,  or  annoy  them  5  but  to  be  gently 
carried  through    convenient  Chanels   back    again 


il 


the  Sun.  is  manifcft  from  Vapours,  being  as,  or  more  copi' 
ouily  raifed  when  the  Sun  Beams  are  vvealceft,  as  when  ftrong  ^ 
e'll,  there  being  greater  Rains  and  Winds  at  the  one  time  thaiMJ 
the  other.     And  that  there  is  luch  a  thing    as  Suhterraneom 
Heat,  (whether   Central,,  or    from   the   meeting  of   Mineral 
Juices  ;  or  fuch  as  is  Congenial  or  Connatural  to  our  Globe,  : 
1  have  not  Time  to  enquire  ;  but  I  fay,  that  fuch  a  Thing  is,) 
is  evident  not  only  from  the  Hot-Baths,  many  fiery  Errupti- 
ons  and  Exploiions,  o'c.  but  alfo  from  the  ordinary  Warmth 
of  Cellars  and  Places  under  Ground,  which  are   not  barely 
comparatively  warm,  but  of  fufficient   Heat  to  raife  Vapours 
alio:  As  is  manifeft  from  the  fraoking  of  perennial  Fountams 
jn  frofly  Weather,  and  Water  drawn  out  of  Pumps  and  open 
Wells  at  fuch  a  Time.     Yea,  even  Animals  themfelvesare  (en-  • 
iihle  of  it,  as  particularly  A/u/e;,  who  digbetore  a  Thaw,  and  Jj 
againft  fome  other  Alterations  of  the  Weather;    excited,  naj 
doubt,  thereunto  by  the  inv.t  warm  Vapours  ariiing  in   ther: 
Earth,  which  animate  them,  as  well  as  produce  the  fucceed-?, ■ 
mg  Changes  of  the  Weather. 

id)  Beiides  \\\t  Irade-Wlnds,  which  ferve  to  mitigate  the  ex- 
ceflive  Heats  in  the  Torrid  Zone ;  the  Clouds  are  a  good  Screen 
againft  the  fcorching  Sun-Beams,  efpecially  when  the  Sun  j 
pa  iP.'th  their  Zenith;  at  which  Time  is  their  V/inter,  or  cool-, 
ell  Seafon,  by  realbn  they  have  then  moft  Clouds  and  Rain.  | 
For  which  Service,  that  which  Varene  takes  notice  of,  is  a 
great  Providence  of  God,  'u'lx..  Pleraque  loca  Zons.  Torrida  v't* 
cinum  ha'hcKt  mare,  Ht  India,  bifuU  IndicA,  Lingua  Afria, 
Guinea,  Braflia,  Peritvia,  Mexicana,  Hifpania :  Pauca  loca 
Zon&  Torrids.  funt  Mediierranea.  Varenii.  Geogr.  1,  2.  c.  2(5. 
Prop.  10,  §.  7,  ' 

to 


Chap.  V.        Earth  and  JVaters.  5-1 

to  tlieir  grand  Fountain  {c)  the  Sea;  and  many  of 
them  through  fuch  large  Trails  of  Land,  and  to  I'ucli 
prodigious  Diftanccs,  that  it  is  a  great  Wonder  the 

Fountains 


(f)  Th.u  Springs  have  their  Origine  from  the  Sea,  and  not 
from  Rains  and  Vapours,  among  many  other  ftrong  Reafons, 
I  conclude  from  the  Percnnity  of  divers  Springs,  which  al- 
ways afford  the  fame  quantity  of  Water.  Of  this  fort  there 
are  many  to  be  found  every  where.  But  I  fliall,  for  an  In- 
ftancc,  finglc  out  one  in  theParifli  of  Vpminfter,  where  I  live, 
as  being  very  proper  for  my  purpofe,  and  one  that  Iliave  had 
better  Opportunities  of  making  Remarks  upon  above  twenty 
Years.  This  in  the  grcatelt  Droughts  is  little,  if  at  all  dimi- 
niflied,  that  1  could  perceive  by  my  Eye,  although  the  Ponds 
all  over  the  Country,  and  an  adjoining  Brook  have  been  dry 
for  many  Months  together ;  as  particularly  in  the  dry  Summer 
Months  of  the  Year  170J.  And  in  the  wetted  Seafons,  fuch  as 
the  Summer  and  other  Months  were,  preceding  the  violent 
Storm  in  November  1703.  {Vid.  Phibf.Tranf.  N".  189.)  I  fay, 
in  fuch  wet  Seafons  I  have  not  oblerved  any  Increment  of  its 
Stream,  excepting  only  for  violent  Rains  falling  therein,  or 
running  down  from  the  higher  Land  into  it;  which  difcolour- 
eth  the  Waters  oftentimes,  and  makes  an  increafe  of  only  a 
Day's,  or  foraetimes  but  a  few  Hours  Continuance.  But  now, 
if  this  Spring  had  its  Origine  from  Rain  and  Vapours,  there 
would  be  an  increafe  and  decreafe  of  the  one,  as  there  fliould 
happen  to  be  of  the  other :  As  adually  it  is  in  fuch  temporary 
Springs  as  have  undoubtedly  their  Source  from  Rain  and  Va- 
pours. 

But  befides  this,  another  confiderable  Thing  in  this  UpminJ 
Jlcr  Spring  (and  Thoufands  of  others)  is,  that  it  breaks  out 
of  fo  inconfiderable  an  Hillock,  or  Eminence  of  Ground, 
that  can  have  no  more  hifluence  in  the  Condenfation  of  the 
Vapours,  or  flopping  the  Clouds,  which  the  Maintainers  of 
this  Hypothefis  fuppofe)  than  the  lower  Lands  aboiu  it  have. 
By  fome  Critical  Obfervations  I  made  with  a  very  nice  por- 
table Barometer,  1  found  that  my  Houfe  Hands  between  80  an  J 
90  Feet  higher  than  the  Low-Water  Mark  in  the  River  of 
Thames,  neareft  me  ;  and  that  part  of  the  River  being  I'carce 
thirty  Miles  from  the  Sea,  I  guefs,  (and  am  more  confirmed 
from  fome  later  Experiments  I  made  nearer  the  Sea)  that  we 
cannot  be  much  above  100  Feet  above  the  Sea.  The  Spring  I 
judge  nearly  level  with,  or  but  little  higher  than  where  my 
Houfe  Hands ;  and  the  Lands  from  whence  it  immediately  if- 
fues,  I  guefs  about  15  or  ro  F'eet  higher  than  the  Spring; 
and  the  Lands  above  that,  of  no  very  remarkable  Height. 

E  a  And 


51  ^iftributlon  of  the  Book  IL 

Fountains  fliould  be  high  enough  (/),  or  the  Seas 
low  enough,  ever  to  afford  fo  long  a  Conveyance. 
Witnefs  the  Danube  {£)  and  Wolga  of  Europe^   the 


And  indeed,  by  adtual  Meafure,  one  of  the  higheft  Hills  I 
have  met  with  in  Effex,  is  but  363  Feet  high;  {Vid.  Phil.  Tranf. 
^°'  l^l-  P-  ^^■)  ^^^  ^  guefs  by  fome  very  late  Experiments  I 
made,  neither  that,  nor  any  other  Land  in  Ejjex,  to  be  above 
400  Feet  above  the  Sea.  Now  what  is  fo  inconfiderable  a  rife 
of  Land  to  a  perennial  Condenfation  of  Vapours,  fit  to  main- 
tain even  fo  inconiiderable  a  Fountain,  as  what  I  have  men- 
tioned is  ?  Or  indeed  the  High-lands  of  the  whole  large  Coun- 
ty of  Ejfex,  to  the  maintaining  of  all  its  Fountains  and  Rivulets? 

But  I  (Irali  no  farther  profecute  this  Argument,  but  refer  to 
the  late  learned,  curious  and  induftrious  Dr.  Plot's  Tentamen 
Ph'd.  deOrig.  Tont.  in  which  he  hath  fully  difcuiTed  this  Matter. 

As  to  the  manner  how  the  Waters  are  raifed  up  irtto  the 
Mountains  and  higher  Lands,  an  eafyand  natural  Reprefenta- 
tion  may  be  made  of  it,  by  putting  a  Httle  Heap  of  Sand, 
Aflies,  or  a  little  Loaf  of  Bread,  Zy'c,  in  a  Bafon  of  Water  ; 
where  the  Sand  will  reprefent  the  dry  Land,  or  an  Ifland, 
and  the  Bafon  of  Water  the  Sea  about  it.  And  as  the  Water 
in  the  Bafon  rifeth  to,  or  near  the  top  of  the  Heap  in  it,  fo 
doth  the  Waters  of  the  Sea,  Lakes,  crc  life  in  the  Hills.  Which 
cafe  I  take  to  be  the  fame  with  the  afcent  of  Liquids  in  capil- 
lary Tubes,  or  between  contiguous  Planes,  or  in  a  Tube  fil- 
led with  A  flies :  Of  which  the  induftrious  and  compleat  Arti- 
ficer in  Air-Pumps,  Mr.  Hawk/bee,  hath  given  us  fome,  not 
contemptible  Experiments,  in  his  Phyf.  Mech.  Exp.  pag.  139. 

Among  the  many  Caufes  aflTigned  for  this  afcent  of  Liquors, 
there  are  two  that  bid  thefaireft  for  it,  viz..  the  Prejfure  of  the 
Atmofphere,  and  the  Newtonian  Attraction.  That  it  is  not  the 
former,  appears  from  the  Experiments  fucceeding,  as  well, 
or  better  in  Vacuo^  than  in  the  open  Air,  the  afcent  being  ra- 
ther fwifter  in  Vacuo.  This  then  beingnot  theCaufe,  I  fliall 
fuppofe  the  other  is  ;  but  for  the  Proof  thereof,  I  (hall  refer 
to  lome  of  our  late  Engli(li  Authors,  efpecially  fome  very 
late  Experiments  made  before  our  mod  famous  R.  S.  which 
will  be  fo  well  improved  by  fome  of  that  illuftrious  Body,  as 
to  go  near  to  put  the  Matter  out  of  doubt. 

(/)  See  BookUl.  Chap.  4. 

(^)  The  Danube  in  a  fober  Account y  performs  a  Courfe  of  a- 
hove  1 500  Miles,  (/.  e.  in  a  ftrait  Line)  from  its  Rife  to  its 
Fall.    Bohun'j  Geogr.Didt, 

me 


Chap.  V.        Earth  and  TV  at  ers.  53 

Nile  (h)  and  the  Niger  (i)  of  y^fric-k,  the  Ganges  (k)  and 
Euphrates  of  Afia^  and  the  Amazons  Rr^er  [I)  and 
Rio  de  la  Plata  of  America^  and  many  others  which 
might  be  named;  fome  of  which  arc  faid  to  run 
above  fooo  Miles,  and  fome  no  lefs  than  6000  from 
their  Fountains  to  the  Sea.  And  indeed  fuch  pro- 
digious Conveyances  of  the  Waters  make  it  muni- 
felt,  that  no  accidental  Currents  and  Alterations 
of  the  Waters  themfelves,  no  Art  or  Power  of 
Man,  nothing  lefs  than  the  Fiat  of  the  Almighty, 
could  ever  have  made,  or  found,  fo  long  and  com- 
modious Declivities,  and  Chancls  for  the  Pafllige  of 
the  Waters. 


{h)  TraHas  fc.  Lo7JgitHdo  [Nili]  ejl  m'dUarittm  circiter  630 
Germ,  fiie  Ital.  1520,  pro  qutbus  ponere  licet  3000  propter  cur- 
vaturas.     Varcn.  Geogr.  1,  I.  c.  16.  p.  Z7. 

(>)  Varene  reckons  the  Courfe  of  the  Niger,  at  a  middle 
Computation,  600  German  Miles,  that  is  1400  Italian. 

{k^  That  of  the  GatTges  he  computes  at  300  German  Miles. 
But  if  we  add  the  Curvatures  to  thefe  Rivers,  their  Chariels 
are  of  a  prodigious  Length. 

(/)  Oritur,  Jinmen  (quod  plerumque  Amaz^onum,  &c.)  haui 
frocul  ffh/ito  in  montibus  -■  Cum  per  leucas  Hifpanicas  I3>6. 
curfum  ab  occidente  in  orientem  conttnudrit,   cflio    84  leucas  la- 

to in  Oceanum  prAcipitatur.     Chr.   D'Acugna    Rchlio    dc 

flumine  Amaz.  in  Aft.  Erud.  Aug.  1683. 


CHAP.    VI. 

The  great  Variety  and  ^tantity  of  all  Things 
upon^  and  in  the  Terraqueous  Globe,  pro- 
vided for  theUfes  of  the  World, 

TH  E  laft  Remark  I  fhall  make  about  the  Ter- 
raqueous Globe  in  general  is,  the  great  Variety 
of^  Kinds,  or  Tribes,  as  well  as  prodgious  Number 
lOf  Individuals  of  each  various  Tribe,  there  is  of  all 

E  $  Crea- 


5'4  Variety  of  Things  Book  II. 

Creatures  {a).    There  are  fo  many  Bcafts,  To  many 
Birds,  fo  many  Inre61:s,  fo  many  Reptiles,  fo  many 
Trees,  fo  many  Plants  upon  the   Land  j  fo  many 
Fiflies,  Sea-Plants,  and  other  Creatures  in  the  Wa- 
ters J  fo  many  Minerals,  Metals,  and  Fofliles  in  the 
Subterraneous  Regions;  fo  many  Species  of  thcfe Ge- 
77era^  fo  m^ny  Individuals  o(  thofe  Species^  that  there 
is  nothing  wanting  to  the  Ufe  of  Man,  or  any  o- 
ther  Creature  of  this  lower  World.     If  every  Age 
doth  change  its  Food,    its  way  of  Cloathing,   its 
way  of  Building;  if  every  Age  (b)  hath  its  Variety 
of  Difeafes;    nay,  if  Man,  or  any   other  Animal, 
was  minded  to  change  thefe  Things  every  Day,  Hill 
the  Creation  would  not  be  cxhauiled,  ftill  nothing 
would  be  wanting   for    Food,    nothing  for   Phy- 
fick,  nothing  for  Building  and  Habitation,  nothing 
for  Clcanlineis  and  Refreihmenr,  yea,  even  for  Re- 


(a)  Non  dat  Deus  henejicia  ?  Unde  ergo  ijla  qus.  poffdcs  ?  ——— 
XJnde  hue  innumerab'tlia,  oculos,  aurcs  ZP'  animum  tnulcentU  ? 
Vnde  ilia  luxuriam  quot^ue  inftruens  copla  ?  Neqae  emm  tiecejfi- 
tatibus  taniummodo  no^ris  provifum  eft-  ufque  in  delicins  ama- 
trnir.  Tot  arbufta,  non  uno  modo  fritgifera,  tot  herbs,  fain  tares, 
tot  varletaies  ciborum,  per  tottim  annum  digeftA,  ut  inerti  quo- 
.que  fcrtiiiia.   tcrr&    aitmcnta  pr&bercnt.      'Jam    animalia  ornnis 

generis,  alia  in  ficco,  ike.  ut  omnis  rermn  natiir&  pars  tri~ 

hut  urn  aliquod  nobis  conferret.  Senec.  de  Benef.  1.  4.  c.  5. 
ubi  plura  vide. 

H'lc,  ubi  kabitamtts  non  intermittit  fuo  tempore  Ccelum  nitef- 
eere,  arbores  frondefcere — —  turn  multitudinem  pccttdum  parti-rn 
ad  vefcendum,  partim  ad  cultus  agrorum,  partim  ad  i-ehendiim, 
fartim  ad  corpora  veftienda  ;  hojninemque  ipfum  quafi  contem- 

platorem  cosli  ac  deorum,  ipforumque  cnltorem. H&c  igi- 

tur,  cr  alia  inmimerabilia  clim  cernimus,  pajfumufne  dnbitare, 
quin  his  pr&fit  aliquis  vel  Effe^for,  ft  h^c  nata  funt,  ut  Platoni 
tidetur  :  z'el  ft  femper  fuennt,  ut  Ariftoteli  placet.  Moderator 
tanti  operis  e^  muneris  ?  Cicer.  Tufc.  Quaeft.  ].  i.  c.  28,  29. 

(h)  Sunt  cy  gentium  differentia  non  mediocres qu£  con- 

templatio  aufert  rurfus  nosad  ipforutn  animalium  naturas,  inge- 
nitafatte  its  'i^el  certiores  morborum  omnium  mcdicinas.  Enim 
'vcro  rcrum  omnium  Parens,  nullum  animal  ad  hoc  tantum  ut 
fafceretur,  aut  alia  fatiaret  nafci  volnit  :  arte/que  falutares  lis 
inferMrit.  Plin.  N.  H.  I,  z?.  c.  13. 

creation 


I  Chap.  VI.  in  the  Terraqueous  Globe.  SS" 

creation  and  Plcafurc.  But  the  Munificence  of  the 
Creator  is  fuch,  that  there  is  abundantly  enough  to 
fupply  the  Wants,  the  Convcniencics,  yen,  almoil 
the  Extravagancies  of  all  the  Creatures,  in  all  Places, 
all  Ages,  and  upon  all  Occafions. 

And  this  may  fervc  to  anfvveran  Objcflionagainfl: 
the  Excellency  of,  and  Wifdom  fhev/cd  in  the  Cre- 
ation i  namely.  What  need  of  fo  many  Creatures  {c)  ? 
Particularly  of  fo  many  Inic61:s,  fo  many  Plant?, 
and  fo  many  other  Things?  And  cfpccially  oi  fome 
of  them,  that  are  fo  far  from  being  ufeful,  that 
■they  arc  very  noxious  j  fome  by  their  Ferity,  and 
others  by  their  poilbnous  Nature,  (yc? 

To  which  I  might  anfwer,  that  in  greater  Varie- 
ty, the  greater  Art  is  feen  j  that  the  fierce,  poi- 
sonous, and  noxious  Creatures  (crve  as  Rods  and 
Scourges  to  chalUfe  us  (d),  as  means  to  excite  our 

Wifdom 


(f)  This  was  no  very  eafy  Queftion  to  be  anfwered  by  fuch 
as  held,  thac  all  ihings  vjere  made  for  Ma?i,  as  mult  oH  the 
Ancients  did  ;  zi  Jirijlotle,  Seneca,  Cicero  ^nA  Pliny,  (to  name 
.only  fomc  of  the  chief^.  And  C;«r<?  cites  it  as  the  celebrated 
ChryfibpUi's  Opinion,  Pnclare  tnitn  Chryfippus,  Cetera  nam 
ije  Horfiinnm  Causa,  c/  Deorum.  JDe  Jin.  bon.  cr  tnal.  I  3. 
And  in  his  Dc  Nat.  Deor.  I.  i.  fin.  he  ferinufiy  proves  the 
World  it  felf  to  h.n'e  been  made  tor  the  Gods  and  Man,  and 
all  Things  m  the  World  to  have  been  made  and  contrived  for 
the  Benefit  of  Man  (parata  cr  inwnta  ad  fruihim  Hcwinuff:^ 
arc  his  Words).  So  Plmy  in  his  Preface  to  his  7^*^  Book  faith, 
Nature  made  all  Things  for  Man  ;  but  then  he  makes  adoubr, 
whether  flic  ihewed  her  felf  a  more  indul^^cnt  Parent,  or  cruel 
Step-Mother,  as  in  Book  IV.  Chap.  12..  Note  i.  Butfmce  the 
Works  of  God  have  been  more  difcovercd,  and  the  Limits  of 
the  Univerfe  have  been  found  to  be  of  infinitely  greater  Extent 
than  the  Ancients  fuppofed  them  ;  this  narrow  Opinion  haih 
been  exploded.  And  the  Anfwer  will  be  found  eafy  to  thcfc 
Queflions,  Why  fo  many  ufelels  Creatures.''  In  the  Heavens, 
Why  fo  many  fixt  Stars,  and  the  greatcllparr  of  them  fcarcc 
vifiblc  ?  Why  fuch  Syfiems  of  Planets,  as  in  Jupiter,  Saturn, 
&c.  {Sttmy  jifiro-Theology.)  In  the  harthand  Waters^  Why 
io  many  Creatures  of  no  ufe  to  Man .-' 

{d)  Kic  mir.iis  clara  exitii  docutncnta  funt  etiam  tx  contem- 
nendis  animaiihus,     M.  Varro  author  f/?,    a  ctmtCHlis  JujfoJJUrn 

E  4  ii6 


$6  Variety  of  Things  Book  II. 

Wifdom,  Care,  and  Induftry,  with  more  to  the 
fame  purpofe.  But  thefe  Things  have  been  fully 
urged  by  others  j  and  it  is  fufficient  to  fay,  that  this 

great 

in  Hifpania  cpidum,  a  talpts  in  Thejjalia  :  ab  ranis  civitatem  in 
Gallia  pulfam,  ab  locuftis  in  Africa.  :  ex  Gyaro,  Cycladum  in- 
fula,  ir/colas  a  nturibus  fugatos  ;  In  Italia  Amyclas  a  fcrpen- 
tibus  delatas.  Cura  Cynamolgos  JF.thiopas  late  dejcrta  regio  ejl^ 
a  fcorpionibus  CT"  folptigis  gente  fublata  :  e?  a  jcolopendris  aba^os 
Trenenfes,  author  eft  Theophraftus.      Plin.  Nat.  Hlit.  1.8.   C.xg. 

To  thefe  Inftances  may  be  added,  the  Plague  they  fome- 
times  fuffer  from  a  kind  of  Mice  (they  call  Leming,  Lemin- 
ger,  Lemmus,  &c,)  in  Norway,  which  eat  up  every  green 
Thing.  They  come  in  fuch  prodigious  Numbers,  that  they 
fancy  them  to  fall  from  the  Clouds;  but  Ol.  Magnus,  rather 
thinks  they  come  from  fome  of  the  Illands.  Hift.  I.  8.  c.  ^.  If 
the  Reader  hath  a  mind  to  fee  a  large  Account  of  them,  with 
a  Difpute  ?ibout  their  Generation,  a  handfome  Cut  of  them, 
with  the  Prayers,  and  an  Exorciim  againft  them  ufed  in  the 
Church  of  Rome,  1  tliall  ref^-r  him,  (it  being  too  tedious  to 
recite  in  thefe  Notes)  to  Mnf&um  Wormian.  1.  3.  c.  2,3. 

6h4are  patimur  multa  mala  a  creatura  quam  fecit  Beus,  nifi 
quiaojendimm  Deum  ?  —  De pxna  tud  peccatum  tiium  accttfa^ 
non  jiidicern.  Nam  propter  Superbiam  i)iftttuit  Beus  creaturam 
iftam  minimam  zjr  abjeiliffimam,  ut  ipfa  nos  tcrqueret,  ut  cum 
fuperbus  fierit  homo,  cjr  fe  jaciaverit  adverfus  Deum,  —  cum 
feerexerit,  PuUcibus  fubdatur.  <§}»ideft,  quid  te  infias  humanA 
fifperbia  ?  —  Pulicibus  refifte,  ut  dormias.  Cognofce  qui  fis.  Nam 
prot-tcr  fupc-biam  noftram  domandam  — —  creata  ilia  qn£.  mole- 
fia  funt :  populum  Pharaonis  fuperbum  potuit  Deus  d.mare  de 
Urfis,   de  &c.     Mufcas  z^  Ranas  illis  immiftt,  ut  rebus  vtliffimis 

fuperbia  domaretur.     Omnia  ergo  per  ipfum  — ■ fa^a  funt  ; 

a' fine  jpfo  fa£l:tm  eft  nihil  Auguft.  Trad   i.  in  S.  Johan. 

But  although  the  infinitely  wife  Creator  hath  put  it  in  the 
Pov/er  of  fuch  vile  Animals  to  chaftife  us,  yet  hath  he  Oicwed 
no  lefs  Wifdom  and  Kindnefs  in  ordering  many,  if  not  molt 
of  them  fo,  as  that  it  fliall  be  the  in  Power  of  Man,  and  other 
Creatures  to  obviate  or  efcape  their  Evils.  For,  befides  the 
.noble  Antidotes  aft(:>rded  by  Minerals,  Vegetables,  crc.  many, 
if  not  moft  of  our  European  venemous  Animals  carry  their 
Cure,  as  well  as  Poifon,  in  their  own  Bodies.  The  Oil,  and 
I  doubt  not,  the  Body  of  Scorpions  too,  is  a  certain  Remedy 
at'ainft  its  Stroke.  A  Bee,  iVafp,  or  Hornet  cruflied  and  rub- 
bed, and  bound  upon  the  Place,  I  have  always  found  to  be  a 
certain  Cure  for  the  Sting  of  thofe  Creatures.  And  I  queftion 
not,  but  the  Flefli,  efpecially  the  Head  of  Vip>ers,  would  be 
found  a  P>.emedy  for  their  Bites. 


Chap.  VI.  in  the  Terraqueous  Globe,  57 

crcat  Variety  is  a  mod  wife  Provjlion  for  all  the  UTcs 
of  the  World  in  all  Ages  and  all  Places.  Some  tor 
i'ood,  fome  lor  Phyfick  (f),  fomc  for  Ii:ibitation, 
feme  for  Utenlils,  fome  for  Tools  and  liilhuincntsof 
Work,  and  fome  for  Recreation  and  Plcafure,  ci'thcr 
to  Man,  or  to  fomc  of  the  inferior  Creatures  thtm- 
fclves  i  even  for  which  inferior  Creatures,  the  li- 
beral Creator  hath  provided  all  Things  ncccllary,  or 
any  ways  conducing  to  their  happy,  comfoi tabic 
living  in  this  World,  as  well  as  for  xVlan. 

And  it  is  manifeil,  that  all  the  Creatures  of  God, 
Beails,  Birds,  lnfe6ls,  Plants,  and  every  other  GV««i 

Our  Viper-Catchers  have  a  Remedy  in  zvhich  they  place  fo 
great  Ccnfidencc,  as  to  be  no  more  afraid  of  the  Bite  [ot  a  Vi- 
per], than  of  a  common  Puncture,  immediately  curing  them- 
felves  by  the  Application  of  their  Specif  ck.  This  though  they  hce^ 
a  great  Secret,  1  have  upon  ftritt  Encjuiry  found  to  be  no  other 
than  Axungia  Viperina,  prcfcntly  rubbed  into  the  Wound.  'I'his 
Remedy  the  learned  Dodor  tried  himfelf  with  good  Succefs 
in  a  young  Dog  that  was  bitten  in  the  Nole.  I'ld.  Mead  of 
Poifons,  p.  19. 

And  as  to  the  means  to  efcapc  the  Mifchief  of  fuch  noxious 
Animals,  bclldes  what  may  be  efiec^ed  by  the  Care,  Indullry 
and  Sagacity  of  Man  ;  fome  of  them  are  fo  contrived  and 
made,  as  to  give  Warning  or  Time  to  Creatures  in  danger 
from  them.  Thus,  for  Inftance,  the  Rattle- Snahe,  the  molt 
poifonous  of  any  Serpent,  who  darts  its  poifonous  Vapours 
to  Ibme  dillance,  and  m  ail  Probability  was  the  BafiUji  of  the 
Ancients,  faid  to  kill  with  its  Kyes,  this  involuntarily  gives 
warning  by  the  Rattle  in  its  Tail.  So  the  Shark,  the  molt  ra-  - 
pacious  Animal  of  the  Waters,  is  forced  to  turn  himfelf  oa 
his  Back,  (and  thereby  gives  an  Opportunity  of  Hfcape)  be- 
fore he  can  catch  his  Piey. 

{e)  Hic  fcla  Nature  placuerat  ejfe  remedia  parata  vuho,  in- 
•ventu  factlia,  ac  fine  impendio,  ex  quiOus  vivimus.  Pofea  frau- 
des  hotninum  cr  ingeniorum  capturti  offcmai  invenire  iflas,  in 
quibus  fua  cuique  h^mini  voenaiis  profnitiitur  vita.  Statim  ccm- 
fojitiones  ZS"  mtfur&  inexplicabtles  dccantantur.  Aral  -a  atque 
India  in  medio  ^[limantur,  ulcerique  purvo  mciicina  d  Rubra 
mari  imputatur,  cutn  rtmedia  vera  quotidie  pauperrimus  quifque 
ccenet.    Plin.  1.  ^4.  c.  i. 

Non  fponte  fud    ex  tcllure germinant  Herb<i,  qut  contra  quof- 
tunaue  morbos  accommods.  funt ;   fed  a   voluntate  OpifJcis,  ad 
fiojiram  utiUtatem  produiU  funt.     Bafil.  Afcct.  Tom.  i. 
Confult  here,  hock  X.  Kote  z,  aa,  bo. 

have 


5^  Variety  of  Things  Book  IT. 

have,  or  may  have,  their  fcveral  Ufes  even  among 
Men.  For  although  in  one  Place  many  Things  may 
lieneglefted,  and  outof  Ufe,  yet  in  other  Places  they 
may  be  of  great  Ufe.  So  what  hath  feemed  ufelefs 
in  one  Age,  hath  been  received  in  another  5  as  all  the 
new  Dilcovcries  in  Phyfick,  and  all  the  Alterations 
in  Diet  do  fufficiently  witnefs.  Many  Things  alio 
there  are  which  in  one  Form  may  be  pernicious  to 
Man  5  but  in  another,  of  great  Ufe.  There  are  many 
Plants  (/),  many  Animals,  many  Minerals,  which 
in  one  Form  delboy,  in  another  heal.     The  Cajfada 

Plant 


(f)  Among  poifonous  Vegetables,  none  more-famous  of  old 
than  Hemlock,  accounted  at  this  Day  alfo  veiy  dangerous  to 
Man,  of  which  there  ate  Ibme  difmal  Examples  in  our  Phil. 
Tranf.  IVepfor,  &c.  But  yet  thisPlant  is  Food  for  Gc^/;,  and  us 
Seeds  to  Bnfiards;  and  as  Gd/^w  faith,  io  Starlings  Mo.  Neither 
is  this,  fo  pernicious  a  Plant,  only  Food,  but  alfo  Phylick  to 
.fome  Animals.  An  Horfe  troubled  with  the  Farcy,  ■4nd  could 
not  be  cured  with  the  raofl:  famed  Remedies,  cured  himfelf 
of  it  in  a  fiiort  Time,  by  eating  Hemloch,  of  which  he  eat 
greedily.  Vid.  Phil.  Tranf.  N^.  231.  And  a  Woman  which  ivits 
cured  of  the  Plague,  but  wanted  Sleep,  did  vjith  very  good  Ef- 
febi  eat  WtvcAozX^  for  fame  time;  till  falling  ill  again  of  n  Fe- 
f«r,  and  having  left  ojftheUfe  of  this  Remedy,  he  [Nic.  Fonta- 
nus]  endeavoured  to  procure  her  Reft  by  repeated  Dofes  of  Opi- 
um, ^v hie h  had  no  Operation,  till  the  Help  0/ Cicuta  was  again 
called  in  zvith  defired  Succefs.     Mead  of   Poif.  p.  144. 

And  not  only  Hemlock,  but  many  other,  if  not  mofl  Plants 
accounted  poifonous, may  have  their  great  Ule  in  Medicine:  Of 
which  take  the  Opinion  of  an  able  Judge,  my  ingenious  and 
learned  Friend  Dr.  Tancred  Robinfon,  in  a  Letter  I  have  of  his 
to  the  late  great  Mr.Ray^  of  Nov.  7.  1604,  viz.  According  to 
my  Promife,  I  here  fend  you  a  Jezu  Obfervations  concerning  fume 
plants,  feldom  ufed  in  Medicine,  being  efteemed  poifonous,  ivhich 
if  truly  corretled,  or  exabll")  dofed,  may  perhaps  prove  the  mojl 
fovjerful  and  effectual  Medicines  yet  known.  Having  then  given 
an  Account  of  fome  of  their  Corredlives,  he  gives  thefe  fol- 
lowing Examples,  w^:.  I.  The  Hellebores  incorporated  ivith  a  Sa- 
fe, or  Alkaly-Salts  alone,  are  fuccefsfid  Remedies  in  Epilepfe:, 
Vertigo's,  Palfies,  Lethargies,  and  Mania  s.  Dof  a  ^j.  to  2/5. 
2.  TJ?e  Radic.  AJJari,  Cicuta,  and  the  Napellus,  in  Agues  and 
periodical  Pains.  Dof.  ^j.  to  tl^.  3.  The  Hyofcyamus  in  H£- 
morrhagiesy  "Jiolent  Htats  and  Perturbation  of  the  Bloody  and  al- 

■   "\  ^ ■       ~      '       fi. 


Chap.  VI.  in  theT err  aqueous  Globe.  59 

Plant  unprepared  poifoncth,  but  prepared,  is  tl" : 
very  Bread  oF  the  IVeft-Indics  [g).  Viper i  and  Scorpi- 
cyjs,  and  inany  Minerals,  as  dcflrudivc  as  they  aic  lo 
Man,  yet  afford  himfomeof  his  bell  Medicines. 

Or  if  there  be  many  Things  of  httle,  immccha  : 
Ui'etoMan,  in  this,  or  any  other  Arc  ;  yettootl^.c/ 
Creatures  they  may  afford  Food  or  Phylick,  or  be  or 
fome  neccffary  Ufc.  How  many  Trees  and  Plants,  nay, 
even  the  very  Carcafes  of  Annuals,  yc.i,  the  very 
Dull:  of  the  Earth  (/j),  and  the  mollrefufe,  contemp- 
tible Things  to  be  met  with  j  I  fay,  how  many  fuch 
I'hings  are  either  Food,  or  probably  Mcdicmc  to  ma- 
ny Creatures,  afi'ord  them  Retreat,  arc  Places  ot  Ha- 
bitation, or  Matrixes  for  their  Generation,  aslhall  be 
Ihewed  in  proper  Place?  The  prodigious  Swarms  of 
Infeds  in  the  Air,  and  in  the  Waters,  (many  of  which 
may  be  perhaps  at  prefent  of  no  great  JJic  to  Man)  yet 
are  Food  to  Birds,  Fiflies,  Reptiles,  Infccls  themklvcs, 
and  other  Creatures  (/'),  for  whofe  happy  and  comfort- 
able Subfiftencc,  I  have  Hiid  the  bountiful  Creator 
hath  liberally  provided,  as  well  as  for  that  of  Man. 

jo  in  all-great  Injlamtnatitns.  Dof.  ^j.  ro^fi.  4.  The  tei?ien6lra~ 
tnoni*  is  a  very  good  Anodyne^  ufeful  in  I'igilia's,  llheumattjins^ 
Hyflerick  Cafes,  in  all  the  Orgajms  of  the  Blood  or  Spirits^  and 
zvhere-ever  there  is  an  Indication  for  a  Paregorick.  T)of.-^].to'^. 
5.  Elaterium  thtu  corrected,  may  be  given  from  gr.  x.to  xv.  i» 
Jtiydropical  Cafes, -..vithottt  any  ferijible  Evacuation  or  Difiurbance. 
So  may  the  Soldanella  and  Gratiola  in  greater  Dojes.  6.  Opi- 
um corretled  as  afore-mentioned,  lojes  its  Narcotick  faculty,  and 
may  be  given  very  fafely  in  great  Dofes,  and  proves  more  than 
ufually  prevalent  in  Convulflve  Cafes,  Fluxes,  Catarrhs,  ar.d 
all  painful  Paroxyfms,  &C. 

(g)  It  is  of  the  mofl ge^c'-al  Ufe  of  any  Provifion  all  over  the 
Weft- Indies,  efpecially  m  t/.e  hotter  Parts,  and  is  ufedto  ViClual 
Ships.  Dr.  Sloan';  Nat.  Hift.  oi  Jamaica,  Vol.  i.  Chap.  5.  §.  iz. 

(h)  1  have  Cliewn  in  the  Phil.  Tranf.  that  the  Pediculus  fati- 
dtcus,  Mortifaga,  Pulfatorius,  or  Death-lVatch  there  deicnbcd, 
feedeth  upon  Dull ;  but  that  this  Dull  they  eat,  is  powdered 
Bread,  Fruits,  or  fuch  like  Duft,  not  powdeied  Haitli ;  as  is 
maniteft  from  their  great  Diligence  aiid  Curiofity  in  hunting 
amongthe  Duft.     See  more  in  Phil.  Tranf.  N^.  291. 

(i)  nd.  Book  IV.  Chap.  II. 

BOOK 


6o 


BOOK  III. 

Of  the  Terraqueous  Globe  m  particular^ 
more  efpec'mlly  the  Earth, 

^^^Aving  thus  taken  a  general  Profpeft  of  our 
Terraqueous  Globe,  I  fhall  in  this  Book 


come  to  its  Particulars.  But  here  we  have 
fuch  an  immenfe  Variety  prefenting  it  felf 
to  our  Senfes,  and  fuch  amazing  Strokes  of  Power 
and  Wifdom,  that  it  is  impofTible  not  to  be  at  a 
Stand,  and  very  difficult  to  know  where  to  begin, 
how  to  proceed,  or  where  to  end.  But  we  mufl 
however  attempt. 

And  for  the  more  clear  and  regular  proceeding  on 
this  copious  Subjcdl,  I  fliall  diftribute  the  Globe  in- 
to its  own  grand  conlHtuent  Parts. 

I.  The  Earth  and  its  Appurtenances. 

II.  The  fVaters  and  Theirs. 

The  firft  of  thefeonly,  is  what  at  prefcnt  I  fhall 
be  able  to  take  into  this  Survey. 

And  in  Surveying  the  Earthy  I  intend, 

1.  To  confidents  conltituent  Parts,  or  Things 
peculiar  to  its  felf. 

2.  The  Inhabitants  thereof,  or  the  feveral  Kinds 
of  Creatures  that  have  their  Habitation,  Growth, 
or  Subfiftence  thereon. 

I .  As  to  the  Earth  it  felf,  the  mod:  remarkable 
Things  that  prefent  themfelves  to  our  View,  are, 

J.  Its 


Chap.  I.  Of  the  Soils.  6t 

1.  Its  various  Moulds  and  Soils. 

2.  Its  fcvcral  Strata,  or  Beds. 

3.  Its  very  Subterraneous  Paflliges,  Grotto's  and 
Caverns. 

4.  Its  Mountains  and  Vallies. 


C  H  A  P.    I. 

Of  the  Soils  and  Moulds  in  the  Earth. 

THE  various  Soils  and  Moulds  are  an  admirable 
and  nunifcfl:  Contrivance  of  the  All-wife 
Creator,  in  makmg  tl)is  Pro\  ifion  for  the  various 
Vegetables  (^),  and  divers  other  Ufes  of  the  Crea- 
tures. For,  as  fome  Trees,  fome  Plants,  fomc 
Grams  dv/ indie  and  die  in  a  difagreeable  Soil,  but: 
thrive  and  flourifli  in  others i  fo  the  All-wife  Crea* 
tor  hath  amply  provided  for  every  Kind  a  proper  Bed. 
It   fomc  delight  in  a  warm,   fome  a  cold  Soilj 


{a)  V  is  not  to  be  doubted,  that  although  Vegetables  delight 
in  peculiar  Soils,  yet  they  owe  not  their  Life  and  Growth  to  the 
Earth  it  fch,  but  tu  fome  agreeable  Juices  or  Salts,  c^c  refiding 
in  the  Earth.  Of  this  the  great  Mr.  iJoy/  hath  given  us  fome 
good  Experiments.  He  ordered  his  Gardener  to  dig  up,  and 
dry  in  an  Oven  fome  Earth  fit  for  the  Purpofe,  to  weigh  it, 
and  to  fet  therein  fome  Squajl)  Seeds,  (a  kind  of  Indian  Pom- 
pion).  The  Seeds  when  fovvn  were  watered  with  R.iin  or 
Spring-water  only.  But  although  a  Plant  was  produced  in  one 
Experiment  of  near  3  /.  and  in  another  of  above  14  /.  yet  the 
Earth  when  dried,  and  weighed  again,  was  fcarcc  diminiflied 
at  all  in  its  Weight. 

Another  Experiment  he  alledges  is  of  Helmont's,  who  dried 
200  /.  of  Earth,  and  therein  planted  a  Willow  weighing  5  /. 
which  he  watered  with  Rain  or  diiliiled  Water:  And  to  fc- 
cure  it  from  any  other  Earth  getting  in,  he  covered  it  with  a 
perforated  Tin  Cover.  After  five  Years,  weighing  the  Tree 
with  all  the  Leaves  it  had  born  in  that  time,  he  found  it  to 
weiiih  169  I.  3  Ounces,  but  the  Earth  to  be  diminilhcd  only 
about  1  Ounces  in  its  weight.  Vid.  Boyl's  Scij^t,  Chym.  Part 
^'  pag.  114. 

fomc 

k 


6%  Of  the  Soils.  Book  III. 

fome  in  a  lax  or  Tandy,  fome  a  heavy  or  clayie  Soil ; 
feme  in  a  Mixture  of  both,  fome  in  this,  and  that 
and  the  other  Mould,  fome  in  moill,  fome  in  dry 
Places  {h)  j  ilill  we  find  ProviUon  enough  for  all 
thefe  Purpofes :  Every  Country  abounding  with  its 
proper  Trees  and  Plants  (t),  and  every  Vegetabl;^ 
flourifliing  and  gay,  fomewhere  or  other  about  the 
Globe,  and  abundantly  anfwering  the  Almighty 
Command  of  the  Creator,  when  the  Earth  and  Wa- 
ters were  ordered  to  their  peculia'.  Place,  Qen.  i.  ii. 
And  God  faid^  Let  the  Earth  bring  forth  Grafs^  the 
Herb  yielding  Seed^  and  the  '2''ree  yielding  Fruit  after 
bis  kind.     All  which  we  aftually  fee  is  fo. 

To  this  Convenience  which  the  various  Soils  thac 
coat  the  Earth  are  of  to  the  Vegetables,  we  may 
add  their  great  Uie  and  Benefit  to  divers  Animals, 
to  many  Kinds  of  Quadrupeds,  Fowls,  Infefts,  and 
Reptiles,  who  make  in  the  Earth  their  Places  of 
Repofe  and  Reft,  their  Retreat  in  Winter,  their 
Security  from  their  Enemies,  and  their  Nefts  to  re- 
pofe their  Young  ;  fome  delighting  in  a  lax  and  per- 
vious Mould,  admitting  them  an  eafy  Paflage  ;  and 
others  delighting  in  a  firmer  and  more  folid  Earth, 

S'ev^^coi,   8CC.      TflC  fj^'j  yi  0(A«  |>;;»5>   t*  'j  i^vS'^H<;,   roc.  5  y:.<:^y.se/i~ 
%^c,    T«  j  ^^o-;j>i4i?,    TH  J)  7r«A(rxi»s,    >^  dXc>)<;y   Tec  fO^  o^hvui;,    ret  j 

jjj   rot  y.i^'i' — ' nx/']u  ^   Tati/Tfle,    en  jj  rcc  ofioict   ^vrei   ts  'oft.oi- 

etj    >^  7i»  iiiou.oix  f^yi   T  omtiv,    ot«v   »i    rn   7r»ocf.XXxy^  t?  ^t/ff-{«s« 
Iheophrafi.  de  Cauf.  Plant.  1.  i.  c.  9. 

{c)  Nee  vero  Terr&  ferre  omnei  omnia  pojfnnt. 
llmninihus  Salicesy  crajjif'que  paludibus  Ain't 
Nafcuntitr;  ftenles  faxofis  montibHs  Orn't : 
Littora  Alyrieiis  Ut'tjfitna  :  Jenique  aperios 
Bacchus  amat  colles  :  Aqnilonem  (:y  frigora  Taxi, 
A  [pice  er  extremis  domitum  cultoribus  orbctn, 
Eoafque  domos  Arabnmt  piilofque  Gelonos : 
Divifd  arboribus  pMriiy  i^c,     Vir.  Georg.  L.  2. 

that 


Chap.  n.       Of  the  Strata  of,  &c.  6^ 

that  will  better  fccure  them  againll  Injuries  from 
without. 


CHAP.    11. 

Of  the  various  Strata   or  Beds  obfervahle 
in  the  Earth. 

TH  E  various  Strata  or  Eeds^  although  but  lit- 
tle different  from  the  lall,  yet  will  deferve  a 
diltinft  Confideration. 

By  the  Strata  or  Beds ,  I  mean  thofe  Layers 
of  Minerals  (c?)^  Metals  (^),  Earth,  and  Stone  (c), 
lying  under    that  upper   Stratum^  or  Tegument 

of 

{a)  AUho'  Minerals,  Metals  and  Stones  lie  in  Beds,  and 
have  done  fo  ever  fince  Noah's  Flood,  if  not  from  the  Crea- 
tion ;  yet  it  is  greatly  probable  that  they  have  Power  of  ^r^u'- 
vi^  in  iheir  refptdive  Beds :  That  as  the  Beds  are  robbed  and 
emptied  by  Miners,  fo  after  a  wiiile  they  recruit  again.  Thus 
Viiriol,  Mr.  Be-}/ thinks,  will  grow  by  the  Help  of  the  Air.  So 
^//.'w  doth  the  fame.  We  are  ajfured  (he  faith)  by  the  experi- 
tnccd  Agricola,  That  the  Earth  or  Ore  of  Alum,  being  robbed  of 
its  Salt,  will  in  trait  of  Time  recover  it,  by  being  expofed  to  the 
Air.  Boyl'f  Sufpic.  about  fome  Hid.  Qual.  in  the  Air,  p.  i8. 

(b)  As  to  the  Growth  of  Metals,  there  is  great  Reafon  to 
fufpeift  that  alfo,  from  what  Mr.  Boyl  hath  alledged  in  his  Ob^ 
ferzations  about  the  Grozvth  of  Metals  :  And  in  his  Scept.  Chym, 
Part  6.  pag.  361.     Compare  alfo  Hakezvil's  Apol.  pag.  164. 

And  particularly  as  to  the  Growth  of  iron,  to  the  Inllan- 
ccs  he  gives  from  Plmy,  Fallopius,  Cxfalpinus,  and  others; 
we  may  add,  what  is  well  known  in  the  Fore/i  of  Dean  in 
CLincelicrjhire :  That  the  belt  Iron,  and  moft  in  Quantity, 
that  is  found  there,  is  in  the  old  Cinders,  which  they  melt  o- 
vcr  again.  This  the  Author  of  the  Additions  to  Gloucefler' 
fl)iie  in  Cambd.  Brit,  of  the  laft  Edition,  p.  145.  attributes  to 
the  RemilTnefs  of  the  former  Melters,  m  not  exhauilmg  the 
Ore  :  But  in  all  Probability  it  is  rather  to  be  attributed  to  the 
new  Impregnations  of  the  old  Ore,  or  Cinders,  from  the 
Air,  or  from  fome  fcminal  Principle,  or  plaftick  Quality  ia 
the  Ore  it  felf. 

(c)  As  for  the  Growth  of  Stone,  Mr.  Boyl  gives  two  In- 
lUnccs.    One  is  that  famous  Place  in  France,  called  i.es  Caret 

Coittieies  • 


^4  Of  the  Strata  of        Book  III. 

of  the  Earth  laft  fpoken  of,  all  of  a  prodigious  Ufe 
to  Mankind  :  Some  being  of  great  Ufe  for  Build- 
ing; fome  ferving  for  Ornament  j  fome  furnifliing 
us  with  commodious  Machines,  and  Tools  to  pre- 
pare our  Food,  and  for  Veflels  and  Utenfils,  and  for 
multitudes  of  other  Ufcs ;  fome  ferving  for  Firing 
to  drefs  our  Food,  and  to  guard  us  againft  the  In- 
fults  of  Cold  and  Weather  ;  fome  being  of  great 
Ufe  in  Phyfick,  in  Exchange  and  Commerce,  in 
manuring  and  fertilizing  our  Lands,  in  dying 
and  colouring,  and  ten  thoufand  other  Conveni- 
ences, too  many  to  be  particularly  fpoken  of :  On- 
ly there  is  one  grand  Ufe  of  one  of  thefe  Strata  or 

Coutieres  ':  Where  the  Water  falling  from  the  upper  Parts  of 
the  Cave  to  the  Ground,  doth  prefently  there  condenfe  into  lit- 
tle Stones,  of  fuch  Figures  as  the  Drops,  falling  either  feveraUjy 
or  upon  one  another ,  and  coagulating  prefently  into  Stones  , 
chance  to  exhibit.     Vid.  Scept.  Chym.  pag.  360. 

Such  like  Caves  as  thefe  1  have  my  felf  met  with  in  Eng- 
land ;  particularly  on  the  very  Top  of  Bredon-Hill  in  Wor- 
cefterjlitre,  near  the  Precipice,  facing  Perjhore,  in  or  near  the 
old  Fortrefs,  called  Bembfiury-Camp;  I  law  fome  Years  ago 
I'uch  a  Cave,  which  (if  1  mil-remember  not)  was  lined  with 
thofe  Stalailical  Stones  on  the  Top  and  Sides.  On  the  Top 
they  hung  like  Icicles  great  and  fmall,  and  many  lay  on  the 
Ground.  They  feemed  manifeftly  to  be  made  by  an  Exfuda- 
tion,  or  Exftillation  of  fome  petrifying  Juices  out  of  the 
rocky  Earth  there.  On  the  Spot,  I  thought  it  might  be  from 
the  Rains  foaking  through,  and  carrying  with  it  Impregnati- 
ons from  the  Stone,  the  Hill  being  there  all  rocky.  Hard  by 
the  Cave  is  one  or  more  vaft  Stones,  which  (if  I  miftake  not) 
are  incruftated  with  this  Sparry,  Staladlical  Subftance,  if 
not  wholly  made  of  it.  But  it  is  fo  many  Years  ago  fmce  I 
was  at  the  Place,  and  not  being  able  to  find  my  Notes  about 
it,  I  cannot  fay  whether  the  whole  Stone  is  (in  all  Probabili- 
ty) Spar,  (as  I  think  it  is,)  or  whether  I  found  it  only  cafed 
over  with  it,  notwithftanding  I  was  very  nice  in  examining  it 
then,  and  have  now  fome  of  the  Fragments  by  me,  confifting, 
among  other  (liining  Parts,  of  fome  tranfparent  angular  ones. 

The  other  Inftance  of  Mr.  Boyl,  is  from  Linfchoten,  who 
faith,  that  in  the  Eafi-lndies,  when  they  have  cleared  the  Dia- 
mond Mines  of  all  the  Diamonds,  In  a  few  Tears  Time  they 
fini  in  the  fame  Place  nezv  Diamonds  produced.     Boyl,  Ibid. 

Bed?, 


,  Chap  IT.  the  Earth.  G<y 

Beds,  that  cannot  cafily  be  omitted,  and  that  is, 
thofc  fubtcnancous  Strata  of  Sand,  Gravel,  and 
laxci  Earth  that  admit  o\\  and  facihtate  tlie  Pafla/;c 
of  the  fwcct  Waters  (r/),  and  may  probably  be  the 
Colanders  whereby  they  arc  fwectcncd,  and  tlicn  ac 
the  flimc  time  alfo  convey 'd  to  all  Parts  of  the  ha- 
bitable World,  not  only  through  the  temperate  and 
torrid  Zones-,  but  even  the  farthcll  l^cgions  of  the 
frozen  Poles, 

That  thefe  Strata  are  \.ht  prtncipal PaJJageso^  the 
fweet  Fountain- Waters,  is,  I  think  not  to  be  doubt- 
ed, confidering  that  in  them  the  Waters  are  well 
known  to  p.ifs,  and  in  them  the  Springs  are  found 
by  thofe  that  feck  for  them.  I  fiiy,  the  principal 
Paflligcs,  becaufe  there  arc  other  lubtcrraneous  Guts 
and  Chanels,  Fiflures  and  Pallagcs,  through  which 
many  Times  the  Waters  make  then-  way. 

Now  that  which  in  a'particular  manner  doth  fcem 
to  me  to  manifcil  a  fpecial  Providence  of  God  in 

the 


{^)  It  is  not  onV   agreeable  to  Rcifon,  bui  I  am  tolti   by 
Perf  jns  coiiverfant  in  digging  of  Wells  throii^^hout  this  Coun- 
ty of  Effex,  wlisre  I  live,  that  the  fureil  Beds  in  which  they 
find  Water,   are  Gravely  and  a  co.ufe,  dark  coloured  Sand  ; 
which  Beds  feldom  faii  to  yield  Plenty  of  fweet  Water;    But 
for  Clay,  they  never  tind  Water  therein,  if  it  be  a  llrong,  ftitf 
Cla-j  ;  but  ir  it  be  lax  and  fandy,  Ibmetimes  Springs  are  found 
in  it;  yet  fo  weak,  that  they  will  fcarcely  ferve  the  U;cs  of 
the  fmailefl  Family.     And  fometimcs  they  meet  with  thole 
Beds  lying  next,  under  a   looCe,  black  Mould,  (which,   by 
their  Defcription,  I  judged  to  be  a  fort  of  oazy,  or  to  have 
the  Refemblance  of  an  ancient,  ruQiy  Ground,)   and  in  that 
Cafe  the  Water  is  always  naught,  and  Uinks.     And  laflly,  A- 
nother  fort  of  Bed  they  find  in   J-fjcx,    in  the  clayie- Lands, 
particularly  that  part  called  the  Rodings,  which  yields  Plenty  of 
fweet  Water,  and  that  is  a  Bed  of  white  Earth,  as  though 
made  of  Chalk  and  white  Sand.     This  they  find,  after  they 
have  dug  through  forty,  or  more  Feet  of  Clay ;   and  it  is  fo 
tender  and  moill,   that  it  will  not  lie  upon  the  Spade,  but  they 
arc  forced  to  throw  it  into  their  Bucket  with  their  Hands,  or 
with  Bowls ;  but  when  it  comes  up  into  the  Air,  it  loon  be- 
comes an  hard  white  Stone. 

F  Jiiuj 


^($  Of  the  Strata  of         Book  III. 

the  rcpofining  thefe  watery  Beds  is,  that  they  (hould 
be  difperfed  all  the  World  over,  into  all  Countries, 
and  almoO:  all  Tra6ls  of  Land  :  That  they  Ihould 
fo  entirely,  or  for  the  moft  part,  confift  of  lax,  in- 
cohering  Earth,  and  be  fofeldom  blended  with  other 
impervious  Moulds,  or  if  they  are  fo,  it  is  common- 
ly but  accidentally  j  and  that  they  are  interpofed  be- 
tween the  other  impervious  Beds,  and  fo  are  as  a 
Prop  and  Pillar  to  guard  them  off,  and  to  prevent 
their  finking  in  and  fhutting  up  the  PafTages  of  the 
Waters. 

The  Time  when  thofe  Strata  were  laid,  was  doubt- 
lefs  at  the  Creation,  v^hcn  God  /aid  (Gen.i.p.)  Let 
the  Waters  under  the  Heaven  be  gathered  together  un- 
to one  Place,  and  let  the  dry  Land  appear  ;  or  elfe  at 
the  Deluge",  if,  with  fome  fagacious  Naturalifis^ 
we  fuppofe  the  Globe  of  Earth  to  have  been  difibl- 
Ved  by  the  Flood  {e).  At  that  Time  (whatever  it 
was)  when  the  terraqueous  Globe  was  in  a  chao- 
tick  State,  and  the  earthy  Particles  fubfided,  then 
thofe  feveral  Beds  were  in  all  Probability  repofitedin 
the  Earth,  in  that  commodious  Order  in  which 
they  now  are  found  j  and  that,  as  is  afferted,  ac- 
cording to  the  Laws  (/)  of  Gravity. 


Thus  much  for  the  Variety  of  Beds  wherein  the  Waters 
are  found.  That  it  is  in  thefe  Beds  only  or  chiefly  the  Springs 
run,  is  farther  manifeft  from  the  forcible  Eruption  of  the  Wa- 
ters fometimes  out  of  thofe  watery  Beds.  Of  which  fee 
chap.  4.  Note  (k).  This  Eruption  ftiews,  that  the  Waters 
c-ome  from  fome  Eminence  or  other,  lying  at  a  Diftance,  and 
being  ciofely  pent  up  within  the  watery  Stratum,  by  the  clayie 
Strata,  the  Waters  with  force  mount  up,  when  the  Strata 
above  are  opened. 

(f)  V.  Dr.  Woadward'%  Effay,  Part  1.     Steno's  Prodr.  ^c. 

If)  Id.  ib.  pag.  z8.  and  74.  But  Dr.  Leigh  in  his  Nat.  Hifto- 
ry  of  Lancaflj'ire,  fpeaking  of  the  Coal-pits,  denies  the  Strata 
to  lie  according  to  the  Laws  of  Gravitation,  faying  the  Strata 
are  a  Bed  of  Marie,  afterwards  Free-Stone,  next  iron- Stone, 
then  Coal,  or  Kennel- Mine^  tkea  fome  other  Strata,  and  again 
Coal,  v<^ 

But 


Chap.  III.  the  Earth,  67 

But  upon  a  ftri<flcr  Enquiry  into  the  Matter,  finding  1  Iiad 
rcafon  to  fufpecft  that  few,  if  any,  adtually  had  tried  the  Ex- 
periment, I  was  minded  to  brmg  the  Thing  to  the  Tcft  of 
Experiment  my  fcif;  and  having  an  Opportunity,  on  ylpr'tl 
II.  1711.  I  cauled  divers  Fhues  to  be  bored,  laymg  the  le- 
vcral  Strata  by  themfelves ;  which  afterwards  I  weighed  with 
all  Stricftnefs,  firft  in  Air,  then  in  Water,  taking  C^are  that  no 
Air-bubbles,  cs-c.  might  obllruci  the  Accuracy  of  the  Experi- 
ment. The  Refult  was,  that  in  my  Yard,  the  Strata  were 
gradually  fpscifically  heavier  and  heavier,  the  lower  and  low- 
er they  went;  and  the  upper  which  was  Clay,  was  confide- 
rably  fpecifically  lighter  than  the  lower  Stratum;  which  was 
firfl  a  loofe  Sand,  then  a  Gravel.  In  which  stratum  princi- 
pally the  Springs  run  that  fupply  my  Well. 

But  in  my  Eields,  where  three  Places  were  bored  (to  no 
great  Depth)  I  found  below  the  upper  (fuperficial  Stratum)  si 
deep  Bed  ot  Sand  only,  which  was  of  diflcrent  Colours  and 
Conlillence,  which  I  weighed  as  before,  together  with  the 
Virgin-Mould;  but  they  were  all  of  the  fame,  or  nearly  the 
fame  fpecirtck  Gravity,  both  out  of  the  fame  Hole,  and  out 
of  different  Holes,  although  the  Sand  was  at  lall  To  gravelly, 
that  it  hinder'd  our  boring  any  deeper. 

Upon  this,  fearing  lelt  fomc  Error  might  be  in  the  former 
Experiments,  I  try'd  them  over  again  ;  and  that  with  the 
fame  SucceTs. 

After  this,  I  made  fome  Experiments  in  fome  deep  Chalk- 
Pits,  with  the  Flints,  Chalk,  o-c.  above  and  below;  but  the 
Succefs  was  not  fo  uniform  as  before. 

Acquainting  our  juflly  renowned  B,  S.  with  thefc  Experi- 
ments, they  ordered  their  Operator  to  experiment  the  Strata, 
of  a  Coal-Pit;  the  Succefs  whereof  may  be  feen  in  PbiloJ. 
Tranf.  Nr.  336, 


CHAP.   III. 

Of  the  Subterraneous  Caverns^  and  the 
Vulcand's. 

I  Shall  take  notice  of  the  fubterraneous  Caverns, 
Grotto's  and  Vulcano's,  bccaufe  they  arc  made 
an  Objc6lion  {a)  againit  the  prefcnt  Contrivance  and 

Stru6lure 

{a)  Nemo  dixerit  terram   pulchrierem  ejfc  quod  cavernofa  fitf 
quid  dchijcat  in  muliis  locis,  quod  dtfnipta  caveis  o"  fpattis  tn- 


6%         The  Cave ffis  and Vulcano^s.  BookllL 

Strufture  of  the  Globe.  But,  if  well  confidered, 
they  will  be  found  to  be  wife  Contrivances  of  the 
Creator,  ferving  to  great  Ufes  of  the  Globe,  and 
Ends  of  God's  Government.  Befides  many  fecret, 
grand  Functions  and  Operations  of  Nature  in  the 
Bowels  of  the  Earth,  that  in  all  Probability  thcfe 
Things  may  minider  unto,  they  are  of  great  Ufe  to 
the  Countries  where  they  are  {b).  To  inftance  in 
the  very  worfl  of  the  Things  named,  'viz.  the 
Vulcano's  and  ignivomous  Mountains  ;  although 
they  are  fome  of  the  moft  terrible  Shocks  of  the 
Globe,  and  dreadful  Scourges  of  the  fmful  Inhabi- 
tants thereof,  and  may  ferve  them  as  Emblems,  and 
Prefages  of  Hell  it  felf;  yet  even  thefe  have  their 
great  Ufes  too,  being  as  Spiracles  or  Tunnels  {c)  to 
the  Countries  where  they  are,  to  vent  the  Fire  and 
Vapours  that  would  make  difmal  Havock,  and  of- 
tentimes a6lually  do  fo,  by  dreadful  Succuffions  and 
Convulfionsof  the  Earth.  Nay,  if  the  Hypothefis 
of  a  central  Fire  and  Waters  be  true,    thefe  Out- 


anibiis ;  iifque  mitto  ordine  difpofitis,  nulla  forma :  nee  qua.  a- 
litid  contincant  quam  tenebras  cr  Jordes;  unde  graves  ojr  peftlfe- 
r&  exhalationes,  terra  motus,  &c.     Buruet  ubi  fupr.  c.  7. 

(h)  The  Zirchmtzer  Sea  in  CarnloU,  is  of  great  Ufe  to  the 
Inhabitants  of  that  Country,  by  affording  them  Fifli,  Fowls, 
Fodder,  Seeds,  Deer,  Swine,  and  other  Beafts,  Carriage  for 
their  Goods,  o'c.  Vid.  Phil.  Tranf.  Nr.  191,  Sec.  or  Lozvth-, 
uibrldg.  Vol.  z.  p.  306,  &c.  where  you  have  put  together  in 
one  View,  what  is  difperfed  in  divers  of  the  Tranfadions. 
This  Sea  or  Lake  proceeds  from  fome  fubterraneous  Grotto, 
or  Lake,  as  is  made  highly  probable  by  Mr.  Valvafor,  ibid. 

The  Grotto  Podpetfchio  may  be  another  Inftance,  that  the 
very  fubterraneous  Lakes  may  be  of  Ufe,  even  to  the  Inha- 
bitants of  the  Surface  above  :  Of  which  fee  Lo~vth.  ubi  fupr. 
fig'  3n-  Sturmius  alfo  may  be  confulted  herein  his  Philof  Ec- 
letl.  Exercit.  11.  de  Terr&  mot.  particularly  in  Chap.  3.  fome 
of  the  moft:  eminent  Specus's  are  enumerated,  and  fome  o£ 
their  Ufes. 

(c)  Crebri  fpeciis  [remedium]  pr^bent.  PrAconceptum  enlm 
fpintum  exhalant :  quod  in  ccrtis  notatur  oppidis,  qu£  minus  qua- 
tiuntur,  crebris  ad  elnviem  cuniculis  cavata,  Flin,  Hill,  Nat. 
iib.  I.  cap.  81. 

lets 


Chap.  III.  The  Caverns  andVulcano^s.         6<) 

lets  fccm  to  be  of  grcatefl:  Vic  to  the  Peace  and 
Q^iict  of  the  terraqueous  Globe,  in  venting  the 
fubterraneous  Heat  and  Vapours  >  vhich,  if  pent 
up,  would  make  dreadful  and  dangerous  Commoti- 
ons of  the  Earth  and  Waiters. 

It  may  be  then  accounted  as  a  fpecial  Favour  of 
the  divine  Providence,  as  is  obferved  by  the  Author 
before  praifcd  (r/),  "  That  there  are  fcarcely  any 
"  Countries,  that  are  much  annoyed  \vith  Earth- 
"  quakes,  that  have  not  one  of  thefe  fiery  Vents. 
''  And  thefe,  (fiith  he)  are  conflantly  all  in  Flames 
"  whenever  any  Earthquake  happens,  thcydifgorg- 
"  ingthat  Fire,  which  whilll  underneath,  was  the 
"  Caufe  of  the  Dilaller.  Indeed,  (faith  he,)  were 
"  it  not  for  thefe  i^ix^a/zV///^,  whereby  it  thus gain- 
"  eth  an  Exit^  'twould  rage  in  the  Bowels  of  the 
"  Earth  much  more  furioufly,  and  make  greater 
*'  Havock  than  now  it  doth.  So,  that  though 
"  thofe  Countries,  where  there  are  fuch  P''idca},o\^ 
"  are  ufually  more  or  lefs  troubled  with  Earih- 
"  quakes  j  yet,  were  thefe  Vulcano's  wanting,  they 
''  would  be  much  more  annoyed  with  them  than 
"  now  they  are  j  yea,  in  all  Probability  to  that  Dc" 
''  gree,  as  to  render  the  Earth,  for  a  valt  Space 
*'  around  them,  perfe6lly  uninhabitable.  In  one 
"  word,  (laith  he)  fo  beneficial  are  thefe  to  the 
"  Territories  where  they  are,  that  there  do  not 
"  -want  Indances  of  fome  which  have  bcenrefcued, 
"  and  wholly  delivered  from  Earthquakes  by  the 
"  breaking  forth  of  anew  Vulcano  there  j  this  con- 
"  tinually  difcharging  that  Matter,  which  being  till 
"  then  barricaded  up,  and  imprifoned  in  the  Bowels 
"  of  the  Earth,  was  the  occalion  of  very  great  and 
"  frequent  Calamities".  Thus  far  that  ingenious 
Author. 

{f)  Woodward's  Effay,  Part  3.  Cof.'fctl.  13. 

F  2  CHAP, 


70  Book  IIL 

CHAP.    IV. 

Of  the  Mountains  and  Valleys, 

H  E  laft  Thing  I  fhall  take  notice  of  relating  to 
the  Earth,  fhall  be  the  Hills  and  Valleys.  Thefe 
the  eloquent  Theorift  owns  to  "  contain  fomewhat 
"  augull  and  flately  in  the  beholding  of  them,  that 
''  infpircth  the  Mind  with  great  Thoughts  and  Paf- 
''  fion?,  that  we  naturally  on  fuch  OccaGons  think 
*'  of  God  and  his  Greatnefs".  But  then,  at  the 
Ame  Time  he  faith,  "  The  Hills  are  the  greatcd 
"  Examples  of  Ruin  and  Confufion ;  that  they  have 
''  neither  Form  nor  Beauty,  nor  Shape,  nor  Order, 
''•  any  more  than  the  Clouds  in  the  Air  5  that  they 
*'  confilt  not  of  any  proportion  of  Parts,  referable 
"  to  any  Defign,  nor  have  the  leafl;  Footrteps  of 
"  Art  or  Counfel ".  Confequcntly  one  grand  Part 
of  this  lower  Creation,  even  the  whole  prefent  Face 
of  our  terraqueous  Globe,  according  to  this  inge- 
nious Author,  is  a  Work  of  mere  Chance,  a  Struc- 
ture in  which  the  Creator  did  not  concern  himfelf. 

Part  of  this  Charge  I  have  already  briefly  anfwer- 
ed,  and  rny  Survey  now  leads  metofhew,  that  the 
Mountains  are  fo  far  from  being  a  Blunder  of  Chance, 
a  Work  without  Defign,  that  they  are  a  noble, 
ufeful,  yea,  a  neccflary  part  of  our  Globe  (a). 

And 

(a)  Though  there  are  fome  that  think  Mountains  to  be  a  De- 
formity  to  the  Earth,  Bzc.  yet  if  xvell  confidered,  they  will  be 
found  as  much  to  conduce  to  the  Beauty  and  Conveniency  of  the 
Vmverfe,  as  any  of  the  other  Parts.  Nature  (faith  Pliny)  puf 
■pofely  framed  them  for  ynany  excellent  Ufes ;  partly  to  tame  the 
Violence  of  greater  Rivers,  to  Jirengthen  certain  Joints  within 
the  Veins  and  Bozvels  of  the  Earth,  to  break  the  Force  of  the. 
Sea's  Inundation,  and  for  the  Safety  of  the  Earth's  Inhabitants^ 
whether  Beafls  or  Men.  That  they  make  much  for  the  Prote- 
ilion  of  Beafts,  the  Pfalmifi  teflifies.  The  higheft  Hills  are  a 
Refuge  for  the  wild  Goats,  and  the  Rocks  for  Conies.    The 

Kingly 


Chap.  IV.       The  Mountainside.  yx 

And  in  the  firll  Place,  as  to  the  Bufincfs  of  Or- 
nament, Beauty,  and  Plcalurc,  1  may  appeal  to  all 
Alcn's  Senlcs,  whether  the  grateful  Variety  of  Hills 
and  Dales,  be  not  more  plcafing  than  the  lur^eil 
continued  Planes.  Let  thofe  who  make  it  their  Bu- 
iinefs  to  vifit  the  Globe,  to  divert  their  Sight  with 
the  various  Profpefts  of  the  Earth  j  let  thclc,  I  fay, 
judge  whether  the  far  dillant  Parts  of  the  Earth 
would  be  fo  well  worth  vifiting,  if  the  Earth  was 
everywhere  of  an  even,  level,  globous  Surface,  or 
one  large  Plane  of  many  looo  Miles  j  and  not  ra- 
ther, as  now  it  is,  whether  it  be  not  far  more  plea- 
ling  to  the  Eye,  to  view  from  the  Tops  of  the 
Mountains  the  fubjacent  Vales  and  Streams,  and 
the  far  diltant  Hills >  and  again  from  the  Vales  to 
behold  the  furrounding  Mountains.  The  elegant 
Strains  and  lofty  Fliglns,  both  of  the  ancient  and 
modern  Poets  on  thefe  Occalions,  are  Tcib'monies 
of  the  Senfc  of  Mankind  on  this  Configuration  of 
the  Earth. 

But  be  the  Cafe  as  it  will  as  to  Beauty,  which  is 
the  leall  valuable  Confideration,  we  fhall  find  as  to 
Convenience,  this  Configuration  of  the  Earth  far 
the  moil  commodious  on  i'cveral  Accounts. 

I.  As  it  is  the  moft  (alubrious,  of  great  ufe  to 
the  Prefervation  or  Relloration  of  the  Health  of 
Man.  Some  Conflitutions  are  indeed  of  fo  happy 
a  Strength,  and  fo  confirmed  an  Health,  as  to  be 


Kindly  Prophet  had  likewife  learnt  the  Safety  of  thofe  by  his 
own  Experience^  when  he  alfo  zvas  fain  to  make  a  Mountain  his 
Refuge  from  the  Fury  of  his  Mafler  Saul,  who  profecuted  him  in 
the  IVildcrnefs.  True  indeed,  fuch  Places  as  thefe  keep  their 
Neighbours  poor,  as  being  mofi  barren,  but  yet  they  prefervt 
them  fafe,     as   being    mojl    firong  ;    witnefs    our    unconquered 

Wales  and  Scothnd. Wherefore  a  good  Author  doth  rightly 

call  them  Nature's  Buhvarks,  cajl  up  at  God  Almighty's  Char- 
ges, the  Scorns  and  Curbs  of  -jiCiorious  Armies ;  which  made  iht 
Barbarians  in  Curlius  fo  confident  of  their  own  Safety,  6cc.  Bi- 
(bop  iVilkia's  World  in  the  Moon,  f>ag.  114. 

^  ^  indifTercnc 


72-  The  Mount ahs  Book  III. 

indifferent  to  almod:  any  Plnce  or  Temperature  of 
the  Air  :  But  then  oihers  are  fo  weakly  and  Feeble, 
as  not  to  be  able  to  bear  one,  bur  can  live  comfort- 
ably in  another  Place.  With  fome,  the  finer  and 
more  fubtile  Air  oF  the  Hills  doth  belt  agree,  who 
are  languifliing  and  dying  in  the  feculent  and 
grofler  Air  of  great  Towns,  or  even  the  warmer, 
and  vaporous  Air  of  the  Valleys  and  Waters :  But 
contrary  wife,  others  languifh  on  the  Hills,  and  grow 
lufty  and  ftrong  in  the  warmer  Air  of  the  Valleys. 

So  that  this  Opportunity  of  fliifting  our  Abode 
from  the  warmer  and  more  vaporous  Air  of  the  Val- 
leys, to  the  colder  and  more  fubtile  Air  of  the  Hills, 
or  from  the  Hills  to  the  Vales,  is  an  admirable  Eafe- 
rnent,  Refrefhment,  and  great  Benefit  to  the  vale- 
tudinarian, feeble  part  of  Mankind,  affording  thofe 
an  eafy  and  comfortable  Life,  who  would  other- 
wife  live  mifcrably,  languiFh  and  pine  away. 

2.  To  this  lalutary  Conformation  of  the  Earth, 
we  may  add  another  great  Convenience  of  the  Hills, 
and  that  is,  in  affording  commodious  Places  for  Ha- 
bitation >  "  ferving  (as  an  eminent  Author  (c*)  word- 
eth  it)  "  as  Skreens  to  keep  off  the  cold  and  nip- 
''  ping  Blads  of  the  northern  and  ealterly  Winds, 
*'  and  reflecting  the  benign  and  cherifhing  Sun- 
"  Beams,  and  lb  rendering  our  Habitations  both 
"  more  comfortable  and  more  chcarly  in  Winter  5 
"  and  promoting  the  Growth  of  Herbs  and  Fruit- 
"  Trees,  and  the  Maturation  of  the  Fruits  in  Sum- 
"  mer. 

3.  Another  Benefit  of  the  Hills  is,  that  they  ferve 
for  the  Produftion  of  great  Varieties  of  Herbs  and 
Trees  {c).     And  as  there  was  not  a  better  Judge  of 

thofe 


(^)  Ray';  Wifdom  of  God,  &c.  pa^.  2,51.  Dijfolution  of  th$ 
World,  pag.  35. 

(c)  Theophrafius  having  reckoned  up  the  Trees  that  delight 
moil  in  the  Hiils,  and  others  in  the  Valleys,  obferveth,  "Airuf 


Chap.  IV.  afid  Valleys,  73 

thofe  Matters,  fo  I  cannot  give  a  better  Account  of 
this  Convenience,  than  in  the  Words  of  the  lall 
cited  Famous  Author,  the  late  moll  eminent  and 
learned  Mr.  Ray  (^),  (who  hath  fo  fully  difcuHed 
this  Subjcft  I  am  upon,  that  it  is  fcarcc  pofliblc  to 
tread  out  of  his  Steps  therein).  His  Obfervation  is, 
"  That  the  Mountains  do  efpccially  abound  with 
"  different  Species  of  Vegetables,  bccaufe  of  the 
"  great  Diverfity  of  Soils  that  arc  found  there,  cvc- 
"  ry  Vertex  or  Eminence  almoil,  affording  new 
"  Kinds.  Now  thefe  Plants,  (f;ith  he,)  ferve  part- 
"  ly  for  the  Food  and  Suilcnance  of  luch  Anmials 
'*  as  are  proper  to  the  Mountains,  partly  for  medi- 
"  cinal  Ufcsj  the  chief  Phyfick,  Herbs  and  Roots, 
"  and  the  bell  in  their  Kiiids  growing  there :  It  bc- 
*'  ing  remarkable,  that  the  grcatell  and  moll  luxu- 
"  riant  Species  in  moil  Genera  of  Plants  are  native 
''  of  the  Mountains. 

4.  Another  Convenience  which  my  laff  named 
"  learned  Friend  obferves  {e)  '\^  "  That  the  Moun- 
"  tains  ferve  for  the  Harbour,  Entertainment,  and 
"  Maintenance  of  various  Animals j  Birds,  Beads 
"  and  Infcdts,  that  breed,  feed  and  frequent  there. 
"  For,  (faith  he)  the  highcft  Tops  and  Pikes  of 
*'  the  Alps  themfelves  are  not  delUtute  of  their  In- 
''  habitants,  the  Ibex  or  Stein-buck^  the  Rupicapra 
"  or  Chamois.^  among  Quadrupeds  >  the  Lagopus  a- 
"  mong  Birds.  And  1  my  felf  (faith  he)  have  ob- 
"  ferved  beautiful  Papilws^  and  Store  of  other  In- 
"  fefts  upon  the  Tops  of  fome  of  the  Alpine  Moun- 
"  tains.  Nay,  the  highell  Ridges  of  many  of  thefc 

fee  3  OTX  X.0I1CC  T  o^av  xj  T  Trehur,  fini^u  ^"  y^  xxWitu  ri)  o-^ei 
rx  c*  T«~i  7r£<J(«/{  Vi»f3-  t^HTiU  i)  TTiTf  jc?^'""^  ^  |Ja<uii  y^  t  k*^- 
9r<?»,  T<*  o^Hvci.  Theoph.  Htft.  Pi.  I.  3.  C.  4.  "AtxiIx  3  ci>  to^j 
iixHoii  TiVfl/s  x«AA('<w  '/'".^    '^  .M(iAA«»  e j;o9-fvH' — —  T«  fi^  yi  ^i- 

f4.  c.  I. 

i^d)  IVtfdom  of  Gcdy  p.  251, 
{t)  Ul>i  fiipra, 

^^  Mountains 


74  ^^^s  Mount ains  Book  III. 

*'  Mountains,  ferve  for  the  Maintenance  of  Cat- 
"  tie,  for  the  Service  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the 
"  Valleys. 

f.  Another  Thing  he  obferves  is,  "  That  thofe 
"  long  Ridges  and  Chains  of  lofty  and  topping 
"  Mountains,  which  run  through  whole  Continents 
"  Eaft  and  Weft  (/},  ferve  to  Itop  the  Evagation  of 
*'  the  Vapours  to  the  North  and  South  in  hot  Coun- 
*'  tries,  condeniing  them  like  Alembick  Heads  into 
"  Water,  and  fo  (according  to  his  Opinion)  by  a 
"  kind  of  external  Diftillation  giving  original  to 
*'  Springs  and  Rivers  j  and  likewife  by  amailing, 
"  cooling  and  conftipating  of  them,  turn  them  into 
"  Rain,  by  thofe  Means  rend  ring  the  fervid  Regi- 
"  onsofthe  torrid  Zone  habitable. 

To  thefe  might  be  added  fome  other  Ufes  and 
Conveniences  {g)\  as   that  the  Hills  ferve  to  the 


(/)  M.iny  have  taken  Notice,  that  fome  of  the  greateft  E- 
minences  of  the  World  run  generally  Eaft  and  Weil,  of  which 
take  the  late  ingenious  and  learned  Dr.  Niehols's  Account, 
^Confer,  zvith  a  The'ifty  Part  l.  pag.  191.]  To  go  no  fartker 
than  our  oivn  Conntr'^,  all  our  great  Ridges  of  Hiils  in  Eng' 
land  run  Ealt  and  Welt;  fo  do  the  Alps  in  Italy,  and  in  [ome 
Meafure  the  Pyrenees ;  fo  do  the  Mountains  of  the  Moon  in  A- 
frick,  and  fo  do  Mount  Taurus  and  Caucafus.  This  he  fauh 
is  a  wife  Contrivance  to  prevent  the  Vapours,  which  ivould  all 
run  Northwards,  ar.d  leave  no  Rains  in  the  Mediteiranean 
Countries. 

{g)  That  the  Generation  of  many  of  the  Clouds  is  owing 
to  the  Hills,  appears  from  the  Obfervations  of  the  ingenious 
and  learned  Dr.  'Jch.  Jam.  Scheuchzer  of  Zurich,  and  Mr. 
^oach.  Frid.  Creitlovius  cited  by  him.  They  obferved  at  Sun- 
riling,  divers  Clouds  detached  by  the  Heat  of  the  Sun,  from 
fome  of  the  Tops  of  the  ^llps,  ckc.  upon  all  which  their  Ob- 
fervations, the  Conclulion  is,  Mirati  fummam  Creatoris  fap't- 
entiam,  qui  o'  id  quod  paulo  ante  nulli  nobis  ufui  effe  videbatur, 
maxitnis  rebus  defimaverat,  adeoque  ex  illo  tempore  dubitare  coe- 
fi,  num  Nubes  ejfent  future,  ft  ifliufmodi  Monte s  v  Petr&  nort 
darentur.  Hypothefi  hac  (iante,  elucefceret  pertnagna  utilitas^ 
imo  necejfttas,  quani  Helviticae  Alpes  non  nobis  tantitm  accolis 
fed  CT*  -vtcinis  aliis  regionibus  pr&flant,  difpenfando,  quas  gignunt 
Niibesy  Ventosy  Aquas.     Schcuch.  Iter.  Alpin.  2.  p.  zq. 

Generation 


Chap.  IV.  and  Valleys.  75- 

Generation  of  Minerals  and  Metals  [h"^.^  and  that  in 
them  principally  arc  the  moll  ufeful  Follllcs  found; 
or  if  not  found  and  generated  only  in  them,  yet  at 
lead  all  thcfe  fubterrancous  Treafures  are  mod  ca- 
fily  come  at  in  them  :  Alfo  their  Ufe  to  fcvtrai  Na- 
tions of  the  Earth,  in  being  Boundaries  and  Bull- 
warks  to  them.  But  there  is  only  one  Ulc  more 
that  I  fhall  infill  on,   and  that  is, 

G.  And  ladly,  That  it  is  to  the  Hills  that  the 
Fountains  owe  their  Rile,  and  the  Rivers  their  Con- 
veyance. As  it  is  not  proper,  fo  neither  fliall  1  here 
enter  into  any  Difpute  about  the  Originc  of  Springs, 
commonly  afhgned  by  curious  and  learned  Philolo- 
phers.  But  whether  their  Originebe  from  condenf- 
ed  Vapours,  as  fome  think  (/)  >  or  from  Rains  fal- 
ling, as  others-,  or  whether  they  are  derived  from 
the  Sea  by  way  of  Attradion,  Percolation,  orDi- 
dillationj  or  whether  all  thefc  Caufes  concur,  or  on- 
ly fome.  Hill  the  Hills  arc  the  grand  Agent  in  this 
prodigious  Benefit  to  all  the  Earth  :  Thofe  vail  Maf- 
les  and  Ridges  of  Earth  ferving  as  fo  many  huge  A- 
Umhicks  or  Cula  in  this  noble  \Vork  of  Nature. 

But  be  the  Modus^  or  the  Method  Nature  takes  in 
this  great  Work  as  it  will,  it  is  fufficient  to  my  Pur- 
pofe,  that  the  Hills  area  grand  Agent  in  this  fo  no- 
ble and  neceffiry  a  Work  :  And  confcquently,  that 
thofe  vail  Maflcs  and  lofty  Piles  are  not  as  they  are 
charged,  fuch  rude  and  ufelefs  Excrefcences  of  our 
ill-formed  Globe  j   but  the  admirable  Tools  of  Na- 

(/;)  l^et  us  take  here  O/.  Mag.  Obfervanon  ot  his  Northera 
Mountains,  Monies  excelfi  funt,  fed  pro  majori  parte  fienlcs^  cr 
andi ;  in  quibus  fere  nil  aliud  pro  tncoUrum  commodttate  er 
conftrvatione g'tgnitur,  quam  inexhaujla pretioforum  Metalhrum 
uhertas,  qua  fata  opulenti,  fertiUfque  funt  in  omnibus  viu  ne- 
ceji'driis,  forfiran  cr  fuperfims  aliunde  fi  lilei  conquirendis,  una- 
nimique  robore,  ac  virtbus,  ubi  -vis  contra  hxc  nature  dona  in- 
tentara  fuerit,  defendendis.  Acre  enhn  genus  hotntnuT7t  eft,  &C. 
Ol.  Mag.  Hift.  L.  6.  Praef.  See  alio  Sir  Robert  Sibbald's  Frodr. 
Nat.  Hift.  Scot.  p.  47. 

ij)  See  Book  1.  Chap.  3.  Note  [I). 

ture 


7<5  I'he  Mountains  Book  III. 

ture,  contrived  and  ordered  by  the  infinite  Creator, 
to  do  one  of  its  mod  ufefLil  Works,  and  to  diTpenfe 
this  great  Blefling  to  all  Parts  of  the  Earth  j  without 
which  neither  Animals  could  live,  nor  Vegetables 
fcarcely  grow,  nor  perhaps  Minerals,  Merals,  or 
Foffiles  receive  any  Increafe.  For  was  the  Surface 
of  the  Earth  even  and  level,  and  the  middle  Parts 
of  its  Iflands  and  Continents,  not  mountainous  and 
high,  (as  now  it  is)  it  is  moit  certain  there  could  be 
no  Defcent  for  the  Rivers,  no  Conveyance  for  the 
Waters  i  but  inftead  of  gliding  along  thcfe  gentle 
Declivities  which  the  higher  Lands  now  afford  them 
quite  down  to  the  Sea,  they  would  (lagnare,  and  per- 
haps flink,  and  alfo  drown  large  Tracts  of  Land, 

But  indeed,  without  Hills,  as  there  could  be  no 
Rivers,  fo  neither  could  there  be  any  Fountains,  or 
Springs  about  the  Earth  >  becaufe,  if  we  could  fup^ 
pofe  a  Land  could  be  well  watered  (which  I  think 
not  poflible)  without  the  higher  Lands,  the  Waters 
could  find  no  Defcent,  no  Pafilige  through  any  com- 
niodious  Out-lets,  by  Virtue  of  their  own  Gravity  j 
and  therefore  could  not  break  out  into  thole  com- 
modious Pallages  and  Currents,  which  we  every 
v/here  almoll  find  in,  or  near  the  Hills,  and  fel- 
dom,  or  never  in  large  and  fpacious  Planes ;  and 
when  we  do  find  them  in  them,  it  is  generally 
at  great  and  inconvenient  Depths  of  the  Earth  j 
nay,  thofe  very  fubterraneous  Waters,  that  are  any 
v/here  met  with  by  digging  in  thefe  Planes,  are  in 
all  Probability  owing  to  the  Hills,  either  near  or 
far  diftant :  As  among  other  Inllances  may  be 
made  out,  from  the  forcible  Eruption  of  the  fub- 
terraneous Waters  in  digging  Wells,  in  the  lo'wer 
jinfiria^  and  the  Territories  of  Moclena^  and  Bologna 
in  Jtaly^  mentioned  by  my  fore-named  learned 
Friend  Mr.  Ray  {k).    Or  if  there  be  any  fiich  Place 

found 

(k)  ^f(3wy;£«r  Blundel,  related  to  the  Parifian  Academy,  what 
Device  the  Inhabitants  of  the  lower  Aultria,  [which  is  enccm- 


Chap.  TV.  aud  Valleys.  yy 

found  throughout  the  E.irth,  that  is  devoid  of 
Mountains  and  yet  well  watered,  as  perhaps  fomc 
fmull  lilmus  m.iy  i  yet  in  this  very  C.ife,  that  whole 
JMafs  oF  Land  is  no  other  than  as  one  Mountaia 
delcending,  ('though  unperceivedly)  gently  down 
from  the  iVJid-land  Parts  to  the  Sea,  as  moll  other 
Lands  do  ;  as  is  manirell  from  the  Dcfccnt  of  their 
Rivers,  the  Principal  of  which  in  moll  Countries 
have  generally  their  Rife  in  the  more  lofty  Mid- 
land Parts. 

And  now  confidcring  what  hath  been  faid  con- 
cerning this  lall  Uie  of  the  Hills,  there  are  two  or 
three  Ads  of  the  divine  Providence  obfervable 
therein.  One  is,  that  all  Countries  throughout  the 
whole  World,  fhould  enjoy  this  great  Benefit  of 
Mountains,  placed  here  and  there,  at  due  and  pro- 
per Diltances,  to  afford  thefc  feveral  Nations  this 
excellent  and  moil  nccefTiu-y  Element  the  Waters. 


pajfsd  ZL'ith  the  Mountains  o/Stiria"!  are  wunt  to  u^e  to  Jill  their 
IVclli  xvith  Water.  They  dig  in  the  Earth  to  the  Depth  of  i^ 
and  lo  Fett,  till  they  conte  to  an  Ai\r'dla.  [clammy  liartli]— — 
zi'hich  they  bore  through  fo  deep,  till  the  Waters  break  forcibly 
out  ;  which  Water  it  is  probable  comes  from  the  nei'^hbouring 
Mountains  in  fubterranecus  Chanels.  And  Caiiiniis  obfervedy 
that  in  many  Places  of  the  Territory  of  Modena  and  Bologna  in 
Italy,  thcj  make  themfclves  Wells  by  the  like  Artijice,  ike.  By 
this  Means  the  fame  Seig.  Caflini  tnade  a  Fountain  at  the  Ca~ 
file  of  Urbin,  that  cajl  up  the  Water  five  Foot  high  above  the  le- 
vel of  the  Ground.     Ray'i  Difc.  i.  pag.  40.  ttli  plma. 

Upon  Enquiry  of  fomc  Ikilful  Workmen,  whole  Biifmcfs  it 
is  ro  dig  Wells,  crc.  whether  they  had  ever  met  with  the  like 
Cale,  as  thefe  in  this  Note,  they  told  me  they  had  met  with 
it  in  Ejfcx,  where  after  they  had  dug  to  50  Foot  Depth,  the 
Man  in  the  Well  obferved  the  clayie  Bottom  to  fwell  and  be- 
pm  to  fend  out  Water,  and  ftamping  with  his  Foot  to  ilop  the 
Water,  lie  made  way  for  fo  fuddain  and  forcible  a  Flux  of 
Water,  that  before  he  could  get  into  his  Bucket,  he  was  a- 
bove  his  Waltc  in  Water;  which  foon  afcended  to  17  Feet: 
height,  and  there  flayed  :  And  although  they  often  with  great 
Labour  endeavoured  to  empty  the  Well,  in  order  to  finilh 
their  Work,  yet  they  could  never  do  it,  but  wcie  forced  to 
kavc  it  as  it  was. 

For 
I 


73  The  Mountains  Book  III. 

For  according  to  Nature's  Tendency,  when  the 
Earth  and  Waters  werefepavated,  and  order'd  to  their 
feveral  Places,  the  Earth  rnufl  have  been  of  an  even 
Surface,  or  nearly  fo. ,  The  feveral  component  Parts 
of  the  Earth,  mufl:  have  fubfidcd  according  to  their 
feveral  fpecifick  Gravities,  and  at  lall  have  ended  in 
a  large,  even,  fpherical  Surface,  every  where  equi- 
diftant  from  the  Center  of  the  Globe.  But  that 
inftead  of  this  Form,  fo  incommodious  for  the 
Conveyance  of  the  Waters,  it  fhould  be  jetted  out 
every  where  into  Hills  and  Dales,  fo  necefTary  for 
that  purpofe,  is  a  manifefl  Sign  of  an  efpecial  Provi- 
dence of  the  wife  Creator. 

So  another  plain  Sign  of  the  fame  efpecial  Pro- 
vidence of  God,  in  this  Matter,  is,  that  generally 
throughout  the  whole  World,  the  Earth  is  fo  dif- 
pos'd,  fo  order'd,  fo  well  laid  j  I  may  fiy,  that  the 
Mid-land  Parts,  or  Parts  fartheft  from  the  Sea,  are 
commonly  the  higheft;  Which  is  manifefl,  I  have 
faid,  from  the  Defcent  of  the  Rivers.  Now  this  is 
an  admirable  Provifion  the  wife  Creator  hath  made 
for  the  commodious  Paflages  of  the  Rivers,  and  for 
draining  the  feveral  Countries,  and  carrying  off  the 
fuperfluous  Waters  from  the  whole  Earth,  which 
would  be  as  great  an  Annoyance,  as  now  they  are 
a  Convenience. 

Another  providential  Benefit  of  the  Hills  fupply- 
ing  the  Earth  with  Water,  is,  that  they  are  not 
only  inflrumcntal  thereby,  to  the  Fertility  of  the 
Valleys,  but  to  their  own  alfo  (/)  5  to  the  Verdure 
of  the  Vegetables  without,   and  to  the  Increment 


and  Vigour  of  the  Treafures  within  them. 


Thus 


(/)  As  the  Hills  being  higher,  are  naturally  difpofed  to  be 
drier  than  the  Valleys;  lb  kind  Nature  hath  provided  the 
greater  Supplies  of  Moifture  for  them,  fuch  at  leaft  of  them 
2S  do  not  afcend  above  the  Clouds  and  Vapours.  For,  be- 
fides  the  Fountains  continually  watering  them,    they  have 

more 


Chap.  IV.  dnd  Valleys.  79 

Thus  having  vindicated  the  prefcnt  Form  and 
Fabrick  of  the  Earth,  as  dilbibutcd  into  Mountains 
and  Valleys,  and  thereby  flicwn  in  Ibmc  Mcafurc 
the  Ufe  thereof,  particularly  of  the  Mountains, 
which  are  chiefly  found  fault  with  :  I  have,  I  hope, 
made  it  in  fome  Mcafure  evident,  that  God  was  no 
idle  Speftator  (w),  nor  unconcerned  in  the  order- 
ing of  the  terraqueous  Globe,  as  the  former  bold 
Charges  againll  it  do  infer ;  that  he  did  not  fuffcr 
fo  grand  a  Work,  as  the  Earth,  to  go  unfinifh'd 
out  of  his  almighty  Hand  ;  or  leave  it  to  be  order- 
ed by  Chance,  by  natural  Gravity,  by  cafual  Earth- 
quakes, ^c.  but  that  the  noble  Strokes,  and  plain 
Remains  of  Wifdom  and  Power  therein,  do  mani- 
feft  it  to  be  his  Work.  That  particularly  the  Hills 
and  Vales,  though  to  a  peevifh  weary  Traveller, 
they  may  ieem  incommodious  and  troublefome;  yet 
are  a  noble  Work  of  the  great  Creator,  and  wifely 
appointed  by  him  for  the  Good  of  our  fublunary 
World. 

And  fo  for  all  the  other  Parts  of  our  terraqueous 
Globe,  that  are  prefumed  to  be  found  fault  with  by 
fome,  as  if  carelelly  order'd,  and  made  without  any 
Dcfign  or  End  j  particularly  the  Dillribution  of  the 


more  Dews  and  Rains  commonly  than  the  Valleys.  They 
are  more  frequently  covered  vvith  Fogs;  and  by  retarding, 
flopping,  or  comprcflingihe  Clouds,  or  by  iheir  greater  Colds 
condenfing  them,  they  have  larger  Quantities  of  Rain  fall 
upon  them.  As  I  have  found  by  atflual  Experience,  in  com- 
paring my  Obfervations  with  thofe  of  my  late  very  curious 
and  ingenious  Correfpondcnt,  Richard  Tozvnley,  Efq;  oi  Lan- 
caPure,  and  fome  others,  to  be  met  with  before.  Chap.  z.  Not€ 
(a).  From  which  it  appears,  that  above  double  the  Quantity 
of  Rain  falleth  in  Lancajlj'ire^  than  doth  at  Upminfler.  The 
Reafon  of  which  is,  becaulc  LancaJJure  hath  more,  and  much 
higher  Hills  than /'.■j!/^x  hath.     See  Book  II.  chap.  5.  Note  (e). 

(m)  yicctifandi  fane  mei  fentent'iA  hic  funt  Sophtftt,  qui  ciwt 
nondttm  invenire,  neque  exponere  Optra  Naturs,  queant,  earn  ta- 
ffjen  iKerti.i  at  que  in/citia  coffJemnanr,  6cc.  Galen,  dc  Uf. 
fart  1,1.  10.  c,  9. 

dry 

i 


8o  The  Mountains  Book  III. 

dry  Land  and  Waters  j  the  laying  the  feveral  Stra- 
ta, or  Beds  of  Earth,  Stone,  and  other  Layers  be- 
fore fpoken  of  i  the  Creation  of  noxious  Animals, 
and  poifonous  Subftances,  the  boifterous  Winds  j 
the  Vulcano's,  and  many  other  Things  which  Tome 
are  angry  with,  and  will  pretend  to  amend  :  I  have 
before  fhewn,  that  an  infinitely  wife  Providence, 
an  almighty  Hand  was  concerned  even  in  them  ; 
that  they  all  have  their  admirable  Ends  and  Ufes, 
and  are  highly  inftrumental  and  beneficial  to  the 
Being,  or  Well-being  of  this  our  Globe,  or  to  the 
Creatures  reiiding  thereon. 

So  alfo  for  humane  Bodies,  it  hath  been  an  anci- 
ent (»),  as  well  as  modern  Complaint,  that  our  Bo- 
dies are  not  as  big  as  thofe  of  other  Animals  j  that 
we  cannot  run  as  fwift  as  Deer,  fly  like  Birds,  and 
that  we  are  out-done  by  many  Creatures  in  the  Ac- 
curacy of  the  Senfes,  with  more  to  the  fame  Pur- 
pofe.  But  thefe  Objeftions  are  well  anfwered  by 
Seneca  (o),  and  will  receive  a  fuller  Solution  from 
"what  I  fhall  obferve  of  animal  Bodies  hereafter. 

But  indeed,  after  all,  it  is  only  for  want  of  our 
knowing   thefe  Things  better,   that   we    do    not 

admire 


(»)  vide  qiiam  miqui  Jint  divinorum  munerHtn  &jl'tmatores,  e- 
t'lam  quidam  profejft  Japientiam.  <^eruntur  quod  non  magn'itu- 
dine  corporis  aquetnus  Elcphantes,  -velocitate  Cervos,  levitate  A" 
ves,  inipettt  Tauros  ;  quod  fol'.dior  fit  cutis  Belluis,  decentior 
Damis,  denfior  Urfis,  mollior  Fibris ;  quod  fagacitate  nos  nari- 
utn  Canes  vincant,  quod  acie  luminum  AquiU,  fpatio  atatis  Cor- 
'vi,  tnulta  Animaliat'nandi  facilitate.  Et  cum  quidam  ne  coire 
quidem  in  idem  Natura  patiatur,  ut  -velocitatem  corporis  cr  vi- 
res pares  animalibus  habeamus ;  ex  diverfis  cr  dijfdentibus  bonis 
Hominem  non  ejj'e  compofitum,  injuriam  vacant ;  cr  in  negligentes 
nojiri  Deos  querimoniamjaciunt,  quod  non  bona  valetudo,  CT"  I'i- 
tiis  inexpugnabdis  data  Jit,  quod  non  futuri  fcientia.  Vix  fibi 
tetnperant  qutn  eoufque  imbudenti&  provehantur,  ut  Naturam  ode- 
rinty  quod  infra  Deos  fumus,  quod  non  in  Aquo  illis  Jietimus.  Se- 
neca de  Benef.  1.  ^■  c.  2.9. 

(q\  Gjuanto  fatius  eft  ad  contemplationem  tot  tantorum^ue  he- 
neficiorum  reverti,  ct*  agere  gratias,  quod  nos  in  hoc  pulcherri- 
^    —     '  -  faa 


Chap.  IV.  The  Cone  In  [ion.  8i 

admire  (/))  them  enough  j  it  is  our  own  Ignorance, 
Dulncfs  or  Prejudice,  that  makes  us  charge  thofc 
noble  Works  oF  the  x^lmighty,  as  Defects  or  Blun- 
ders, as  ill-contriv'd,  or  ill- made. 

It  is  therefore  fitter  for  fuch  finite,  weak,  igno- 
rant Beings  as  we,  to  be  humble  and  meek,  and 
confcious  of  our  Ignorance,  and  jealous  of  our  ow.i 
Judgment,  when  it  thus  confrontcth  infinite  Wif- 
doni.  Let  us  remember  how  few  Things  we  know, 
how  many  we  err  about,  and  how  many  we  arc 
ignorant  of:  And  thofe,  many  of  them,  the  molt 
familiar,  obvious  Things ;  Thmgs  that  we  fee  and 
handle  at  Plcafurej  yea,  our  own  very  Bodies,  and 
that  very  P.irt  of  us  whereby  we  undcrlland  at  all, 
our  Soul.  And  ihould  we  therefore  pretend  to  cen- 
fure  what  God  doth  !  Should  we  pretend  to  amend 
his  Work!  Or  to  advife  infinite  Wifdom !  Or  to 
know  the  Ends  and  Purpofes  of  his  infinite  Will,  as 
if  we  were  of  his  Council!  No,  let  us  bear  in  JVlind, 
that  thefe  Objeftions  are  the  Produ6ls,  not  of  Rea- 
foi),  but  of  Peeviflinefs.  They  have  been  incom- 
moded by  Storms  and  Tempells  j  they  have  been 
terrify'd  with  the  burning  Mountains,  and  Earth- 
quakes i  they  have  been  annoy'd  by  the  noxious  A- 
nimals,  and  fatigu'd  by  the  Hills  j  and  therefore  arc 
angry,  and  will  pretend  to  amend  thefe  Works  of 
the  Almighty.  But  in  the  Words  of  St.  Paul  (^), 
we  may  lay,  Nay^  hut  O  Man,  ivbo  art  thou  that 


mo  domicilio  voluerunt  (Dii)  fecundos  fort'tri ,  quod  terrenis 
frifecerunt.  Then  having  reckoned  up  many  of  the  Privileges 
and  Benefits,  which  the  Gods,  he  f.iich,  have  conferred  upon 
U5,  he  concludes,  Ita  eft  .-  cariffimos  ncs  habuerunt  Dii  nnmortalest 
haventque.  Lt  qui  inaxitnus  trihul  honos  potu'tt,  ah  ipfis  proxi- 
mos  collccaverunt.  I>lagna  accepimus ,  tnajora  )ion  cepimus. 
Senec.  Ibid. 

ip)  Naturam  tnaxim\'  adtniraberis,  ft  omnia  ejus  Optra  peilu' 
firaris.     Galen,  de  Uf.  i*art.  1.  ii.  concluf. 

(q)  Roin,  ix.  ZO, ZI. 


G  re^Iiefl 


^z  77je  Conch fion.  Book  III. 

repUefl  agalnjl  Go  J?  Shall  the  Thing  formed  fay  ta 
him  that  formed  it^  M'''hy  haft  thou  made  me  thus  ? 
Hath  not  the  Potter  power  o-ver  the  Ciay,  of  the  fame 
hump  to  make  one  Vcffe]  to  honour^  and  another  to 
difloonour  ?  If  the  Almighty  Lord  of  the  World,  had 
for  his  own  Pleafure,  made  this  our  World  more  in- 
convenient for  Man,  it  would  better  become  us  ta 
fit  ftill,  and  be  quiet  j  to  lament  our  own  great  In- 
firmities and  Failings,  which  deferve  a  worfe  Place, 
a  more  incommodious  Habitation,  than  we  meet  with 
in  this  elegant,  this  well  contriv'd,  well  formed 
World;  in  which  we  find  every  Thing  neccflary 
for  the  Sullentation,  Ufe  and  Pleafure,  both  of 
Man,  and  every  other  Creature  here  below  j  as  well 
as  fome  Whips,  fome  Rods  to  fcourge  us  for  our 
Sins  (f).  But  yet  fo  admirably  well  temper'd  is  our 
State,  fuch  an  Accord,  fuch  an  Harmony  is  there 
throughout  the  Creation,  that  if  we  will  but  pur- 
fue  the  Ways  of  Piety  and  Virtue,  which  God  hath 
appointed  ;  \\  we  will  form  our  Lives  according  to 
the  Creator's  Laws,  we  may  efcape  the  Evils  of 
this  our  frail  State,  and  find  fufScient  Means  to 
make  us  happy  whilft  we  are  in  the  Body.  The 
natural  Force   and  Tendency  of  our  Virtue,   wili 


(r)  Neiihgr  are  they  [noxious  Creatures]  of  lefs  I'fe  to  a- 
mend  our  Minds,  by  teaching  us  Care  and  Diligence,  and  more 
Wit.  And  jo  much  the  more,  the  worje  the  Things  are  we  Jecy 
and  jJjoiild  avoid.  VVeezels,  Kites,  and  other  mifchievous  A' 
Tiimals,  induce  us  to  a  IVatchfulnefs :  Thiftles  and  Moles  to  . 
good  Hujbandry ;  Lice  oblige  us  to  CleanHxefs  in  our  Bodies ; 
Spiders  in  our  Hoafes  ;  and  the  Moth  in  our  Clothes.  The  De- 
fortuity  and  Tdthinefs  of  Swine,  make  them  the  Beauty-Spot  of 

the  Animal   Creation,   and  the    Emblems   of  all  Vice The 

truth  is.  Things  are  hurtful  to  us  only  by  Accident ;  that  is, 
Tiot  of  Necejfity,  but  through  our  own  Negligence  or  lAifiaks. 
Hoiifes  decay.  Corn  is  blafted,  and  the  Weevel  breeds  in  Mault% 
fooneft  totvards  the  South.  Be  tt  fo,  it  is  then  our  otvn  Vault, 
if  we  ufe  not  the  Means  which  Nature  and  Art  have  provided! 
againfi  thefe  Inconveniencies.    Grew's  Cofmol.  c.  z.  §.49,50. 


prevenj 


Chap.  IV.  The  Concltifion.  %^ 

prevent  many  of  the  Harms  {f)^  and  the  watchful 
Providence  oF  our  Almighty  Bcnciailor,  will  be  a 
Guard  againll  others  j  and  then  nothing  is  wanting 
to  make  us  happy,  as  long  as  we  are  in  this  World, 
there  being  abundantly  enough  to  entertain  the 
Minds  of  the  molt  contemplative  j  Glories  enough 
to  pleafc  the  Eye  of  the  mod  curious  and  inquili- 
rive  i  Harmonics  an  J  Conforts  of  Nature's  own, 
as  well  as  Man's  making,  fuflicicnt  to  delight  the 
V.xx  of  the  mod  harmonious  and  muhcal  5  All 
Sorts  of  plcalant  Gulto's  to  gratify  the  I'aUe  and 
Appetite,  even  of  the  moll  luxurious  j  And  fra- 
grant Odours  to  pleafc  the  nicelt  and  tendered 
Smell  :  And  in  a  Word,  enough  to  make  us  love 
and  delight  in  this  World,  rather  too  much,  than 
too  little,  confidering  how  nearly  we  are  aliy'd  to 
another  World,  as  well  as  this. 


(/)   Kun  efl  gtmendus,  nee  gravi  iirgendus  nece, 
Virtute  quifcjuis  aljiulit  fails  tier. 

Senec.  Hercul.  Oct.  Ad.  5.  Car.  1833, 


Hunquatn  Stygias  fertur  ad  utnhras 
Inclyia  virius.     Id.  Ibid.  Car.  1981. 


G2      BOOK 


84 


BOOK   IV. 

Of  Animals  in  general, 

^^^pjN  the  laft  Book,  having  furvey'd  the 
^fTT^J  Earth,  it  felf  in  Particular,  1  fliall  next 
Kl__.Jpl  take  a  View  of  the  Inhabitants  thereof  3 
feS^ffiSi  Oi*  the  feveral  Kinds  of  Creatures  {d)^ 
that  have  their  Habitation,  Growth,  or  Subfi- 
ilence  thereon. 

-  ThHe  Creatures  are  either  Senfltive,  or  Infenfi- 
tive  Creatures'. 

In  fpeaking  of  thofe  endow'd  with  Senfe,  I  {hall 
confider : 

J.  Some  Things  common  to  them  all. 

II.  Things  peculiar  to  their  Tribes.  A 

I.  The  Things  in  common,   which  I  intend  to 
take  Notice  of,  are  thefe  Ten  : 

1.  The  five  Senfes^  and  their  Organs. 

2.  The  great  Inilroment  of  Vitality,  Refpiration, 
5.  The  Motion^  or  Loco-motive  Faculty  of  A- 

nimals. 


(a)  Princ'tpio  civktm,  ac  terras,  campofque  liquentes, 
Lucentemque  globum  Lnn&,   TttantaqHe  ajlra 
Spirinis  inttis  alit,    totamqtte  jnfufa  per  artus 
Mens  agitat  moiem,  cjr  magna  fe  corpore  mifcet. 
Inde  hominum,  pecHdmnque  genus,  vit&que  volantunfy 
Et  q'i&  marmoreo  fert  monftra  fub  Aquore  ponlus. 
Igneus  eft  illis  'vigor,  cr  roelejiis  origo 
Seminibus. 

Virgil.  iJ^neid.  L.6.  Carm.  714. 

4.  The 


Chap.  I.         Survey  of  Animals,  85 

4.  The  Place^  in  which  they  live  and  a(5l. 
f .  The  B  dance  of  their  Numbers. 

6.  Their  Food. 

7.  Their  G loathing. 

8.  Their  Houfes^  Nefts  or  Habitations. 
p.  Their  Methods  of  Self-Prefcrvation. 

10.  Their  Generation^   and  Conjcr'uation  of  their 
Species  by  that  Means. 


CHAP.    I. 

0/  ^/j^  /^'^  iy^7//^j  /;/  general. 

THE  firfl:  Thing  to  be  confider'd,  in  common 
to  all  the  Scnficive  Creatures,  is,  their  Faculty 
of  Seeing.,  Hearing.,  Smelling.,  'Tajiing  and  Feeling', 
and  the  Organs  mmiilring  to  thefe  five  Senfcs.^  toge- 
ther with  iheexad;  Accommodation  of  thofe  Senles, 
and  their  Organs,  to  the  State  and  Make  of  every 
Tribe  of  Animals  (^0-  The  Confideration  of  wiiich 
Particulars  alone,  were  there  no  other  Demoniba- 
tions  of  God,  is  abundantly  (Ijfficient  to  evince  the 
infinite  Wifdom,  Power  and  Goodncis,  of  the  great 
Creator.  For,  Who  can  but  iland  amaz'd  at  the 
Glories  of  thefe  Works !  x^t  the  admirable  Artifice 
of  them  I  And  at  their  noble  Ufe  and  Performan- 
ces !  For  fuppofe  an  Animal,  as  fuch,  had  Breath 
and  Life,  and  could  move  it  felf  hither  and  thither  j 
yet  how  could  it  know  whither  to  go,  what  it  was 
about,  where  to  find  its  Food,  how  to  avoid  thou- 


\d)  Ex  fenfibiis  ante  c.aera  Hornini  Ja6lus,  ricinJe  Cufiatus  ; 
reliquis  fuperatur  a  tnultis.  AqniU  clarths  tertiunt  :  I'ultHres 
fagaclUs  ordorantur  ,  liqut.iius  uttdinnt  TalpA  jbrute  terr.i,  tarn 
d«n[o  4ftque  furdo  natuneUtvento.     P)in.  Nac.  Hill.  ).  lo.  c.  69, 

G  5  fands 


8^  Senfes  of  Animals.       Book  IV. 

fands  of  Dangers  (^),  without  Sight !   How  could 
Man,   particularly,   view  the  Glories  of  the  Hea- 
vens, furvey  the  Beauties  of  the  Fields,  and  enjoy 
the  Pleafure  of  beholding  the  noble  Variety  of  di- 
verting objects,  that  do,  above  us  in  the  Heavens, 
and  here  in  this  lower  World,  prefent  themfelves  to 
our  View  every  where  j    how  enjoy  this,    I   fay, 
without  that  admirable  Senfe  of  Sight  (J) !    How 
could  alfo  the  Anin)al,  without  Smell  and  T^afte.^  di- 
ilinguifh  its  Food,  and  difcern  between  wholfome 
and  unwholfome  j  befides  the  Pleafures  of  delight^ 
ful  Odours,  and  relifhingGufto's !    How,  without 
that  other  Senfe  of  Hearings  could  it  difcern  many 
Dangers  that  are  at  a  Diftance,  underftand  the  Mind 
of  others,  perceive  the  harmonious  Sounds  of  Mu- 
iick,   and  be  delighted  with  the  Melodies  of  the 
winged  Choir,   and  all  the  reft  of  the  Harmonies 
the  Creator  hath  provided  for  the  Delight  and  Plea- 
fure of  his  Creatures !  And  laftly.  How  could  Man, 
or   any   other  Creature  diflinguifh  Pleafure   from 
Pain,   Health  from  Sicknefs,   and  confequently  be 
able  to  keep  their  Body  found  and  entire,   without 
the  Senfe  of  Feeling  /   Here,   therefore,  we  have  a 
glorious  OEconomy  in  every  Animal,    that  com- 
mandeth  Admiration,   and  deferveth  our  Contem- 
plation :  As  will  better  appear  by  coming  to  Par- 
ticulars,   and  diftin6lly   confidering  the  Provilioq 
which  the  Creator  hath   made  for  e^ch  pf  thefs 
Senfes. 


{b)  Subjacent  OchU,  pars  corporis  pretiofijftma,  ^  quilucis  uffi 
'vitam  diftinguant  a  morte.     Plin.  Nat.  Hiit.  1.  ii.    c.  37. 

(c)  FxminA  aliqu&  Megarenfes  foits  oculis  difcernere  'valebant 
inttr  Ova  qud  ex  Galltnd  nigra,  ct*  quA  ex  alba  nata  funt,  13 
what  is  affirmed  (how  truly  I  know  not)  by  Grimald,  ds  Li^-^ 
tnin.  ^  Color,  Pr.  42.  §.  (5o. 


V  li  A  P,^ 


Chap.  II.  *7 

CHAP.   11. 

Of  the  Eye. 

FOR  our  clearer  Proceeding  in  the  Confidcra- 
tion  of  this  nohle  Part  (rf),   and  underllanding 
its  OEconomy,  I  iliall  conlidcr; 

1 .  The  Form  of  the  Eye. 

2.  Its  Situation  in  the  Body. 

3.  Its  Motions. 

4.  Its  Size. 

f.  Its  Number. 

d.  Its  Parts. 

7.  The  Guard  and  Security  Nature  hath  provided 
for  this  fo  ufeful  a  Part. 

As  this  eminent  Part  hath  not  been  pretermitted 
by  Authors,  that  hnve  made  it  their  particular  De- 
fign  and  Bufinefs  to  fpcak  of  the  Works  of  God  ; 
fo  divers  of  the  aforefaid  Particulars  have  been 
touched  upon  by  them.  And  therefore  I  fhall  take 
in  as  httle  as  polllble  of  what  they  have  ^■.■■\  and  as 
near  as  I  can,  mention  chiefly  what  they  have  omit- 
ted.    And, 


{a)  In  BiJfcHionibus  anatom'iciiv'tx  alieiu'td  ad'in'trabilius,  ant 
artificiyfius  jtruCiurJi  OchU  humani,  fneo  quidetn  judicia,  occur- 
rit  :  ut  merito,  per  excillcntiam,  Crcatoris  appeUetur  Aliracu- 
lum.     Gui.  Fabr.  Hi'.dan.  Cent.  z.  Oblerv.  i. 

So  likewife  that  accurate  Surveyor  of  the  Eye,  Dr.  Brl^S', 
whok  Ophthalmography  Ih^ivc  met  wth  fince  my  penning  ihis 
jtart  of  my  Survey.  His  Chararter  of  this  curious  piece  of 
Cod's  Work  is,  Inter  prxcip'tas  corpoi  is  animati  partes,  qu^t  tna^- 
ni  Conditoris  noftri  japientiaTJi  oJiendu?it,  nulla fafie  reperitur,  qm 
ffjajori  powpii  elucet  qu.'im  ipj'e  Oculiis,  atit  quf.  cleT^antiori  for- 
tfiJi  concinnatur.  Deurn  enim  ait.i  partes  'vel  mlnori  fatellhto 
fiipantur,  vel  in  t  ant  am  vennjlatem  haud  affurguht ;  Ocelli  pc- 
culiarem  honorem  cjr  decus  a  fupremo  Num'/?ie  e^atufn  rcftrunt, 
cr  nunquam  non  fiupends  ftu  Potentii  charailcra  repnjentatit, 
iiulla  jane  part  tarn  Jivino  artifcio  c^ordine,  &;c.  Cap.  i.  §•  i. 

G  4  I ,  For 


08  Of  the  Eye.  Book  IV, 

I.  For  the  Torm  of  the  Eye  j  which  is  for  the 
mofc  part  Globous,  or  fomewhat  of  the  fphseroidal 
Form  :  Which  is  far  the  mofb  commodious  optical 
Form,  as  being  fitteft  to  contain  th.e  Humours 
within,  and  to  receive  the  Images  of  Objeds  from 
without  {b).  Was  it  a  Cube,  or  of  any  multangular 
Form,  fome  of  its  Parts  would  lie  too  far  off  (<:), 
and  fome  too  nigh  thofe  lenticular  Humours,  which 
by  their  Rerractions  caufe  Vifion.  But  by  Means 
of  the  Form  before-meniioned,  the  Humours  of 
the  Eye  are  commodioufly  laid  together,  to  perform 
their  Office  of  Refratlion  j  and  the  Retina^  and  e- 
very  other  Part  of  that  little  darkned  Cell,  is  neatly 
adapted  regularly  to  receive  the  Images  from  with- 
out, and  to  convey  them  accordingly  to  the  com- 
mon Senfory  in  the  Brain, 

ib)  It  is  a  good  Real'on  Imr  Bacon  affigns  tor  the  ;iph3e:ri- 
city  of  the  Eye:   Nam  fi  ejfet  planx  figHr£,  /pedes  ret  majoris 

oculo  non  pojjet  cadere  perpendicularirer  fuper  eum Cum 

er^^  Oculus  videt  magna  corpora,  ut  jere  quartam  cceli  uno 
afpe£tHy  man'-ifefium  efi,  quod  non.  poteji  ejj'e  planA  figure,  nee  a- 
licujus  nifi  fphAricA,  quoniam  fuper  fph&ram  parvan*  pojjunt  ca- 
dere perpendiculares  infinite,  quA  a  magno  corpore  veniunt,  cr 
tendiint  in  centnim  Sphs.r&  :  Et  fie  magnum  corpus  potejl  ah  oculo 
parvo  wderi.  For  the  Demonltration  of  which  he  hath  given 
us  a  Figure.   Rog.  Bacon.    Perfpedl.  B;fi':r.ii.  4.   Cap.  4. 

Dr.  Br'tggs  faiih,  Pars  antica,  (five  Cornea,)  con-jexicr  efi 
pcfiicd :  hdc  emm  ratione  radii  melius  in  pupillam  detorqucn- 
tur,  cr  Ocuit  fundus  ex  altera  parte  in  majorem  (propter  ima- 
fines  rernm  ibidem  delineandos)  expanditur.     Ibid.   §.2. 

(c)  Suppofe  the  Eye  had  the  Retina,  or  back  part  flat  for 
the  Reception  of  the  Images,  as  in  Fig.  i.  ABA:  it  is  mani- 
feft,  that  if  the  Extremes  of  tlie  Image  AA  were  at  a  due 
focal  diitance,  the  middle  B  would  be  too  nigh  the  Crylial- 
hr.e,  and  confequently  appear  confufed  and  dim  ;  but  all  Parts 
of  the  Retina  lying  at  a  due  focal  diftance  from  the  Cryflal- 
line,  as  at  ACA,  therefore  the  Image  painted  thereon  is  ieen 
dillimft  and  clear.  Thus  in  a  dark  R.oom,  with  a  Lens  at  a 
Hole  in  the  Window,  (which  5r;/rw/«^  calls  his  Artifici.il  Eye, 
in  his  Exerc'.i.  Acad,  one  of  which  he  had  made  for  his  Pu- 
pils, to  run  any  where  on  Wheels).  In  this  Room,  I  fay,  if 
the  Paper  that  receives  the  Images  be  too  nigh,  or  too  far  off 
the  Lens,  the  Image  will  be  confufed  and  dim;  but  in  the 
Focus  of  the  Gi.^fs,  diftinft,  dear,  and  a  pleafant  Sight. 

To 


Chap.  IT.  Of  the  Eye.  ^ 

To  this  \vc  mny  add  the  aptitude  of  this  Figure 
to  the  Motion  of  the  Eye,  for  it  is  ncccnaiy  for 
the  Eye  to  move  this  way,  and  that  way,  in  order 
to  adjull  it  fclf  to  the  Objcfts  it  would  view  >  io  by 
this  Fiourc  it  is  well  prepared  for  fuch  Motions,  Jo 
that  itcan  with  great  Facility  and  Dexterity  dircft 
it  fclf  as  occalion  requires. 

And  ns  the  Figure,  fo  no  lefs  commodious  is, 
2.    The   Situation   of   the   Eye,    namely   in   the 
Head   (^/),    the  moil    cre(5l,    eminent    Fart  of  ihc 
Body,  near  the  moll  fenfible,  vital  Parr,  the  Brain. 
By  its  Eminence  in  the  Body,  it  is  pvepai'd  to  take 
in  the  more  {e)  ObJLfts.     And  by  its  Situation  in 
the  Held,  belidcs  it  Pioximity  to  the  Brain,  it  is 
in  the  moil  convenient  Place  for  Defence  and  Secu- 
rity.    In  the  Hands,    it  might  indeed  (in  Man)  be 
render'd  more  eminent  than  the  Head,  and  be  turn- 
ed about  here  and  there  at  ple.illire.     But  then  it 
would  be  expofed  to  many  Injuries  in  that  adtivc 
Part,   and  the  Hands  (/)  render'd  a  Icfs  aftivc  and 
ijfcful  Part.     And  the  like  may  be  faid  to  its  Sight, 
in  any  other  Part  of  the  Body,    but  where   it  is. 
But  in  the  Head,   both  of  Man,   and  other  Ani- 
mals, it  is  placed  in  a  Part  that  lecms  to  be  contri- 
ved, and  made  chiefly  for  the  Action  of  the  princi- 
pal Senfes. 

Another  Thing  obfcrvabls  in  the  Sight  of  the 
Eye,  is  the  Manner  of  its  Situation  in  the  Head,  in 

{d)  Blemmyis  tradnntur  capita  ahcffv,  Ore  o"  Ocuiis  pf5lorl 
affixis.  Plin.  Nat.  Hift.  1.  y.  c.  8.  Outd.ntcmve.sifi  quofd^xm 
(ine  cervice  Oculos  inhumcm  habcr.tcs.  lb.!,  y.c.  i.  iroiinlieic, 
and  other  luch  like  Fable?,  in  this  \?A\  cited  Chapter  of  PLay^ 
no  doubt  our  famous  Romancer  Sir  'J.  MmidnvUe,  had  his 
Romantick  Stories  relatedin  his  Travels. 

(e)  See  Book  V,   Chap.  r.  Note  {e.) 

(/)  Galen  defcrves  to  be  here  confultcd,  who  in  liis  Cook 
De  Ufa  Partium,  from  many  Coiifider-Uions  of  the  Hand, 
fuch  as  what  is  here  mentioned,  as  alfo  its  Structure,  Site  and 
Ufe,  largely  proves  and  reflccf^s  upon  the  VVifdum  and  I'rovi- 
dcnce  of  the  Contriver  and  Maker  of  that  I'art, 

the 


fO  Of  the  Eye,  Book  IV. 

the  Fore-part,  or  Side-part  thereof,  according  to 
ehe  particular  Occafions  of  particular  Animals.  la 
Man,  and  fome  other  Creatures,  it  is  placed  to  look 
diredtly  forward  chiefly  j  but  withal  it  is  fo  order'd, 
as  to  take  in  near  the  Hemifphere  before  it.  In 
Birds,  and  fome  other  Creatures,  the  Eyes  are  fo 
feated,  as  to  take  in  near  a  whole  Sphere,  that  they 
may  the  better  feek  their  Food,  and  efcape  Dan- 
gers. And  in  fome  Creatures  they  are  feated,  fo  as 
to  fee  beil  behind  them  (^),  or  on  each  Side,  where- 
by they  are  enabled  to  fee  their  Enemy  that  purfues 
them  that  way,  and  fo  make  their  Efcape. 

And  for  the  Affillance  of  the  Eyes,  and  fome  of 
the  other  Senfes  in  their  Adions;  the  Head  is  ge- 
Bcnily  made  to  turn  here  and  there,  and  move  as 
Occaiion  requires.     Which  leads  me  to  the 

5.  Thing  to  be  remarked  upon,  the  Motions  of 
the  Eye  it  felf.  And  this  is  generally  upwards, 
downwards,  backwards,  forwards,  and  every  way  (/j), 
lor  the  better,  more  eafy,  and  diltind:  Reception  of 
the  vifual  Rays. 

But  where  Nature  any  way  deviateth  from  this 
Method,  either  by  denying  Motion  to  the  Eyes,  or 
ihe  Head  (/),   it  is  a  very  wonderful  Provilion  Hie 

hath 


{g)  Thus  in  Hares  and  Conies,  their  Eyes  are  very  protu- 
berant, and  placed  fo  much  towards  the  fides  of  their  Head, 
that  their  two  Eyes  take  in  nearly  a  whole  Sphere  :  Whereas 
i:i  Dogsy  (that  purfue  them)  the  Eyes  are  fet  more  forward  in 
the  Head,  to  look  that  way  more  than  backward. 

(h)  Sed  htbrkos  Oculos  fecit  [Natura]  z^  mobiles,  ut  z^  decli' 
sarentfiqiiid  noceret  ;  zy  afpe£him,  qua  vellent,  facile  converts-- 
rent.     Cicer.  de  Nat.  Deor.    1.1.0.57. 

(i)  The  E'^es  of  Spiders,  (in  fome  four,  in  fome  fix,  and  in 
fame  eight)  are  placed  all  in  the  fore-front  of  their  Head, 
{which  is  round,  and  without  any  Neck)  all  diaphanous  and 
tranfparent,  like  a  Locket  of  Diamonds,  &c.  neither  wonder  why 
}>r evidence  flwuld  be  fo  anomalous  in  this  Animal,  more  than  in 
any  other  we  know  of.  For,  I.  Since  they  wanting  a  Neck, 
i,amot  move  their  Head,  it  is  reitiijit$  that  Defe^  JJjould  be 


Chap.  II.  Of  the  Eye.  91 

h;iih  made  in  the  Cafe.  Thus  for  a  Remedy  of 
this  Inconvenience,  in  fomc  Crc;uuits  tlicir  Eyes 
are  fet  out  at  a  Diitance  {k)  from  the  Head,  to  be  cir- 
cumvolvcd  here  and  there,  or  one  this,  the  other 
that  way,  at  Pleafure.  And  in  CJrcaturcs,  n-hofc 
Eyes  are  without  Motion,  as  in  divers  Inftdsj  in 
this  Cafe,  either  they  have  more  than  t^^'o  Eyes,  or 
their  Eyes  are  nearly  two  protubeiant  Hcrmlphcics, 
and  each  Hemifphcrc  often  confilling  of  a  prodigi- 
ous Number  of  other  httle  Segments  of  a  Sphere  il). 
By  which  Means  thofe  Creatures  arc  fo  far  hom  be- 
ing deny'd  any  Benerit,  of  that  noble  anu  moil  ne- 
celFary  Senfe  of  Sight,    that  they  have  probably 


fupplied  by  the  multiplicity  of  Eyes.  r.  Since  i hey  were  to  live  by 
catchmg  fo  ni??ible  a  Prey  as  a  Fly  is,  they  oughr  ti  fee  her  eve- 
ry way,  and  to  take  her  per  lahum,  (as  they  do  J  without  any 
Motion  of  the  Head  to  difcover  her:  Which  Motion  would  Lave 
feared  away  fo  timorous  an  Infect.  Power";  Microl'.  Oly'.crv, 
pag.  ir. 

The  Eyes  of  the  Cnmeleon  refemlle  a  Lens,  or  Convex  GWs, 
fet  in  a  zer/atilc  globular  Socket,  ivhich  flie  turncth  backboard, 
or  any  way,  without  wovir^  her  Head  ;  and  ordinarily  the  one 
a  contrary,  or  quite  d.jferent  way  from  the  other.  Dr.  Coddar.i 
in  Phil.  Tran.  N^.  137. 

But  what  is  more  extraordinary  in  this  Motion  ''of  the  Ca^ 
pjeleon's  Fye]  is  to  fee  one  of  the  Eyes  move,  whdfl  the  other 
remains  immoveable  ;  and  the  one  to  turn  forward,  at  the  fame 
time  that  the  other  Icoheth  behind;  the  one  to  look  up  to  the 
Sky,  when  the  other  is  fixed  on  the  Ground.  And  thefe  Motions 
to  be  fo  extreme,  that  they  do  carry  the  Pupilla  undtr  the  Creji 
which  makes  the  Eye-brow,  and  fo  fur  into  the  Canthi,  or  Cor- 
ners of  the  Eyes,  that  the  Sight  can  difcern  whatever  is  done 
jujl  behind  it,  and  direcVy  before,  ivithout  turning  the  Head, 
which  is  faftned  to  the  Shoulders.  Mem.  for  a  Nat.  Hlft.  in 
Anatom.  DilTedt.  at  Parif.  Dill',  of  Camel,  pag.  li. 

(A-)  Snails  lend  out  their  Eyes  at  a  diHancc,  thry  bein" 
contained  in  their  four  Horn?,  like  atramentous  spots,  fitted  tl 
the  end  of  their  Horns,  or  rather  to  the  end:  of  thofe  black  Fila- 
ments or  optick  Nerves,  which  are  finathed'  in  her  Horns,  as 
Dr.  Pozver  wordeth  it.  Obf  31.  pag.  36.  So  the  ingcniou; 
Pr.  Lifier.   Exercit    Anat.  Cochl,  ij'  Liltiac 

(/)  Viii  I.  8.    f,  3.    Note  ;aj. 

more 


92.  Of  the  Eye.  Book  IV. 

more  of  it  than  other  Creatures,  anfwerable  to  the 
Rapidity  of  their  Flight,  and  brisk  Motion  j  and  to 
their  Inquefis  after  Food,  Habitation,  or  Repofi- 
tories  of  Generation,  or  fuch  other  Neceffity  of  the 
Animal. 

4.  Aijother  admirable  Provifion  in  the  Eye,  is, 
its  Size  5  in  fome  Animals  large,  in  feme  little.  It 
would  be  endlefs  here  to  enumerate  Particulars j  as 
thofe  of  Qiiadrupeds,  Birds,  Jnfc6ts,  and  other  ter- 
rertrial  Animals.  And  as  for  Fifhes,  ihcy  will  fall 
under  another  Part  of  my  Survey. 

1  fhall  therefore  only  take  Notice  of  its  Size  m 
one  Creature,  the  Mole  {m).     As  the  Habitation  of 

thac 


(m)  Sever jnus  is  of  Ari/lotle's,  Pliny's,  and  Ml^.  Magnus'^ 
Opinion,  that  the  Alole  hath  no  Sight;  G.  Seger  denies  any 
Humour  to  be  therein,  but  thinks  they  may  probably  fee,  be- 
caufe  Nature  made  nothing  in  vain.  But  Borrichius  faith, 
their  Eyes  have  appendiculam  nerveam  in  cerebrum  euntcm, 
cuius  benejicio  globuii  Ml  [the  little  Eyes]  extra  pellem  facile 
tolerant  exferi,  rerrahiqtie  pro  arbitrio  — —  In  iUis  oculorum 
globulis  humor  aqneus  copiose  fatis  natahat;  c&terorum  non  nijs 
tenue  vefiigium.  Blaf.  Anat.  Anim.   c.  35. 

lit  quoniam  Nntura  hoc   vitA  genus  ipfi  defiinavit,  etlam  per- 

auatn  exiguos  Ocalos dedit  eo    concilia,  ut   ii,   pretiofijfi/na 

corporis  pars,  a  terrs,  pulvere  ne  affUgerentur.  ft  infuper  ptlis 
teiii,  ^vC.  Bumores  illis  oculis  infunt,  e?"  tunica  nigra,  uvea, 
fe  prcdit.  Ad  hos  tramiie  alio  nervus  vcnit.  Schneider  iu 
131aY.  ibid. 

Some  time  fince  I  rnxde  divers  accurate  DifTefiions  of  the 
j^yes  of  Aides,  with  the  help  of  Microfcopes,  having  a  doubt 
whether  what  v/e  take  to  be  Eyes,  were  fuch  or  no.  And 
upon  a  drift  Scrutiny  I  plainly  could  diltinguifti  the  Vitreous 
and  Cry/Ialline  Humours,  yea,  the  Ligajnentum  Ciliarc,  and 
the  atr'^mentaceous  Mucus.  The  Pupil  I  could  manifeilly 
difcern  to  be  round,  and  the  Cornea  copped,  or  conical  : 
The  Eye  is  at  a  great  uiftance  from  the  Brain,  the  Optick 
Nerve  very  flender  and  long,  reaching  from  the  Eye  through 
the  intermediate  Flefli,  apd  fo  paffeth  to  the  Brain,  along 
with  the  pair  of  Nerves  reaching  to  the  Nofe,  which  are 
much  the'largelt  that  are  in  all  the  Animal.  Thefe  Crea- 
tures, I  imagine,  have  the  Faculty  of  withdrawing  their  Eye.s 

if 


Chap.  II.  Of  the  Eye.  9j 

that  uncouth  Animal  is  wholly  fubteirancous,  its 
Lodging,  its  Food,  its  Exercifcs,  nay,  even  all  its 
Paltinics  and  Plcafurcs,  arc  in  thofe  fubtcrraneous 
Recedes  and  Riflagcs,  which  its  own  Indulhy  hath 
made  for  it  felfj  lo  it  is  an  admirable  Provifion 
made  in  the  Size  of  the  Eye  of  that  little  Creature, 
to  anfwer  all  its  Occafions,  and  at  the  fame  time  to 
prevent  Inconveniences.  For  as  a  little  Light  will 
lliffice  an  Animal  living  always  under  Ground  j  fo 
the  fmallell  Eye  will  abundantly  fupply  that  Oc- 
cafion.  And  as  a  large  protuberant  Eye,  like  that 
of  other  Animals,  would  much  annoy  this  Creature 
in  its  principal  Bufincfs,  of  digging  for  its  Food 
and  Paifagei  fo  it  is  endow'd  with  a  very  fmall 
one,  commodioully  fcatcd  in  the  Head,  and  well 
fenced  and  guarded  againlt  the  Annoyances  of  the 
Earth. 

f .  Another  Thing  remarkable  in  this  ncble  Part 
of  Animals,  is,  its  Numbers  -,  no  lefs  than  two  («) 
in  any  Inllance,  that  I  know  of  j  and  in  fome  Ani- 
mals more,  as  1  have  already  hinted  {o). 

Now  this  is  an  admirable  Proviiion ;  firft,  for 
the  Convenience  of  taking  in  the  larger  x^ngle  or 
Space :  And  in  the  next  Place,  the  Animal  is  by 
this  Provifion,   in  fome  Meafure  prcpar'd  for  the 


if  not  quite  into  the  Head,  (as  Snails)  yet  more  or  lefs  with- 
in the  Hair,  as  they  have  more  or  lefs  Occalion  to  uTc  or 
guard  their  Eyes. 

Galea  faith,  Aides  have  Eyes,  the  CryJialUne  and  Vitreous 
Humours,  encompalTed  with  Titnicks.  De  Vf.  Part.  I.  14. 
<.  6.     So  accurate  an  Anatomift  was  he  for  his  Time. 

(»)  Plmy  tells  us  of  a  fcrt  of  Heron  with  but  one  Eye, 
but  'twas  only  by  hear-fay.  Inter  Aves  Ardcolarum  genertf 
quos  Lencos  vacant y  altera  oculo  carere  tradunt.  Nat.  Hill.  1.  ri. 
c.  37.  So  the  King  of  the  Nigr&  that  hath  but  one  Eye,  and 
that  in  his  Forehead,  /.  6.  c.  30.  Which  Fables  I  take  no- 
tice of  more  for  the  Reader's  Diverfion,  than  any  Truth  in 
them. 

(0)  Su^ra,  Note  (i}. 

Misfortune 


94  Q/"  ^^^^  Ey^'  Book  IV. 

Misfortune  of  the  Lofs  of  one  of  thefe  noble,  and 
necefTary  Organs  of  its  Body. 

But  then  befides  all  this,  there  is  another  Thing 
confiderable  in  this  multiplicate  Number  of  the 
Eye  5  and  that  is,  that  the  Ohjc6t  feen  is  not  mul- 
tiplied as  well  as  the  Organ,  and  appears  but  one, 
though  feen  with  two  or  more  Eyes  (/>).     A  ma- 

nifeft 


{f)  The  mofl  celebrated  Anatomids  diiFer  greatly  about  the 
Realbn  why  we  fee  not  double  with  two  Eyes.  This  Galeriy 
and  others  after  him,  generally  thought  to  be  from  a  Coali- 
tion or  Deciurition  of  the  Optick  Nerves,  behind  the  Os 
Spheno'ides.  But  whether  they  deculTate,  coalefce,  or  only 
touch  une  another,  they  do  not  well  agree.  The  Barthol'tnes 
expreffly  alTert  they  are  united,  non  per  fimplkem  comactumvd 
interfe^ionem  in  homme,  fed  totalem  jnbftantu  confufioneWf 
Anar.  1.  3.  c.  1.  And  whereas  Ve'^alius,  and  fome  others  had 
found  fome  Inftances  of  their  being  difunited;  they  fay,  fed 
in  plerifque  ordinarte  confunditur  interior  fubjiantia,  ut  accu- 
ratd  difquifitione  deprehendi. 

But  our  Learned  Dr.  Gibfon,  {Anat.  I.  3.  c.  10.)  faith,  they 
are  united  by  the  clofefl  Conjun^ion,  but  not  Confufion  of  their 
fibres. 

But  others  think  the'Reafon  is  not  from  any  Coalefcence, 
Contadt,  or  croffing  of  the  Optick  Nerves,  but  from  a  Sym- 
pathy between  them.  Thus  Monfieur  C<zr/«  is  of  Opinion, 
that  the  FibrilU  conftituting  the  medullary  Part  of  thofe 
Nerves,  being  fpiead  in  the  Retina  of  each  Eye,  have  each 
of  them  correfponding  Farts  in  the  Brain;  fo  that  when  any 
of  thofe  FibnlU  are  ttruck  by  any  part  of  an  Image,  the 
correfponding  Parts  of  the  Brain  are  thereby  afFedted,  and 
the  Soul  thereby  informed,  ct'c  but  fee  more  hereafter  under 
Note  {00),  from  Cartes  himfelf. 

Somewhat  like  this  is  the  Notion  of  our  judicious  Dr. 
Briggs,  who  thinks  the  Optick  Nerves  of  each  Eye  confift  of 
Homologous  Fibres,  having  their  rife  in  the  Thalamus  Nervo- 
rum Opticorum,  and  thence  continued  to  both  the  Retina, 
which  are  made  of  them  ;  And  farther,  that  thofe  FibrilU 
have  the  fame  Parallelifm,  Tenlion,  ct-c  in  both  Eyes;  and 
confequently  when  an  Image  is  painted  on  the  fame  corre- 
fpondmg,  fympathizing  Parts  of  each  Retina,  the  fame  Ef- 
fefts  are  produced,  the  fame  Notice  or  Information  is  car- 
ried to  the  Thalamta,  and  fo  imparted  to  the  Soul,  or  judg- 
ing Faculty.    That  there  is  fuch  an  'Oy.onvci6ei*  between  the 

Re  tin  A, 


Chap.  11.  Of  the  Eye.  95- 

nifcil  Sign  of  the  infinite  Skill  of  tlie  Coritrivcr  of 
this  fo  noble  a  Part,  and  of  thecxquifitc  Art  hecm- 
ploycd  in  the  Formation  thereof.  But  the  Defign 
and  Skill  of  the  infinite  Workman,  will  bcfl  be  let 
forth  by 

6  Surveying  the  Parts  and  Mechamfin  of  this 
admirable  Organ  the  Eye.  And  here  indeed  wc 
cannot  but  iland  amazed,  when  we  view  its  ad- 
mirable Fabrick,  and  confider  the  prcdigious  Ex- 
aftncG,  and  the  exquifite  Skill  employed  ^in  every 
part  miniibing  to  this  noble  and  neceflary  Scnfc, 
To  pafs  by  its  Arteries  and  Veins,  and  fuch  other 
Parts  common  to  the  red  of  the  Body,  let  us  call 
our  Eye  on  its  Mufcles.  Thefe  wc  fhall  find  ex- 
aftly  and  neatly  placed  for  every  Motion  of  the 
Eye.  Let  us  view  its  Tunicks,  and  thefe  we  fliall 
find  fo  admirably  feated,  fo  well  adapted,  and  of  fo 
firm  a  Texture,  as  to  fit  every  Place,  toanfwcr eve- 
ry Occafion,  and  to  be  Proof  againfl:  all  common 


RctiriA,  Sfc.  he  makes  very  probable  from  the  enfuing  of 
double  Vifion  upon  the  Interruption  of  tlie  Parallclifm  oi 
the  Eyes ;  as  when  one  Eye  is  dcprefled  with  the  Finger,  or 
their  Symphony  interrupted  by  Dileaie,  Drunkenncfs,  vc 
And  lail'.y,  That  liniple  Vilion  is  not  made  in  the  former 
way,  viz,,  by  a  Decutration  or  Conjundion  of  the  Optick 
Nerves,  he  proves,  bccaule  thofe  Nerves  are  but  in  few  Sub- 
jed?  deculTated,  and  in  none  conjoined  otherwiie  than  by  a 
bare  Contaft,  which  is  particularly  manifeU  in  Fillies;  and 
in  fome  Inltanccs  it  hath  been  found,  that  they  have  been 
fcparatcd  without  any  double  Vifion  enfuing  thereupon.  Vid. 
Brig.  Ophthalmogr.  cap.  ii.  &  5.   and   Nov.  Vif.  Jheor.  palftm. 

Wlidt  the  Opinion  of  our  julily  eminent  Sir  Ifaac  Newton 
is,  may  be  feen  in  his  Optichs,  Qu.  15.  ^re  not  the  Species  oj 
OhjecU  [ten  zviih  Both  Eyes,  united  where  the  Optick  Nerves 
Meet  Before  they  come  into  the  Br^in,  the.  Fibres  on  the  right 
jide  of  both  Nerves  uniting  there,  &:c.  For  the  Optick  NervtT 
cf  fuch  Animals  as  look  the  fame  way  with  both  Eyes,  (as  of 
Men,  Dogs,  Sheep,  Oxen,  &CC.  J  meet  before  they  come  into  the 
Brain;  but  the  Optick  Nerves  of  Juch  Animals  as  do  not  lock 
the  fame  way  with  both  Eyes,  (as  of  Fijhes  ard  of  the  Camele- 
•n)   do   not   meet y   if  I    am  rightly   injormed.     Newt.  Opt. 

Inconvc- 


9^  Of  the  Eye.  Book  IV. 

Inconveniences  and  x^nnoyances.  Let  us  examine 
its  three  Humours^  and  thcfe  we  ihall  find  all  of  ex- 
quifire  Clcarnefs  and  Tranfparency,  for  an  eafy  Ad- 
miffion  of  the  Ray;;j  well  placed  for  the  refrading 
of  them.j  and  fonn-d  (particularly  the  Crystalline 
Humour)  by  the  nicell  Laws  of  Opticks,  to  coi- 
led the  wandring  Rays  into  a  Point.  And  to  name 
no  more,  let  us  lock  into  its  darkned  Cell,  where 
thofe  carious  Humourslie,  and  into  which  the  Glo- 
ries of-  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  are  brought,  and 
exquifitely  pittured  j  and  this  Cell  we  fhall  find, 
without,  well  prepared  by  Means  of  its  Texture, 
Aperture,  and  Colour,  to  fence  off  all  the  ufclcfs 
or  noxious  Raysj  and  within,  as  well  coated  with 
a  dark  Tegument,  that  it  may  not  reflect,  difii- 
pate,  or  any  way  confufe  or  diilurb  the  beneficial 
Rays  {q). 

But  to  ^Q.^ctV'A  to  Particulars,  although  it  would 
be  a  great  Demonftration  of  the  Glory  of  God,  yet 
would  take  up  too  much  Time,  and  hath  been  in 
fome  Meafure  done  by  others  that  have  written  of 
God's  Works.  PafTmg  over  therefore  what  they 
have  obferved,  I  fhall  under  each  principal  Pare 
take  a  tranfient  Notice  of  fome  Things  they  have 
omitted,  or  but  flightly  fpoken  of. 

And  my  firil  Remark  fhall  be  concerning  the 
Mufcles  of  the  EyCy  and  their  Equilibration.  No- 
thing can  be  more  manifeflly  an  a6t  of  Contrivance 
and  Defign,  than  the  Mufcles  of  the  Eye,  admi- 
rably adapted  to  move  it  an)',  and  every  way>  up- 
wards, downwards,  to  this  fide  or  that,  or  how- 


(o)  Nigra  eft  [Uvea]  ut  radios  (ah  Ocult  fundo  ad  anteri- 
orem  ejus  partem  refiexos)  obumbret;  ne  hi  (ut  air  clar.  Car- 
tefius)  ad  Oc:ili  fandum  retorti  ibidem  confufam  vifionem  effice- 
rent.  Alia  forfan  ratio  hujus  nigredinis  ftatuatur,  quod  radii 
in  '■jifio?ie  Jhperfini,  qui  ah  objeblis  lateraltbiis  provenitint  hoc 
rttu  abforbeantur.  Ita  cnim  e  hco  obfcuro  interdiu  ohjetla  op- 
tinte  intueninr,  quia  radii  tunc  temporis  circumfujo  Uinine  non 
dUuuntur.     Biigg's  Ophthal.  c.  3.  §.  5. 

foever 


Chap.  ir.  Of  the  Eye,  97 

focvcr  we  plcafe,  or  thciv  is  occaflon  for,  fo  ns  ro 
alwiiys  keep  that  Par.illclilm  or  the  ICve,  which  is 
nccefTiry  co  nuc  Vifion.  For  the  Pciformancc  of 
which  Service,  the  Form,  the  Policion,  and  the 
due  Strength  oF  each  Mulcle  is  admirable.  And 
here  I  might  Inltance  the  peciili;ir  and  artificial 
Stru6turc  o\  the  Trochkaris^  and  the  Augmentation 
of  its  Power  by  the  'trochlea  {r)  j  the  Magnitude 
and  Strength  of  the  Attollent  Mufcle^  fomewhut  ex- 
ceeding that  of  its  Anragoniii ;  the  peculiar  Mulcle, 
called  the  Seventh^  or  Sufpenfory  Mnfcle  (/),  given 
to  Brutes,  by  reafon  of  the  prone  Pofturc  of  their 


(r)  Admrand:tm  Dei  artijlc'f.itn  ex  diierforum  annn-Jium 
comparatione  indies  evadit  tnanifcjit:is.  Mirantur  omr.e%  Jro- 
chlearem  in  oculis  Hominum  c/  o)jadrupedum,  cr  quidem  jure  : 
fed  admirati^nem  omnem  fuperat^  quod  fine  Trochlea  oculutn 
movens  in  Avib:is  novatu  genus  Trochles,  longe  artificiofius  Nic- 
titandi  Mtmbrans,  dedent.  Blaf.  Anat.  Animal,  p.  i.  c.  4.  ex 
Stenon. 

[Mufculum  Trochlcircm]  per  intermedium  troch'ejm  tra- 
dutium,  nunquam  intueor,  c^titn  admirabundtis  nncum,  'O  ©£<;?, 
exclamem,  «'  ^ovov  ein  ytcjix'.l^ii ,  d^?iOi  y^  dn  iA.^y^»i!ij.  I.  C. 
Sturmii  Exercit.  Acad.  9.  dt  Vif.  Org.  cr  R-H.  C.  3.  §.  4. 
p.  446. 

(/)  Ohfervare  eft  quod  oluadrupedcs,  qui  oculos  in  tcrraifi 
pronos,  ac  pendulos  gerunt,  Mufculum  peadiarem  habent,  quo 
Oculi  globus  fufpenditur  ———  Hoc  Mufculo  Bos,  Equus,  Ovis, 
Lepus,  Pjrais,  6ZC.  pruditi  funt :  hoc  etiam  Canis  i}:jlrui[ur, 
fed  alto  modo  conformatnm habtt.  Willis  de  An.  Brut,  p    i.  c.  15. 

Of  this  Opinion  alio  was  BarthoUne  Anat.  1.  3.  c.  8.  and 
divers  other  eminent  Anatomills. 

But  Dr.  Briggs  is  of  Opinion  that  the  Adn.tta,  and  the 
other  Mufcles  latficienily  anfwer  all  thofe  Ends  afcribcd  to 
that  Mufcle  by  former  Anatomills,  and  thinks  ProbabiUhs  iia- 
quc  effe  hunc  Mufculum  tiervi  Optici  aHionem  (per  vices )  con- 
firmare,  n"e  k  prono  Brutorum  incefj'u  CT"  copiofo  ajjl.ixu  humo- 
rum  debiittetur,  Ophthal.   c.  z.  §.  i. 

The  Mufculus  Sufpenforius  being  in  the  Porpefs,  as  well  as 
Brutes,  Dr.  T'^fon  thinks  the  Ufe  of  it  is  not  to  fufpend  the 
Bulk  of  the  Eye  ;  but  rather  by  its  equal  Gontraftion  of  the 
Sclerotis,  to  render  the  Ball  of  the  Eye  more  or  lefs  S  ^heri-. 
cal,  and  fo  fitter  for  Vilion.  Tyfon's  Anat.  of  the  Porpefs, 
P-  39. 


H  Bodicg, 


98  Of  the  Eye.  Book  IV. 

Bodies,  and  frequent  Occafions  to  hang  down  their 
Heads :  And  I  might  fpeak  alfo  of  the  pecuhar  O- 
rigine  and  Infertion  of  the  loisjer  Oblique  Mufcle  (/), 
which  is  very  notable,  and  many  other  Things  relat- 
ing to  thefe  Parts  •,  but  it  would  be  tedious  to  def- 
cend  too  much  to  thofe  admirable  Particulars.  And 
therefore  to  clofe  up  thefe  Remarks,  all  I  fhall  far- 
ther take  Notice  of,  ihall  be  only  the  exquifite  E- 
quilibracionof  all  thefe  Opposite  and  Antagonift  MuJ- 
cks,  affefled  partly  by  the  Equality  of  the  Strength  5 
which  is  the  Cafe  of  the  Adducent  and  Abducent 
Mi'ifcles ;  partly  by  their  peculiar  Origine,  or  the 
Addition  of  the  Trochlea^  which  is  the  Cafe  of  the 
Oblio^ue  Mufcles  (u)  :  and  partly  by  the  natural  Po- 
llurc  of  the  Body,  and  the  Eye,  which  is  the  Cafe 
of  the  Attollent  and  Depriment  Mufcles.  By  this  fo 
curious  and  exa£t  a  Libration,  not  only  unfcemly 
Contortions,   and  incommodious  Vagations  of  the 


(?)  Mtifculas  obl'iquus  inferior  oritur  a  peculiari  quodam  fo- 
nnum  in  lattre  Orbits,  ocularis  faflo,  (contra  qukm  in  cAte- 
ris,  &ZC. )  quo  fit  ut  ex  una  parte  a  Mufcub  trochleari,  ex  al- 
tera vera  ab  hujus  Mufculi  cotnmodijftmd  pojitione,  Otulus  in 
Aquilibrio  quodam  ccnftitutus,  irretorto  obtutu  njerfus  objetla  fe- 
racur,  nee  plus  juflo  accedat  verfus  internum  externumve  can- 
thuvii  ;  quit,  quidem  Libratio  omn'mo  nulla  fuiffety  abfque  hujus 
Mufculi  peculiari  originatione  (ciijus  ratio  omnes  hucufque  Ana- 
tomicos  latuit).  And  (o  this  curious  Anatoraift  goes  on  to 
fliew  farther  the  ilupendous  Artifice  of  the  great  Creator  ia 
this  Polition  of  the  Oblique  Mufcles.  Brigg'i  Nova  Vif.  The- 
or.   p.  I  r.  meo  libro. 

(«)  Befides  thofe  particular  Motions  which  the  Eye  receives 
from  the  oblique  Mufcles,  and  I  may  add  its  Libration  alfo 
in  feme  Meafure,  fome  Anatomifts  afcribe  another  no  lefs  con- 
lidervible  Uie  to  them;  namely,  to  lengthen  and  fliorten  the 
Eye  (by  fqueezing  and  comprefllng  it)  to  make  it  correfpond 
to  the  Diftances  of  all  Objects,  according  as  they  are  nigh  or 
far  off.  Thus  the  ingenious  Dr.  Keil;  The  Aqueous  Humour 
being  the  thinnefi  and  tnojl  liquid,  eafily  changeth  its  Figure^ 
•when  either  the  Ligamentum  Ciliare  contracts,  or  both  the  Ob- 
lique Mufcles  fqueez.s  the  middle  of  the  Ball  of  the  Eye,  to 
render  it  Oblong  when  ObjeHs  are  tot  near  m,  Keil'f  Anat. 
Chap,  4.  Se^.  4.    See  Note  (y). 


Eye 


Ghap.  ir.  Of  the  Eye.  99 

Eye  are   prevented,  but  alfo  it  is  able  with  great 
Rcadincfsund  Exadtncfs  to  apply  it  fclF  to  every  Ob- 

jea. 

As  to  the  Tunicks  of  the  Eye,  many  Things 
might  be  taken  notice  of,  the  prodigious  Finencfs  of 
the  Arachfioidci^  the  acute  Scn!c  of  the  Retina^  the 
delicate  Tranlparency  of  the  Cornea  (ct;),  and  the 
firm  and  Ibong  Texture  of  that  and  the  Scleru*iC(^ 
too  i  and  each  of  them,  in  thcle  and  every  c^th'^r 
refpc6t,  in  the  mod  accurate  manner  adapted  ^o  the 
Place  in  which  it  is,  and  the  Bufinefs  it  is  there  to 
perform.  But  for  a  Sample,  1  fliall  only  take  no- 
tice of  that  part  of  the  Uvea  which  makes  the  Pu- 
piL  It  hath  been  obfervcd  by  others,  particularly 
by  our  Honourable  Founder  (x),  That  as  we  are 
forced  to  ufe  various  Apertures  to  our  Opticlc 
GlaOes,  fo  Nature  hath  made  a  far  more  compleac 
Provilion  HI  the  Eyes  of  Animals,  to  fliut  out  too 
much,  and  to  admit  fufficicnt  Light,  by  the  Dila- 
tation and  Contraction  of  the  Pupil  {y).  Butitde- 
fervcth  our  efpccial  Remark,  that  thefc  Pupils  are 
in  divers  Animals  of  divers  Forms,  according  to  their 


(iv)  iS}u'ts    verb  opifex  prater   Naturani,   cjnA    nihil  potcji  ejfe 

callidius,  tantam   JcUrtum  perficjHi  pntHiJjei   in  Senfibus  }  qua. 

frimum  Oculos  membrAnis   tenuijftmis  -vefttvit,  cr  [epiit  ;    quas 

fnmum  perlucidas  fecit,  ut  per  eas  cerni  pojj'et :  firmai  auitm, 

\  ut  corttinerenttir.     Cic.  de  Nat.  Ueor.  1.  i.  c.  57. 

(x)  Bo'jl  ot  Final  Caufes. 

(y)  It  is  eafy  to  be  obfcrved,  that  the  Pupil  openeth  in 
dark  Places ;  as  alfo  when  we  look  at  tar  diftant  Objeds,  hut 
contradts  by  an  Increafc  of  Light,  and  when  the  Objeds  are 
nigh.  This  Motion  ot  the  I'liptl  feme  fay,  is  cffcded  by 
the  circular  and  (bait  Fibres  of  the  Uvea,  and  fome  artributc 
it  to  the  Ligamentiim  Ciliare.  Yet  I  have  no  great  doubt  bit 
that  they  both  concur  in  that  Adion,  and  that  the  Li^ame).", 
turn  Ciltare  doth,  at  the  fame  time  the  Pupil  opens  or  lliuts, 
dilate  or  comprefs  the  Cry/fallint,  and  bring  it  nighcr  unto, 
or  carry  it  faither  otF  the  Ketina.  For  the  Strudturc  of  the 
Li^amentum  CiLare,  and  irs  two  Sorts  of  Fibres,  drawn  with 
the  Help  of  a  Microfcope,  1  fliall  refer  to  Mr.  Cowper's  A- 
naf.  T.  XI. 

H  z  peculiat 


too  Of  the  Eye,  Book  IV. 

peculiar  Occafions.  In  fome  (particularly  in  Man) 
it  is  round  J  that  being  the  moll  proper  Figure  for 
the  Pofition  of  our  Eyes,  and  the  Ufe  we  make  of 
them  both  by  Day  and  Night.  In  fome  other  A- 
nimals  it  is  of  a  longiHi  Form  5  in  fome  Tranf- 
verfe  (2;},  with  its  Aperture  large,  which  is  an  ad- 
mirable Provifion  for  fuch  Creatures  to  fee  the  bet- 
ter laterally,  and  thereby  avoid  Inconveniencies,  as 
well  as  help  them  to  gather  their  Food  on  the 
Ground,  both  by  Day  and  Night.  In  other  Ani- 
mals the  Fiffure  of  the  Pupil  is  ere£t  (aa)^  and  al- 
fo  capable  of  opening  wide,  and  fhutting  up  clofe. 
The  latter  of  which  ferveth  to  exclude  the  brighter 
Light  of  the  Day,  and  the  former  to  take  in  the 
more  faint  Rays  of  the  Night,  thereby  enabling 
thofe  Nodurnal  Animals  (in  whom  generally  this 
ere61:  Form  of  the  Pupil  is)  to  catch  their  Prey  with 
the  greater  Facility  in  the  dark  (l;h),  to  fee  upwards 
and  downwards,  to  climb,  £5"^.  Thus  much  for  the 
^unicks. 

The 


(^)  In  Bove,  Caprd,  Equo,  Ove,  z^  qti'tlufdam  al'iis  elllptica 
eft  (Pupilla}  ut  eo  magis  in  hlfce  for  fan  ammalibus,  qiu  prono  in- 
cejfii  vicium  in  agris  qu&ritant,  radios  laterales  ad  mala  ct"  income 
moda  utrinque  devitanda  admittat.     Briggs'5  Ophthal.  c.  7.  §.  6. 

Homini  eretlo,  aliifque,  &c.  caput  erigere,  ct*  quaqnaverfus 
circumfpicere  folifis,  plurima  fifnul  ol/jedla,  turn  fupra,  turn  in- 
fra, turn  e  latere  utroque vifu  excipittntur ;  quapropter  Ocu- 

li  Pupilla  rotunda  ejfe  debet. Attamen  hovi,  Sec.    caput  fere 

femper  pronum gerentibus,  tanthm  qua  coram,  zj' paulo  a  la- 
tere obverfantur,  intuitu  opus  eft :   quapropter  Pupilla oblofi- 

ga  eji,  &c.      Willis  de  Anim.  Brut.  p.  i.  c.  15. 

{aa)  Thus  Cats  (their  Pupils  being  ered,  and  the  ftiutting 
of  their  Eye-hds  tranfverfe  thereunto)  can  fo  clofe  their  Pu- 
pil, asto  admit  of,  as  it  were,  one  only  fingle  Ray  of  Light; 
and  by  throwing  all  open,  they  can  take  in  all  the  fainteft 
Rays.  Which  is  an  incomparable  Provifion  for  thefe  Ani- 
mals, that  have  occafion  to  watch  and  way-lay  their  Prey 
both  by  Day  and  Night. 

(bb)  There  is  befides  this  large  opening  of  the  Pupil,  in  fome 
nofturnal  Animals>   another  admirable  frovilion,   enabling 

them 


Chap.  IT.  Of  the  Eye.  loi 

The  next  Thing  I  {hall  take  notice  of,  will  relate 
to  the  Humours  of  the  Eye,  and  that  only  o^ncern- 
ing  the  Mechanifm  of  the  Cryjla!li/je  Humour  i 
not  its  incomparable  Tranfparcncy  j  nor  its  exa6t 
lenticular  Form  •,  nor  its  curious  arancous  Mem- 
brane (a)y    that   conftringeth  and  dilatcth  ir,    and 

fo 


them  to  catch  their  Prey  in  the  Dark;  and  that  is  a  Radiation 
of  the  liyes :  Ot  which  Dr.  Willis  thus;  Hujus  uft4s  eji  Oculi 
Ptipillatn,  quafi  jubare  infito,  illuminate,  ut  re^  notlu,  cr  in  te~ 
nebris  pofitas  confpicere  valeat :  quare  in  Fele  plunmum  illujlrit 
efi :  at  Homini,  Aviius,  u- Pifcibus  deeft.  This  llluminatioa 
he  fpeaks  oF,  is  from  the  Tapetum,  in  the  Bottom  of  the  Eye, 
or  the  fliinmg  of  the  Retina,  round  the  optick  Nerve. 

Befides  which,  he  faith,  the  Iris  hath  a  Faculty  alfo,  in 
fome,  of  darting  out  Rays  of  Light,  fo  as  to  enable  them  to 
fee  in  the  Dark:  Of  which  he  tells  this  Story  ;  Novi  quendam 
cerebro  calidiori  priditum,  qui  poft  uheriorem  -vini  pencraft  pctum 
in  noHe  atratd,  five  tenebns  profundis,  literas  difiin6tc  legere  po- 
tuit,  Chjhs  ratio  videtur  efje,  quid  fpiritus  animates  lelut  ac- 
cenfi,  adeoque  ah  hac  Iride  irradtantes,  jnbare  nifito  Medium  il- 
lummabant.     Willis  Ibid. 

Such  another  Thing,  Pliny  tells  us,  was  reported  of  Tiberius 
Cafar :  Ferunt  Tib.  C^f.  nee  alii  genitorum  mortalium,  fuijj'e  na~ 
turam,  ut  expergefaHus  no^ii  paulifper,  haud  alio  modo  quam 
luce  clara,  contueretur  omnia.     Nat.  Hiff.  1.  1 1.  c.  37. 

So  Dr.  Briggs :   Virtimfane  calid&  indolis  novi  in  Ccmitatu  Bed- 

fordienfi  degentem,  qui  oculis  felineis donatus  efl :  adeo  ut  e- 

pificlam—'—mire  admodum  in  loco  obfcuro  ubi  eadem  mihi  vix 
apparuit)  perlegtf.  Hujus  vera  Oculi  (nifi  quod  PupilLts  i>ij:gni~ 
ores  obtinuere)  ab  aliorum  formatione  neutiquam  difcrepabant. 
Ophthal.  c.  5.  §.  IX. 

(cc)  The  Tunica  Aranea  is  taken  notice  of  by  Trier  Bacon, 
who  calls  it,  Tela  Aranea,  and  faith,  in  hac  contmetur—— 
glaciate  vel  Cryfiallinum.  Rog.  Bacon'j  Perfpeil.  Difitnft.  2. 
c.  3.  The  wrinkling  of  this,  and  the  Cornea  (as  the  Skin  is  of 
old  Perfons)  he  thinks  is  the  Caufe  of  the  Obfcurity  of  the 
Sight  in  fuch  Perfons.  Bacon  lb.  par.  z.  cap.  2.  But  this  T«- 
nick  fome  deny,  and  others  allovv  of:  Dr.  A.  M.  of  Trinity- 
College,  Dublin,  (in  his  Relat.  of  Anat.  Obf.  in  the  Eyes  of 
Animals,  in  a  Letter  to  Mr.  Boyl,  Ann.  1681.  annexed  to  his 
Anat.  Account  of  the  Elephant  burnt  in  Dublin,  p.  57.)  affirms 
the  Tunica  Aranea,  and  faith,  /  have  often  feen  it  before  'twas 
expofed  to  the  Air  one  Minute,  notwithjlanding  -juhat  Dr.  BriggS 
faiik  to  the  contrary,  &c.    But  Dr.  Bri^s  lus  Opinion  is,  Hu- 

H  3  mor 


I02,  Of  the  Eye.  Book  IV. 

To  varieth  its  Tocus^  (if  any  fuch    Variation  there 
be,  as  fome  affirm  with  great  Probability,)  nor  lall^ 

ly 


mor  CryftaUtriHs,  nifi  aeri  diutius  expofitus,  vel  lemur  co5ius 
(inftar  la^is)  cuticulam  non  acquirit  :  qn£  vera  Improprie,  Tu- 
nica Aranea  d'icitur,  chm  fi  tanthm  adventitia,  ut  in  OchIo  Bq' 
vis  recens  exeffo  appareat.     Briggs'i  Ophthalm.  c.  3. 

The  Cryflalline  Humour  being  of  a  double  Subftance,  out- 
wardly like  a  Gelly,  towards  the  Center  as  confident  as  hard 
Suet,  upon  occalion  whereof  its  Figure  may  be  varied  ;  which 
Variation  may  be  made  by  the  Ligamentum  Cilia- e  ;  Dr.  Grew 
doth,  upon  thefe  Accounts,  not  doubt  to  afcribe  to  the  Liga- 
K^entum  Ciliare,  a  Power  of  making  the  Cryfialiine  more  Con- 
vex, as  well  as  of  moving  it  to,  or  from  the  Retina.  See 
Gre-iv's  CojmA'g.  Sacr.  1.  r.  c.  4  Now  it  is  certain  by  the 
Laws  of  O^cicks,  thac  foiTiewhat  of  this  is  ahfolutely  ne- 
celTary  to  diliincl  Vifion,  inafmuch  as  the  R.iys  proceeding 
from  nigh  Objeds  do  more  diverge,  and  thofe  from  diftant 
Objects  lefs:  Which  requires  eith.-r  that  the  Cryflalime  Hu- 
mour lliould  be  made  more  Convex,  or  more  flat;  or  elfe  an 
Elongation,  or  fhortning  of  the  Eye,  or  of  the  Diftance  be- 
tween the  CiyJ^aHine  Humr.ir  and  the  Retina. 

But  although  Dr.  Briggs  [\'o  good  a  Judge)  denies  the  Tuni- 
ca Cry/iallina,  contrary  to  the  Opinion  of  moft  former  Ana- 
tomil^s ;  yet  there  is  gteat  Reafon  to  conclude  he  was  in  a 
Miftake,  in  my  Opinion,  from  the  Obfervations  of  the  French 
Anatom-fts,  of  the  Cr)';?^//;?;^  of  the  Eye,  of  the  Gf>»/)  or  C^<i- 
mois,  who  fay,  The  Ahmbrana  Arachnoides  was  very  thick, 
and  hard,  fo  that  it  was  eafily  feparaiid  from  the  CryjlaliinHSf 

p.  145- 

The  fime  Anatomifts  alfo  favour  the  Surmife  of  Dr.  Grew, 
This  [Contradion  of  the  Fibres  of  the  Ligamentum  Ciliare  on 
one  fide,  and  Dilatation  on  the  other]  ivould  make  us  think 
that  thefe  Fibres  of  the  Ligamentum  Ciliare,  are  capable  of 
Contraction,  and  voluntary  Dilatation,  like  that  of  the  Fibres  of 
the  Mufcles ;  and  that  this  A6lion  may  augment,  or  diminijh  the 
Convexity  of  the  Cryftallinus,  according  as  the  Need  ivhich  the 
Difiance  of  the  Obje6ls  may  make  it  to  have  on  the  Eye,  to  fee 
fnore  clearly  and  dijiin^ly.     Anat.  Defcrrp.  of  a  Bear,  p.  49. 

Since  my  penning  the  foregoing  Notes,  having  as  critically 
ts  I  could,  dilTeded  many  Eyes  of  Birds,  Beads  and  Fiflies, 
I  manifeftly  found  the  Membrana  Arachnoides,  and  will  un- 
dertake to  fbew  it  any  one,  with  great  Eafe  and  Certainty. 
It  is  indeed  fo  iranfparent,  as  not  to  be  feen  diftindl  from  the 
iSrjM^i'}^'    But  if  the  Cornea  and  Uvis  be  taken  off  before^ 


Chap.  II.  Of  the  Eye.  103 

Jy,  irs  admirable  Approach  to  or  from  the  Retina^ 
by  help  of  the  CUiar  Ligament  idd)^  according  as 

Objcds 


or  the  viireoHs  Humour  behind  it,  and  the  out- fide  of  the  Cry- 
fialline  be  gently  cut,  the  ArachnouUs  nuy  be  feen  to  open, 
and  the  Cry/lalline  will  eafily  leap  out,  and  p.\rt  from  the  Lz- 
gamentum  Ctliare ;  which  otherwifc  it  would  not  do:  For  it 
is  by  the  Arachno'iHes  braced  to  the  Ligamentum  Ctiiare.  This 
Membrane  or  Tunick,  in  the  Ox,  is  lo  rublhntial  and  itrong, 
tJiough  thin,  that  it  yields  to.  or  links  under  the  fliarpelt  Lan- 
cet, and  requires  (for  lb  thin  and  weak  a  Membrane  in  appea- 
rance) a  Itrong  PrelTure  to  pierce  it. 

{dd)  As  Birds  and  Fidies  are  in  divers  Things  conformable, 
fo  in  ("ome  fort  they  are  in  their  F.ye;  to  enable  it  to  corref- 
pond  to  all  the  Convergences,  and  Divergences  of  the  Rays, 
which  the  Variations  of  each  of  the  Mediums  may  produce. 
For  this  Service  the  Tunica  Choroeida,  (\\\  Fiflies)  hath  a  muf- 
culous  Subttance  at  the  Bottom  of  it,  lying  round  the  optick 
Nerve,  at  a  fmall  Diltance  from  it;  by  which  Means  I  ima- 
gme  they  are  able  to  contracff,  and  dilate  the  Choroeides,  and 
thereby  to  lengthen  and  Iborten  the  Fye  :  For  the  helping  ia 
which  Service,  1  imagine  ;t  is  that  the  Choroeides,  and  Sclero' 
lica,  are  in  a  great  Mcalure  psrted,  that  the  Choroeides  may 
have  the  greater  Liberty  of  ac^ting  upon  the  Humours  within. 

But  in  Birds,  I  have  my  fcif  found,  that  although  the  Cho- 
roeides be  parted  from  che  Sclerotica ;  yet  the  Choroeides  hath 
no  Mufcle,  but  inftend  thereof,  a  curious  pedinated  Work, 
fcated  on  the  optick  Nerve,  reprefented  in  Fig.  z.  In  Vv'hich 
c  a.  e.  b.  d.  reprefents  the  Choroeides  and  Sclerotica:  a.  b.  the 
Part  of  the  optick  Kerve,  that  is  within  the  Lye :  v.  v.  v.  the 
'vitreous  Humour :  a.  f.  g.  b.  the  PeCten  :  h.  i  the  Cryftalline. 
For  the  Reception  of  this  Fe£len,  the  optick  Nerve  comes  far- 
ther within  the  Eye,  than  in  other  Creatures.  The  Stiudure 
of  this  Petlen,  is  very  like  that  of  the  Ltgamentum  Ciliare  ; 
and  in  the  Eye  of  a  Alagpy,  and  fome  others,  I  could  per- 
ceive it  to  be  mufcubus  towards  the  Bottom.  This  Peflen  is 
fo  firmly  fixed  unto,  or  embodied  in  the  vitreous  Humour, 
th.U  the  vitreous  Humour  hangs  firmly  to  it,  and  is  not  fo  ea- 
fily parted  from  it.  By  which  Means  all  the  Motions  of  the 
Pe^en  are  eafily  communicated  to  the  vitreous  Humour,  and 
indeed  to  all  contained  in  the  Choroeides.  And  foraimuch  as 
the  Cry/Ialiine  is  conne(ffed  to  the  vitreous  Humour,  therefore 
alfo  the  Alterations  in  the  vitreous  Humour  atfetft  alio  the  Cry» 
fiAlltne-,  and  the  Cryftalitrte  is  hereby  brought  nearer  unto, 
QX  farther  from  the  Rttina,  as  occafion  is. 

H  4  BcttJcs 


X04  Of  the  Eye,  Book  IV. 

Obje6ts  are  far  oflF  or  near,  becaufe  thefe  Things 
are  what  areufually  taken  notice  ofj  but  that  which 
J  l"hall  obferve  is,  the.  prodigious  Art  and  Finery 
of  its  conltitnent  Parts,  it  beings  according  to 
fomelate  nice  Microfcopical  Obfervations  (<?^),  com- 

pofed 


Befidcs  nil  which  O'ufervables  in  the  Choroeldes,  and  inner 
Eye,  I  have  ahb  fuund  this  farther  remarkable  in  the  Scleroti- 
ca, and  outer-part  of  the  i"-ye  of  Birds,  "Jiz.  That  the  fore- 
part of  the  Sclerotica  is  horny  and  hard,  the  middle-part  thin 
and  flexible,  and  Braces  intervene  between  the  fore  and  hind- 
part,  running  between  the  Choroeides  and  Sclerotica  ;  by  which 
Means  the  Cornea,  and  back-part  of  the  Eye,  are  brought  to 
the  fsme  Conformity,  that  the  reft  of  the  Eye  hath. 

The  great  End  and  Defign  of  this  fmgular  and  curious  ^p- 
faratus  in  the  Eyes,  both  of  Birds  and  Fiflies,  I  take  to  be, 
I.  To  enable  thofe  Creatures  to  fee  at  all  Diftances,  far  off, 
or  nigh;  which  (efpecially  in  the  Waters)  requireth  a  diffe- 
rent Conformation  of  the  Eye.  In  Birds  alfo,  this  is  of  great 
Ufe,  to  enable  them  to  fee  their  Food  at  their  Bill's  End,  or 
to  reach  the  utmofl:  Diftances  their  high  Flights  c;i.ib!e  them 
to  view  ;  as  to  fee  over  great  Trads  of  Sea  or  Land,  whither 
they  have  occafion  to  fly  ;  or  to  fee  their  Food  or  Prey,  even 
fmall  Filhes  in  the  Waters,  and  Birds,  Worms,  zs'c.  on  the 
Eaich,  when  they  fit  upon  Trees,  high  Rocks,  or  are  hover- 
ing high  in  the  Air.  2.  To  enable  thofe  Animals  to  adapt 
their  Eye  to  all  the  various  Refradions  of  their  Medium.  E- 
ven  the  Air  it  felf  varies  the  Refraftions,  according  as  it  is  ra- 
rer or  d'jnfcr,  more  or  lefs  corapreffed;  as  is  manifefl:  from 
the  learned  and  ingenious  Mr.  Loivthorp's  Experiment  in  Phil. 
Tranf.  N°.  2.57.  and  feme  other  Experiments  fince  of  the  be- 
fore-commended Mr.  Havjkfiee,  both  in  natural,  rarify'd  and 
comrreffed  Air;  in  each  of  which,  the  Refraftions  conftantly 
\ar)ed  in  exaft  Proportion  to  the  Rarity  or  Denfity  of  the 
Air.  Vid.  Hazvkjhee's  Exp.  pag.  175,  ct^c. 

Beiides  this  Conformity  in  general,  between  the  Eyes  of 
Birds  and  Fifties,  Du  Hatnel  tells  us  of  a  fingular  Confor- 
mity in  the  Cormorant's  Eye,  and  that  is,  that  the  Cry/ialline 
is  globous,  as  in  Fifties,  to  enable  it  to  fee  and  purfue  its  Prey- 
under  Water:  Which  ^.  Falser,  in  Mr.Wilbughhy  faith,  they 
do  zvith  wonderful  Szvifmefsj  and  for  a  long  Time.  Will.  Omi- 
thol.  p.  329. 

{ee)  The  CryJIalline  Humour,  when  dry'd,  doth  mani.^eftly 
enough  appear  to  be  made  up  of  many  very  thin  fphcrical 


Chap.  II.  Of  the  Eje.  lOf 

pofcd  of  divers  thin  Scales,  and  thefc  made  up  of 
one  lingle  minuteft  Thread  or  Fibre,  wound  round 
and  round,  fo  as  not  to  crols  one  another  in  any 
one  Place,  and  yet  to  meet,  fome  in  two,  and  fomc 
in  more  different  Centers  j  a  Web  not  to  be  woven, 
an  Optick  Lens^  not  to  be  wrought  by  any  Art  lefs 
than  infinite  Wifdoni. 

Lajllyy  To  conclude  the  Parts  of  this  admirable 
Organ,  1  ihall  make  only  one  Remark  more,  and 
that  is  about  its  Nerves.  And  here,  among  others, 
the  admirable  Make  of  the  Optick  Nerves  might 
dcferve  to  be  taken  notice  of  in  the  firft  Place,  their 
Medullary  Part  (//)  terminating  in  the  Brain  it  felf, 
the  Teguments  propagated  from  the  Meninges^  and 
terminating  in  the  Coats  of  the  Eye,  and  their  com- 
modious Infertions  into  the  Ball  of  the  Eye,  in  fomc 
direftly  oppofite  to  the  Pupil  of  the  Eye,  in  others 


Lami?u,  or  Scales  lying  one  upon  another.  Mr.  Lewenhoek 
reckons  there  may  be  looo  of  them  in  one  Cryfialime,  from 
the  outcrmolt  lo  the  Center.  Every  one  of  tlicle  Scales,  he 
faith,  he  hath  difcovcred  to  be  made  up  of  one  fingle  Fibre, 
or  h.ieft  Thread  wound,  in  a  moft  llupendous  Manner,  this 
way,  and  that  way,  ib  as  to  run  fever.U  Courfcs,  and  meet  in 
as  many  Centers,  and  yet  not  to  interfere,  or  crofs  one  ano- 
ther, in  any  one  Place.  InOxew,  Sheep,  Hogs,  Bogs  inCi  Cat s, 
the  Thiead  fpreads  into  three  feveral  Courlcs,  and  makes  as 
many  Centers :  In  Wheiles  five;  but  in  Hares  and  Rabbe:$  on- 
ly two.  In  the  whole  Surface  of  an  Ox's  CnJlalluie,  he  rec- 
kons there  are  more  than  iiooo  Fibres  juxtapolited.  For  the 
right  and  clear  Underlbnding  of  the  Manner  of  which  admi- 
rable Piece  of  Mechanifm,  I  (IviU  refer  to  his  Cuts  and  De- 
fcriptions  in  Philof.  Tranf.  N".  165.  and  2.93.  The  Truth 
hereof  I  have  heard  fome  ingenious  Men  quellion  ;  but  it  is 
what  1  my  felf  have  feen,  and  can  Ihew  to  any  Body,  witli 
the  Help  of  a  good  Microfcope. 

(//)  S.  Malpighi  obferved  the  Middle  of  the  optick  Kerv$ 
of  the  Sword-Fijh,  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  a  large  Membrane, 
folded  according  to  its  Length  in  many  Doubles,  almoll  like 
?  Fan,  and  invelfed  by  the  Duramater;  whereas  in  Land- 
Animals  it  is  a  Bundle  of  Fibres,     v.  Phil.  Tranf.  N".  27. 

pbliquely 


io6  Of  the  Eye.  Book  IV. 

obliquely  towards  one  Side  (gg).  But  moft  of  thefe 
Things  have  been  treated  of,  and  the  Convenience 
hereof  fet  forth  by  others  that  have  written  of 
God's  Works.  I  fhall  therefore  take  notice  only  of 
one  wife  Provifion  the  Creator  hath  made  about  the 
Motion  of  the  Eye,  by  uniting  into  one  the  T'hird 
Pair  of  Nerves,  called  the  Motory  Nerves  {hb),  each 
of  which  fending  its  Branches  into  each  Mufcle  of 
each  Eye,  would  caufe  a  Diitortion  in  the  Eyes  j  but 
being  united  into  one,  near  their  Infertion  into  the 
Brain,  do  thereby  caufe  both  Eyes  to  have  the  fame 
Motion;  fo  that  when  one  Eye  is  moved  this  way  and 
that  way,  to  this  and  that  Objed,  the  other  Eye  is 
turned  the  fame  way  alfo. 

Thus  from  this  tranfient  and  flight  View  (I  may 
call  it)  of  the  Parts  of  the  Eye,  it  appears  what  an 
admirable  Artift  was  the  Contriver  thereof.  And 
now  in  the 

Seventh  and  lad  Place,  Let  us  conflder  what  Pro- 
vifion this  admirable  Artid  hath  made  for  the  Guard 
and  Security  of  this  fo  well  formed  Organ  (//).    And 

here 


(og)  Certijfimum  eft,  quod  in  omn'tbus  Ocul'ts  humanis  (qu»s 
[dtem  mihi  dijjecare  conttgit)  Kervus  opticus  PupilU  e  diametro 
ciponitur,  &C.  Briggss  Ophthal.  c.  3.  §.  ij.  Ita  Willis  de  A- 
mm.  Brut.  p.  I.  e.  15. 

Nervi  Optici  in  nobis,  item  in  Cane,  Tele  (zT  in  c&teris  for  fan 
animalihus  calidisj  ad  fundum  Oculi  delati  PupilU  regioni  pr«-- 
fpiciunt,  dum  interim  in  aliis  S}jadrupedibus,  uti  etiam  in  Pifci- 
bus  cr  Volucribus,  oblique  femper  TunicA  Sclerotidt  inferuntur, 
Vnde,  &c.  WiUis  lb.  c.  7.  §.  ir. 

{hh)  This  Pair  is  united  at  its  Rife;  whence  is  commonly 
drazvn  a  Reafon  why  one  Eye  being  tnov'd  towards  an  ObjeCi, 
the  other  is  direSled  alfo  to  the  fame.  Gibfon'i  Anat.  Book  ill. 
Chap.   ir.     So  Bartholme  Anat.  Libellus  3.  C  2. 

{ii)  Among  all  the  other  Security  the  Eye  hath,  we  may 
reckon  the  Reparation  of  the  aqueous  Humour-,  by  which 
Means  the  Eye  when  wounded,  and  that  in  all  Appearance 
very  dangeroufly  too,  doth  often  recover  its  Sight :  Of  which 
l^znt.  Verzafcha  gives  divers  Examples  ancient  and  modern. 
One  is  £1019  Gal(»s,  of  a  Boy  fo  wouiided,  that  the  Cor»t4 


Chap.  II.  Of  the  Eye.  107 

here  we  fhall  find  the  Gaaid  equivalent  to  the  Ufc 
and  Excellency  of  the  Part.  I'hc  whole  Organ  for- 
tified and  fenced  with  ftrong,  com pa(5l  Hones,  lodg- 
ed in  a  lliong,  well  made  Socket,  and  the  Eye  it 
felf  guarded  with  a  nice  made  Cover  {kk).  Its  Hu- 
mours, and  its  inward  Tunicks,  are  indeed  tender, 

propor- 


fell,  and  became  flaccid,  but  yet  recovered  his  Sight.  Other 
fuch  hke  InlUnccs  alfo  he  gives  from  Fent.ius  ColHmbus^  Rho- 
diust  and  Tulpius ;  and  one  thnt  he  cured  himfelf  in  thcfe 
Words,  Fgo  in  Kobiiijfmi  viri  j'llicla  fimtlem  cafum  obferva- 
\ji :  hic  di4m  levibm  de  can/is  cum  fiaire  altercaret,  ifie  ira- 
citndid  perch  us  cultellum  Scriptorium  apprehenJit,  (j"  fororn  ccu- 
lo  vulnus  infligit,  iride  humor  a^nens  tfjhtxit.  V'ocatus  pr£fen- 
tem  Chirurgum  jtijfi  fequens  collyriiim  anodynum  Qj-  exftccans  te- 
pide  fipihs  admovere.  F?(  aq.  PUntag.  f  iv.  Rofar.  Sanicul.  Eu- 
phraf.  ana  Trochifc.  alb.  Rhaf.  cum  Opio  5ii.  Tut:£  pp.  ^\  Crock 
orient.  ^j>.  M.  Hoc  Collyrium  uiflammationem  compefcuit,  "vul- 
nus  ficcavit  c^  fanavit.  Hinc  pjji  ait  juot  tnenfes  Humor  aqueus 
fuccrevit.  Nam  'vifus,  fed  dibilior,  cum  fummo  parentum  gaU' 
dio  redivit*     B.  Verzifchae  Ohferv.  Mcdicce.  Obf.  i.\. 

Another  Cure  of  tliis  kind,  was  experimented  by  Dr.  Da-i 
niel  Alajor,  upon  a  Goofe,  Ann.  1(^)70.  the  aqueous  Humour 
of  both  whole  Eyes  they  let  our.  To  that  the  Eyes  fell,  and 
the  Goofe  became  quite  blind  :  But  without  the  Uie  of  any  Me- 
dicine, in  about  two  Days  Time,  Nature  repaired  the  wate- 
ry Humour  again,  the  Eyes  returned  to  their  former  Tur- 
gency,  and  the  Goofe  was  in  a  Week  after  produced  feeing 
before  twenty  eight  or  thirty  Spedtators.  Ephem.  Germ.  T.  j. 
Add.  ad.  Obf.  117. 

From  the  fame  Caufe,  I  doubt  not,  it  was  that  the  Eye  of 
a  Gentleman's  Daughter,  and  thofe  of  a  Cock,  when  wound- 
ed, fo  that  the  Cornea  funk,  were  reftored  by  a  Lithuanian 
Chymift,  that  palled  fur  a  Conjurer,  by  the  Ut'e  of  a  Liquor 
found  in  May,  in  the  Veliculjie  of  Elm.  Of  which  fee  Mr, 
Kay's  Catal.  Cantab,  in  Vlmus  from  Henr.  ab  Hecrs. 

[kk]  Palpebrd,  qnt  funt  tegmnenta  Oculorum,  tn^lijfimt 
ta6lu,  ne  Uderent  aciem,  apti[f>ms.  fafU,  c/  ad  claudendas  Fu- 
pilias,  ne  quid  incideret,  cr  ad  apenendas  ;  idjue  providtt,  ut 
identidem  fieri  pojfet  cum  maxima  celeritate.  MnnitAque  funf 
Palpebn  tanqu.im  -vallo  pilorum :  quibus  CT*  atcriis  Oculu,  fi 
quid  incideret,  repelleretury  c?"  fomno  connizenitbtti,  cum  Ociilis 
ad  ctrneudum  non  egerimtn,  ut  q'ti,  tanquam  invcluti,  quitf- 
(trerit.     La:en(  prxtcrea  Htjlitert   c/  excelfif  undique  partibnt 

Je^tHUluf^ 


ic)8  Of  the  Eye,  Book  IV. 

proportionate  to  their  tender,  curious  Ufesj  but 
the  Coats  without,  are  context  and  callous,  firm 
and  flrong.    And   in  fome  Animals,   particularly 

Birds 


fep'mntur.  Primhm  enim  fttpenora  Sdperciliis  obdi-ifla  fudorem 
acapite.  ^S'  fronte  defluentem  repellunt.  Gens  de'mde  ab  injeri- 
ore  pane  tutuntur  fubjetl&,  levilerque  eminentes  Cicer,  de 
Nat.  Deor.  L.  z.  c.  57, 

Tully,  in  the  Perfon  of  a  Stokk,  having  fo  well  accounted 
for  the  Ufe  or  the  Eye- Lids,  I  (liill  for  a  further  Manifefta- 
tion  of  the  Creator's  Contrivance  and  Structure  of  them, 
take  notice  of  two  or  thr.?e  Things  :  i.  They  confilt  of  a 
thin  and  flexible,  butftroig  Skin,  by  which  means  they  the 
better  wipe,  clean,  and  guard  the  Cornea,  z.  Their  Edges 
are  forcitied  with  a  fort  Cartilage,  by  which  means  they  are 
not  only  enabled  the  better  to  do  their  Office,  but  alio  to 
clofe  and  flvar  the  better.  3  Out  of  thefe  Cartilages  grow  a 
failifade  ot  itiflf  Hairs,  of  great  Uie  to  warn  the  Eye  of  the 
invafion  of  Dangers,  to  keep  off  Motes,  and  to  ftiut  out  too 
exeeffive  Light,  ct'c  and  at  the  fame  time  to  admit  of  (through 
their  intervals)  a  fufficient  Paffage  for  Objeds  to  approach 
the  Eye,  And  it  is  remarkable,  that  thefe  Hairs  grow  but  to 
a  certain,  commodious  Length,  and  need  no  cutting,  as  ma- 
ny other  Hairs  of  the  Body  do  :  Alio,  that  their  Points  itand 
out  of  the  way,  and  in  the  upper-lid  bend  upwards,  as  they 
do  downwards  in  the  lower  lid,  whereby  they  are  well 
adapted  to  their  \J^q.  From  which  lah  Obfcrvables,  we  may 
learn  how  critical  and  nice  the  great  Author  of  Nature  hath 
been,  in  even  the  lead  and  mod  trivial Conveniencies  belong- 
ing to  Animal  Bodies  ;  for  which  Reafon  I  have  added  it  to 
Tally  s  Remarks.  And  more  might  have  been  added  too,  as 
particularly  concerning  the  curious  Strudture  and  Lodgment 
of  the  Right  Mnfcle,  which  opens  the  Eye-Lids;  and  the 
Orbicularis,  or  Circular  one,  that  (liuts  them  ;  the  nice  j^p- 
traratus  of  Glands  that  keep  the  Eye  moift,  and  ferve  for 
Tears ;  together  with  the  Reafon  why  Man  alone,  who  is  a 
fecial  Animal,  doth  exhibit  his  focial  Affeftions  by  fuch  out- 
ward Tokens  as  Tears ;  the  Nerves  alfo,  and  other  Or- 
gans afting  in  this  Minillry.  I  might  alfo  fpeak  of  the  Paf- 
fages  for  difcharging  the  fuperfluous  Moifture  of  the  Eyes 
through  the  Noftrils,  and  much  more  of  the  hke  kind.  But 
it  would  take  up  too  much  Room  in  thefe  Notes  ;  and  there- 
fore it  (hail  fuffice  to  give  only  fuch  Hints  as  may  create  a 
Sufpicion  of  a  noble  O Economy  and  Contrivance  in  this  (I 
bad  almoft  faid)  leaft  confiderahle  part  of  the  Eye.    But  for 

Particulars. 


Chap.  II.  Of  the  Eye.  I09 

Birds  (//),  fomcPart  ofthofc  Tiinides  have  the  Na- 
ture and  Hardnifs  of  Bone  or  Hurn. 

But  for  Creatures,  whofc  Eyes,  hkc  the  reft  of 
their  Body,  are  tender,  and  without  tlic  CJuard  of 
Bones  J  there  Natuie  hath  provided  for  this  ncccflii- 
ry  and  tcnd^-r  ScniV,  a  wonderful  kind  o*i  Guard, 
by  endowmg  the  Creature  with  a  Faculty  of  with* 


Particulars  I  fhill  refer  to  the  Anatomifts ;  and  for  fome  of 
thefe  Things,  pjrtijuiarly  to  Dr.  Willis  <  Cercj.  Anut.  and  de 
jinim  Brut,  and  Mr.  Cow^er's  Elcginc  Cuts  in  the  nth  Jal/. 
of  his  Anatcmy. 

To  the  Eye- Lias  we  may  add  another  Guard  afforded  the 
Eyes  of  moll  Qu.idiupeds,  Birds,  and  Filli::<:,  by  the  nitlita- 
ttng  Membrane,  which  Dr  Willis  givts  this  Account  of,  Plu- 
rimis  [Animahbus]  qnibm  Mttfculus  fufpenforiu:  adeji  (which 
Limitation  he  needed  not  to  ii've  added)  etia77i  alttr  Mem- 
branofus  ccnceditur,  ijui  juxta  ::iteriorem  cculi  cant  hum  fttttt^ 
quando  elevatur,  Octtli  glohum  fere  tottim  obtegit.  Hujtis 
ujiii  effe  I'idctur,  ttt  ckm  BejiU  inter  gramina,  ikc.  capita  fua 
propter  i>ifl:iPi  cap!jj!:nJ:im  dtwtr^nnt,  hie  Mufctil.is  Oc:ili  Pw 
f  :11am,  ne  k  Jlipularum  incurfu  feriatur,  oculit,  fnunitq:te.  De 
Anim.  Brut,  p   i.  c.  15. 

1  his  Mtfnbrane  Man  hath  not,  ht  having  little  Occafion 
to  thrull  his  He.id  into  lach  Places  of  Ai>noy,ince,  as  Beafls 
and  other  Animals;  or  if  he  hath,  he  can  defend  his  Eyes 
with  his  Hands.  But  Birds  (who  frequent  Trees  and  Bu(lics) 
and  Quadrupeds,  (Hedges  and  long  Grafs)  and  who  have  no 
part  leady,  like  the  Hand,  to  fence  off  Annoyances;  thefe,  I 
fay,  have  this  incomparable  Provifion  made  for  the  Safety  of 
their  Eyes.  And  for  Fiflies,  as  they  are  delh'tute  of  Kyc- 
Lids,  becaufc  in  the  Wa  ers  there  is  no  occafion  for  a  De- 
fenl^itive  againft  Dull  and  Motes,  offenfive  to  the  Eyes  of 
Land  Animals,  nor  to  moiflen  and  wipe  the  Eyes,  as  the 
Eye-Lids  do,  fo  the  Nictitating-Metnbratie  is  an  abundant 
Provifion  for  all  their  Occafions,  without  the  Addition  of 
the  Eye-Lids. 

And  now,  if  we  reflctfl,  are  thefe  the  Works  of  any  Thing 
but  a  wife  and  indulgent  Agent  ^ 

ill)  Although  the  Hardnefs  and  Firmnefs  of  the  Adnata, 
or  Sclerotica  in  li.rds,  is  a  good  Guard  to  their  Eyes,  yet  I  do 
not  think  i;  is  made  thus,  fo  much  for  a  Defence,  as  to  mini- 
fterto  thelengthningandfliortmng  the  Eye,  mentioned  before 
ia  Holt  {cc^t 

drawing 


no  Of  the  Eye.  Book  IV. 

drawing  its  Eyes  into  its  Head  {mm).,  and  lodging 
them  in  the  fame  Safety  with  the  Body. 

Thus  have  I  furvey'd  this  firll  Senfe  of  Animals, 
I  may  fay  in  a  curfory,  not  accurate,  ftri6t  manner, 
confidering  the  prodigious  Workmanfhip  thereof  j 
but  fo,  as  abundantly  to  demondrate  it  to  be  the 
Contrivance,  the  Work  of  no  lefs  a  Being  than  the 
infinite  Wife,  Potent,  and  Indulgent  Creator  {nn). 
For  none  lefs  could  compofe  fo  admirable  an  Or- 
gan, fo  adapt  all  its  Parts,  fo  adjuft  it  to  all  Occa- 
sions, fo  nicely  provide  for  every  Ufe,  and  for  every 
Emergency :  In  a  word,  none  lefs  than  God,  could, 
I  fay,  thus  contrive,  order,  and  provide  an  Organ, 
as  magnificent  and  curious  as  the  Senfe  is  ufeful  5  a 
Senfe  without  which,  as  all  the  Animal  World 
would  be  in  perpetual  Darknefs,  fo  it  would  labour 
under  perpetual  Inconveniencies,  be  expofed  to  per- 
petual Harms,  and  fuffer  perpetual  Wants  and  D\- 
ilrefles.  But  now  by  this  admirable  Senfe,  thegreat 
God,  who  hath  placed  us  in  this  World,  hath  as 
well  provided  for  our  comfortable  Rcfidence  in  it  5 
enabled  us  to  fee  and  chufe  wholfome,  yea  delicate 
Food,  to  provide  our  felves  ufeful,  yea  gaudy  Cloath- 
ing,  and  commodious  Places  of  Habitation  and  Re- 
treat.    We  can  now  difpatch  our  Affairs  with  Ala- 


imin)  Cochleii  oculorum  vicem  Comicula  bina  pntentu  implent. 
Plin.  Nat.  Hifl:.  1.  ir.  c.  37,  See  more  of  the  Eyes  of  Snaih 
before  in  Note  (k)  ;  and  in  Note  (/),  I  faid  that  I  fufpeded 
Moles  alfo  might  thruft  out,  or  withdraw  their  Eyes  more  or 
lefs  within  the  Hair  or  Skin. 

(»»)  The  diligent  Sturmim  was  fully  perluaded  there  could 
not  be  any  fpeculative  Atheifm  in  any  one  that  (hould  well 
furvey  the  Eye.  Nobis,  faith  he,  fuit  ferfuafijfimum,  Athe- 
ifmum,  quern  vacant  fpeculativum,  h.  e.  obfirmatam  de  Deita- 
te  in  Univerfo  nulla  perfuafeonem,  habere  locum  aut  inventri  nott 
foJJ'e  in  eo  hotnine,  qui  vtl  uniiis  corporis  organici,  c  fpeciatim 
Oculi  fabricam  attento  animo  afpexerit.  StUim.  Exerc.  A- 
cad.  9.  De  Vif.  Organ.  8c  Rat.  in  Epilogo. 


cnty 


Chap.  II.  Of  the  Eye,  iir 

crity  and  Pleafure,  go  here  and  there  as  our  Occafi- 
ons  Call  us.  We  cm,  if  need  be,  vanfack  the  whole 
Globe,  penetrate  into  the  Bowels  of  the  Earth,  dcf- 
ccnd  to  the  bottom  t)f  the  Deep,  travel  to  the  far- 
theft  Regions  oF  this  World,  to  acquire  Wealth, 
to  encrcale  our  Knowledge,  or  even  only  to  pleafc 
our  Eye  and  Fancy.  We  can  now  look  about  us, 
difcern  and  fl\un  the  Precipices  and  Dangers  which 
every  where  cnclofe  us,  and  would  deiboy  us.  And 
thofc  glorious  Objects  which  fill  the  Heavens  and 
the  Earth,  iholc  admirable  Works  of  God  which 
every  where  furround  us,  and  which  would  be  as 
nothing  to  us,  without  being  ieen,  do  by  means  of 
this  noble  Senfe  prefent  their  Glories  to  us  (t^o),  and 


{oo)  The  glorious  Landll:;ps,  and  otlier  Objeds  tli»t  pre- 
fent theiiifelvcs  to  the  Eye,  are  manifellly  painted  on  the  Rt- 
tina,  and  that  not  ered,  but  inverted  as  the  l^aws  of  Opticks 
require;  and  is  manilelt  to  the  Lye  from  AUn/ieur  Canes's 
txperiment,  of  laying  bare  the  vitreous  Humour  on  the 
back  part  of  the  Eye,  and  clapping  over  it  a  Bit  of  wliite  Pa- 
per, or  the  Skin  of  an  Egg;  and  ilien  placing  the  fore-parr  of 
the  Eye  to  the  Hole  of  the  Window  of  a  darkned  Room.  By 
which  means  we  have  a  pretty  Landlliip  of  the  Objcdts 
abroad  invertedly  painted  on  the  Paper,  on  the  back  of  the 
Eye.  But  now  the  QuelUoa  is,  How  in  this  Cafe  the  Eye 
comes  to  fee  the  Objeds  cre(Jt  .-•  Monfieur  Cartel's  Anfwer  is, 
Notiiia  iUim  ex  nulla,  imagine  pendet,  nee  ex  ulid  a6lione  ab  ob- 
jeclis  veniente,  Jed  ex  folo  fitu  exiguarum  partium  cerebri,  e  qui- 
bus  Nervi  cxpnUiilani.———E.   g.  cogitandtim    tn   Ocuh  ■ 

fitum    capillamenti     nervi    opiici  refpondere    ad    alium 

quendufn  partis  cerebri qui  facit  ut  Anima  fmgula  lota 

cognofcat,  qu£  jacsnt  in  reila,  ant  qtt-ift  retLi  linea  ;  ut  ita 
mtrart  rton  dcbcamuA  corpora  in  naturah  fitu  videri,  quamvis 
ijnago  in  oculo  liclmeaia  contrarium  habeat.  Dioptr.  c.  6.  But 
our  mod  mgenious  Mr.  Motyneux  anfwereth  thus,  The  Eye  is 
only  the  Organ  or  lnftrnment,  'tis  the  Soul  that  fees  by  means 
of  the  Eye.  To  enquire  then  hozu  the  Soul  perceives  the 
Objetl  ere5l,  by  an  inverted  Image,  is  to  enquire  into  the  Soul's 
JFaculties  ■  But   ereci  arid  inverted   are  only  Terms  oj  Re- 

latton  to  up  and  down;   or  farther  from,   or  ntgher  to  the  Cen- 

Ur  of  tht  Earth,  in  Parts  of  the  fame  Thing, But  the 

Eyt, 
I 


itr  Of  the  Eye.  Book  IV. 

fill  us  with  Admiration  and  Pleafure.  But  I  need 
rot  expatiate  in  the  Ufefuhiefs  and  Praifes  of  this 
Senfe,  which  we  receive  the  Benefit  of  every  Mo- 
ment, and  the  want,  or  any  defed  of  which,  we 
lament  among  our  greateft  Misfortunes. 

Leaving  then  this  Senfe,  I  fhall  proceed  to  the 
other  four,  but  more  briefly  treat  of  them,  by  rea- 
fon  we  have  fo  ample  a  Sample  of  the  divine  Art  in 
the  laft,  and  may  prefume  that  the  fame  is  exerted 
in  all  as  well  as  one.  For  a  Demonftration  of 
•which,  let  us  in  the  next  Place  carry  our  Scrutiny 
to  the  Senfe  of  Hearing. 


Eye,  or  vifive  Faculty  takes  no  notice  of  the  internal  Pofiure  of 
its  own  Parts,  hut  ufeth  them  as  an  Inftrument  only,  contrived 
by  Nature  for  the  Exercife  of  fuch  a  Faculty.  —  Let  tu  imagine^ 
that  the  Eye  (on  its  lower  Part)  receives  an  Impulfe  [by  a  Ray 
from  the  upper  part  of  theObjedt]  mufi  not  the  vifive  Faculty 
be  necejjarily  diretled  hereby  to  confider  this  Stroke,  as  coming 
from  the  top  rather  than  the  bottom  [of  the  Objedl]  and  con- 
fequently  be  direiied  to  conclude  it  the  Reprefentation  of  the 
top  ?  Hereof  we  may  be  fatisfied,  by  fuppofing  a  Alan  ftanding 
on  his  Head.  For  here,  though  the  upper  Parts  of  OhjeSls  are 
tairted  on  the  upper  Parts  of  the  Eye,  yet  the  Objetis  are 
judged  to  be  ercfi.  What  is  faid  of  Ere£l  and  Reverfe,  may  be 
underfiood  of  Sinifier  and  Dexter.  Molyneux'j  Dioptr.  Nov. 
Part  I.  Prop.  28. 


CHAP, 


JI3 

CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  Senfe  of  Hearing, 

Concerning  the   Senfc  of  Hearings  I  ihall  take 
notice  oF  two  Things,    the  Organ,  the  Ear-^ 
and  Its  Obic6i:,  Sound. 

I.  For  the  Organ,  the  Ear-,  I  fliall  pafs  by  its 
convenient  Number  oF  being  double,  which  (as  in 
the  hilt  Senfe)  ferves  for  the  commodious  Hearing 
every  way  round  us;  as  alfo  a  wife  Provifion  for  the 
utter  Lofs  or  Injury  {a)  of  one  of  the  Ears.  But 
I  fhall  a  Htcle  indtl  upon  its  Situation,  and  its  ad- 
mirable Fabrick  and  Parts. 

I.  It 


{a)  I  prefurae  it  will  not  be  ungrateful  to  take  notice  here 
of  the  admirable,  as  well  as  ufcful  Sagacity  of  fome  deaf 
Perlbns,  that  have  learnt  to  fupply  their  want  of  Hearing  by 
underlVanding  what  is  faid  by  the  Motion  of  the  Lips.  My 
very  ingenious  Friend  Mr.  Waller,  R.  s.  Seer,  gives  this  Ac- 
count, There  live  now  and  have  from  their  Birth,  in- our  Town, 
a  Man  and  his  Stjier,  each  about  fifi'j  Tears  old,  neither  of 
which  have  the  leaft  Senfe  of  Hearing,  — — —  yer  both  of  theft 
know,  by  the  Motion  of  the  Lips  only,  whatever  is  faid  to 
them,  and  will  anfzuer  pertinently  to  the  Giuefiion  propofed   ta 

them The  Mother  told   me   they  could  hear  very  well,    and 

fpeak  when  they  were  Children,  but  both  loji  that  Senfc  after- 
wards, which  makes  them  retain  their  Speech  ;  though  that,  to 
Perfom  not  ufed  to  them.  Is  a  little  uncouth  and  odd,  but  in- 
telligible enough.     Phil.  Tranf.  N".  3ri. 

Such  anotlicr  Indance  is  that  of  Mr.  Goddy,  Minifler  of 
Sl.Gervats  in  Genev-i,  his  Daughter.  She  is  now  about  Jixteen 
Tears  old.  Her  Nurje  had  an  extraordinary  Thicknefi  of  Hear- 
ing ;  at  a  Tear  old,  the  Child  fpake  all   thoje  little  Words   that 

Children  begin  to  fpeak  at  that  Age. ■  .///  two  Years  old,  they 

perceived  jlie  had  lofl  her  Hearing,  and  was  fo  Deaf,  that  ever 
fince,  though  fiie  hears  great   Noifes,  yet  fie  hears    njthing  that 

one  can  fpeak  to  her. But  by  obferving  the  Motions  of  the 

Mouth  and  Lips  of  others,  (he  hath  acquired  fo  mA»J  Words, 
that  out  of  theft  fit  hath  formed  a  fort  of  Jargon,  in  which 


iij^  Of  the  Ear.  Book  IV. 

1 .  It  is  fituated  in  the  mofl  convenient  Part  of 
the  Body,  (Hke  as  I  faid  the  Eye  is)  in  a  Part  near 
the  common  Senfory  in  the  Brain,  to  give  the  more 
fpeedy  Information  >  in  a  Part  where  it  can  be  beft 
guarded,  and  where  it  is  mofl:  free  from  Annoy- 
ances and  Harms  it  felf,  and  where  it  gives  the  lead 
Annoyance  and  Hindrance  to  the  Exercifes  of  any 
other  Part ;  in  a  Part  appropriated  to  the  peculiar  Ufe 
of  the  principal  Senfes,  in  the  moll  lofty,  eminent 
Part  of  the  Body,  where  it  can  perceive  the  moft 
Objects,  and  receive  the  greateft  Information ;  And 
kflly,  in  a  Part  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  its  Sifter 
Senfe  the  Eye,  with  whom  it  hath  peculiar  and  ad- 
mirable Communication  by  its  Nerves,  as  I  intend 
to  fhew  in  its  proper  Place.  In  refpe6t  then  of  its 
Situation  and  Place  in  the  Body,  this  Senfe  is  well 
defigned  and  contrived,  and  may  fo  far  be  accounted 
the  Work  of  fome  admirable  Artift.     But, 

2.  If  we  furvey  its  Fabrick  and  Parts,  it  will 
appear  to  be  an  admirable  Piece  of  the  Divine  Wif- 
dom,  Art,  and  Power.  For  the  Manifeftation  of 
which,  let  us  diftin6tly  furvey  the  outward  and  the 
inward  Part  of  its  curious  Organ. 

I .  For  the  outward  Ear  :  If  we  obferve  its  Strii- 
fture  in  all  Kinds  of  Animals,  it  muft:  needs  be  ac- 
knowledged to  be  admirably  Artificial,  it  being  fo 


p}e  can  hold  Converfation  ivhole  Bays  with  thofe  that  can  [peak 
her  oivn  Language.  I  could  under/land  fome  of  her  IVords,  but 
could  not  comprehend  a  Period^  for  it  feemed  to  be  but  a  confuf- 
ed  Notfe.  She  knoivs  nothing  that  is  faid  to  her,  unlefs  flie 
feeth  the  Motion  of  their  Months  that  [peak  to  her  ;  fo  that  in 
the  Night,  zvhen  it  is  necejj'ary  to  fpeak  to  her,  they  jfiufi  light 
a  Candle.  Only  one  thing  appeared  the  ftrangejl  part  of  the 
■whole  Narration  :  She  hath  a  SiJIer,  with  whom  flie  hath 
firat'iifed  her  Language  more  than  tvith  any  other  :  And  in  the 
Night,  by  laying  her  Hand  on  her  Sifter's  Mouth,  fjg  can  per- 
ceive by  that  what  pe  faith,  and  fo  can  difconrfe  with  her  in 
the  Ni^ht.    Bilhop  Burnet'z  Let,  4.  p.  248.  * 


nicely 


Chap.  m.  Of  the  Ear.  ixt^ 

r.iccly  prepared,  and  adjured  to  the  peculiar  Occa- 
^ns.  of  each  rcfpcaivc  Animal.  In  Man  {h)^  it  is 
.  r  a  Form  proper  for  th-  ercd  Poflure  of  his  Body. 
In  Birds,  of  a  Form  proper  for  Flight ;  notprotubc- 
ranr,  becaufe  that  would  obltructr heir  Progrcfs,  but 
clofe  and  covered,  to  afford  the  eaHcr  PafTigc  through 
tlie  Air.  In  Qiiadrupeds,  its  Form  is  agreeable  ^o 
the  Pofture,  and  flower  Motion  of  their  Bodies  j 
and  in  thefe  too,  various,  according  to  their  vari- 
ous Occafions.  In  fome  large,  crcd,  and  open,  to 
h.car  the  kail  Approaches  of  Dangers  {c\  in  others 
covered,  to  keep  out  noxious  Bodies.     In  the  Sub- 


1*^)  I  cannot  but  admire  th.u  our  mofl  eminent  modern 
Anatomilh  Oiould  not  agree,  whether  there  be  any  Mufcles 
m  the  outward  Ear  of  Man  or  not.  Dr.  Ked  faith  there  are 
two  ;  Dr.  Drake  the  fame  Number;  and  Dr.  Gibfon  makes 
<  icm  to  be  four.  So  alfo  doth  Monfieur  Diofih,  and  fo  did 
t.'ij  ancient  Anatomirts  :  But  Dr.  Schelhammer  expreffly  de- 
nies there  are  any,  and  faith,  Seduxit  autetnrdiquos  Brntorum 
A>i.ttome,^  in  quorum  plenfque  tales  Mufculi  plures  inieniun- 
t:'ry  putarunt  autem  fortajfts  ignominiofum  Hommi,  fi  non  CT* 
L:^  tnJtruClus  ejfet,  &•  minks  mde  perfe£}um  animal  fore.  Schel 
dc  Auditu^  p.  r.  c.  r.  §.7.  But  Valfalva,  who  wrote  ver/ 
Ivcly,  and  is  very  accurate  in  his  Survey  of  the  Ear,  faith, 
cull  aurtcuU  pofteriores  quandoque  quatuor,  quandoque  duo  ; 

ut  plurtmum  tres  adnoiantur  ;  ^  quando  folhm  duo  fe  jna- 
Unt,  tunc  unus  ex  illis  dupiuato  tendine  ziershs  Concham  dc 
'  "  folet.  Horum  mufculorum  in  numero  varietalcm  non  Mum 
in  diver  [is;  verkm  ettatn  in  eodem  fub^eefo  quandoque  ztdi-^ 
Ex  quibus  diferentiis  fuboru  funt  Auaorum  dijcrepantu  in  ho- 
rum  Mufculorum    numero,    cr  pofitu: quod  non  evenifTet, 

^*  P^^ries  in  diverfis  Corponbus  iidem  Mufcuit  quxfiti  ejfent  Ant 
Mar.  Valfalva  de  Aur.  Human,  c.i.  §.6.  But  Dr  Drake 
:hmks  fome  of  Valfalva  s  Mufcles  the  Produd  of  F^ncy  Mr 
^owper  makes  them  to  be  three,  one  Attollent,  and  iv^oKetra- 
bent  Mufcles.     See  Anat.  Tab.    li. 

^  (0  Inter  citera  [animalia  aurita]  maxim):  admirabdis  tjl  au- 
•IS  leponm  fabnca,  quod  cum  timidijfitnmn  antmal  fit  <y 
>rorfus  tnerme,  natura  td  tum  audit u  acuttjfimo,  tanquam  ho- 
ttum  exploratore  ad  perfentienda  pencula,  tum  ped.bus  ceu  ar- 
ms ad  currendum  aftis  munijfe  vidctur.  A  Kucher';  Phonurct. 
fir  §.  7.  Techaaf.  z.  * 


Iz 


terraneouj 


i  1 6  Of  the  Ear.  Book  IV. 

terraneous  Quadrupeds,  who  are  forced  to  mine, 
and  dig  for  their  Food  and  Habitation,  as  a  pro- 
tuberant Ear,  like  that  of  other  Quadrupeds,  would 
obftru6t  their  Labours,-  and  be  apt  to  be  torn  and  in- 
jured 5  fothey  have  the  contrary  {d\  their  Ears  fhort, 
lodged  deep  and  backward  in  their  Head,  and  paf- 

fing 


{d)  Moles  h&ve  no  portuberant  Ear,  but  only  a  round  Hole 
between  the  Neck  and  Shoulder ;  which  Situation  of  it,  to- 
gether with  the  thick,  (hort  Fur  that  covers  it,  is  a  fufficient 
Defenfative  againft  external  Annoyances.  The  Meatus  Au- 
dhorius  is  long,  round  and  cartilaginous,  reaching  to  the  un- 
der part  of  the  Skull.  Round  the  iniide  runs  a  little  Ridge, 
refembling  two  Threads  of  a  Skrew ;  at  the  Bottom  where- 
of is  a  pretty  Inlet,  leading  to  the  Drum,  made,  on  one  fide 
with  the  aforefaid  cochleous  Ridge,  and  on  the  other,  with 
a  fmall  Cartilage.  I  obferved  there  was  Cerumen  in  the 
Meatus. 

As  to  the  inner  Ear,  it  is  fomewhat  lingular,  and  different 
from  that  of  the  other  Quadrupeds,  and  much  more  from 
Birds,  although  I  have  met  with  fome  Authors  that  make  it 
agreeing  with  that  of  Birds,  There  are  three  fmall  Bones 
only  (all  hollow)  by  which  the  Brum  (to  ufe  the  old  Appel- 
lation) or  the  Membrana  Tympani  (as  others  call  it)  afteth 
upon  the  Auditory  Nerve.  The  firi\  is  the  Malleus,  which 
hath  two  ProcelTes  nearly  of  equal  Length  ;  the  longer  of 
which  is  braced  to  the  Membrana  Tympani,  the  (horter  to  the 
fide  of  the  Drmn  or  Os  Petrofum ;  the  back  part  of  it  refem- 
bles  the  Head  and  Stalk  of  a  fmall  Mujljroom,  fuch  as  are 
pickled.  On  the  back  of  the  Malleus  lies  the  next  fmall  i 
Bone,  which  may  be  called  the  Incus,  long,  and  without  any 
Procefs,  having  fomewhat  the  Form  of  the  (liort  Scoop 
wherewith  Water-men  throw  the  Water  out  of  their  Wher- 
ries. To  the  end  of  this  the  third  andlaft  fmall  Bone  is  tack- 
ed by  a  very  tender  Brace.  This  little  Bone  bears  the  Office  of 
the  Stapes,  but  is  only  forked  without  any  Bafe.  One  of 
thefe  Forks  is  at  one  Feneftra,  or  Foramen,  the  other  at  ano- 
ther; in  which  Fenejin  I  apprehend  the  Forks  are  tacked  to  the 
Auditory  Nerve.  Thefe  FeneftrA  (equivalent  to  the  Fenejira 
Ovalis,  and  Rotunda  in  others)  are  the  Inlets  into  the  Cochlea 
znd  Canalcs  Semicirculares,  in  which  the  Auditory  Nerve  li-^ 
cth.  The  Semicircular  Canales  lie  at  a  diftance  from  the  Drum^  ■ 
and  are  not  lodged  (as  in  other  Animals)  in  a  ftrong,  thick 
Body  of  Bone,  but  are  thruft  out,  within  the  Skull,  making 


Chap.  III.  Of  the  Ear.  117 

fing  to  the  under  Part  thereof,  and  all  fufficiently 
fenced  and  guarded.  And  as  for  Infefts,  Reptiles, 
and  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Waters,  if  they  enjoy 
this  Senfc,  (as  there  is  great  Reafon  to  think  they 
do,)  it  may  probably  be  lodged  commodioufly  un- 
der the  fame  Security  and  Guard,  as  the  Smelling, 
or  fome  other  Senfe  is. 

And  moreover,  as  the  Form  of  this  Organ  is  va- 
rious in  various  Animals,  fo  in  each  of  them  its 
Strudure  is  very  curious  and  obfervable,  being  in 
all  admirably  contrived  to  colled  the  wandering, 
circumambient  Impreilions,  and  Undulations  of 
Sound,  and  to  convey  them  to  the  Senfory  within. 
If  I  fhould  run  over  the  feveral  Genera  of  Animals, 
we  might  find  a  notable  Profped  of  the  handy-work 
of  God  (^),  even  in  this  fo  inconliderable  Part  of 
Animals.     But  1  ihall  only  carry  my    Survey  to 

that 


an  Antrum^  with  an  handfome  Arch  leading  into  it,  into 
which  a  part  of  the  Brain  enters. 

One  Leg  of  the  Mallem  being  faftned  to  the  Membrane 
Tympaniy  and  the  Incus  to  the  back  of  the  Malleus,  and  the 
top  of  that  to  the  top  of  the  Stapes,  and  the  Forks  or  Branches 
of  the  Stapes  to  the  Auditory  Nerve,  I  obferved  that  when- 
ever 1  moved  the  Membrane,  all  the  little  Bones  were  at  the 
fame  time  moved,  and  confcquenlly  the  Auditory  Nerve 
thereby  atfeded  alio. 

I  hope  the  Reader  will  excufe  me  for  being  fo  particular  in 
this  Organ  only  of  the  AloU,  a  defpifed  Creature,  but  as  no- 
table an  Example  of  God's  Work,  as  its  Life  is  different  from 
that  of  other  Quadrupeds ;  for  which  Reafon  it  partly  is  that 
I  have  enlarged  on  this  part  differing  from  that  of  others, 
and  which  no  Body  that  I  know  of,  hath  taken  much  notice 
of,  and  which  is  not  difcoverable  without  great  Patience  and 
Application;  and  partly  becaufe  by  comparmg  thefe  Obferva- 
lions  with  Book  VII.  Chap.r.  Note  (d),  we  may  judge  how 
the  Senfe  of  Hearing  is  performed. 

(e)  Among  many  Varieties,  both  in  the  inner  and  outer 
Ear,  thofe  which  appear  in  the  Pajfage  into  the  Rock-Bone,  are 
remarkable.  For  in  an  Owl,  that  perches  on  a  Tree  or  Beamt 
and  hearkens  after  the  Prey  beneath  her,  it  is  produced  farther 
out  above  than  it  is  bcloiv,  for  the  better  Reception  of  the  leaft 

1  3  sound. 


Ii8  Of  the  Ear.  Book IV. 

that  of  Man.  And  here  the  firft  Thing  that  offer- 
eth  it  felf  to  our  View,  is  the  Helix^  with  its  tor- 
tuous Cavities,  made  to  flop,  and  collcft  the  fono- 
rous  Undulations,  to  give  them  a  gentle  Circulation 
and  Refradion,  and  lo  convey  them  to  the  Concha^ 
or  larger  and  more  capacious  round  Cell  at  the  En- 
trance of  the  Ear.  And  to  bridle  the  Evagation  of 
the  Sound,  when  arrived  fo  far,  but  withal  not  to 
make  a  Confufion  thereof,  by  any  difagreeable  Re- 
percuffions,  we  may  take  notice  of  a  very  curious 
Provifion  in  thofe  little  Protuberances,  called  the 
T'ragus^  and  j^ntitragus  of  the  outward  Ear,  of  a 
commodious  Form  and  Texture  (/),  and  conveni- 
ently lodged  for  this  Ufe.  The  great  Convenience 
and  Benefit  of  this  Form  and  Contrivance  of  the 
outward  Ear,  is  fufficiencly  manifeft  by  the  want 
thereof,  which  caufeth  a  Confufion  in  the  Hearing.^ 
with  a  certain  Murmur^  or  Swooing  like  the  Fall  of 
Waters  (g). 


Sound,  But  in  a  Fox,  that  fcouteth  underneath  the  Prey  at 
Kooft ;  it  is  for  the  fame  Reafon,  produced  farther  out  below. 
In  a  Pole-Cat,  which  hearkens  firait  forward,  it  is  produced 
lehind,  for  the  taking  of  a  forward  Sound.  Whereas  ;»  4  Hare, 
ivhich  is  very  quick  of  Hearing,  and  thinks  of  nothing  hut  be- 
ing purfued,  it  is  fupplied  zvith  a  bony  Tube,  which  as  a  na- 
tural Otocouflick,  is  fo  directed  backward,  as  to  receive  the 
fmalle/l  and  rnofi  dijlant  Sound  that  comes  behind  her.  Giew'i 
Cofmolog.  Sacr.  lib.  i.  c.  5,  §.6. 

(/)  The  Texture  of  the  Tragus  and  Antitragm,  is  fofter 
than  that  of  the  Helix,  which  lerveth  gently  to  blunt,  not 
forcibly  to  repel  the  Sound  in  the  Concha. 

(g)  Dr.  Gibfon's  Anatomy,  Chap.  iz.  Book  IIT. 

Thofe  whoje  Ears  are  cut  off,  have  but  a  confufed  ivay  of 
Hearing,  and  are  obliged  either  to  form  a  Cavity  round  the 
Ear  with  their  own  Hands,  or  elje  to  make  ufe  of  a  Horn,  and 
apply  the  end  of  it  to  the  inner  Cavity  of  the  Ear,  in  order  to 
receive  the  a~itated  Ai>\  'Tis  likewife  obferved,  that  thofe 
yihofe  Ears  jut  out,  hear  better  than  jiat-eared  Perfoos.  Mon- 
fieur  Dionis'i  Anat.  Dtmvnftr.  8. 

Another 


Chap.  III.  Of  the  Ear.  119 

Another  wife  Provifion  of  the  Creator,  Is  in  the 
Subftance  of  the  outward  Ear,  which  is  cartilagi- 
nous, the  fitted  for  this  Place.  For  (as  an  ingeni- 
ous Anatomilt  {h)  obfcrves)  "  If  it  had  been  Bone, 
"  It  would  have  been  troublefome,  and  might  by 
*'  many  Accidents  have  been  broken  off:  If  Fiefli, 
"  it  would  have  been  fubjeft  to  Contufion".  Buc 
indeed  a  worfe  Confequence  than  this  would  have 
cnfu'd  fuch  a  Softnefs  as  that  of  FlcHi,  and  that  is, 
it  would  neither  have  remain'd  expanded,  neither 
would  it  fo  kindly  receive  and  circulate  the  Sounds, 
but  abforb,  retard,  or  blunt  their  Progrefs  into  the 
inward  Organ.  But  being  hard,  and  curioufly 
fmooth  and  tortuous.  Sounds  find  an  eafie  Pafiage, 
with  a  regular  Volutation  and  Refraflion :  As  in  a 
"Well-built  Arch,  Grotto,  or  mufical  Inllrumcnt;, 
which  magnify  and  meliorate  Sounds  j  and  fome 
of  which  convey  even  a  Whifper  to  a  large  Di- 
llance  (/) :  But  from  the  outward,  let  us  carry  our 
Survey, 

2.  To 


(/>)  Gibf.  Ibid. 

(■;)  It  would  naufeate  the  Reader  to  reckon  up  the  Places 
famed  for  the  Conveyance  of  VVhifpers,  fuch  as  the  Prifon 
of  Dionyfius  at  Syracufe,  which  is  faid  to  encreafe  a  Whifper 
to  a  Noife ;  the  clapping  ones  Hands  to  the  Sound  of  a  Can- 
non, crc  Nor  the  Aquxdudis  of  ClauditMy  which  carry  a 
Voice  fixteen  Miles,  and  many  others  both  Ancient  and  Mo- 
dern. If  the  Reader  hath  a  mind  to  be  entertained  in  this 
way,  he  may  find  enough  in  Kirchers  Phonurgia.  But  it  may 
not  be  irkfome  to  mention  one  or  two  of  our  own  m  Eng- 
land. Among  which,  one  of  the  moft  famed  is  the  Whifper- 
ing-Place  in  Gloucejler  Cathedral,  which  is  no  other  than  a 
a  Gallery  above  the  Eaft-end  of  the  Choir,  leading  from  one 
fide  thereof  to  the  other.  It  confifteth,  (if  I  millake  not) 
of  five  Angles,  and  fix  Sides,  the  middlc-moftof  which  is  a 
naked,  uncovered  Window,  looking  into  a  Chapel  behind  it. 
I  guefs  the  two  Whilperers  ftand  at  about  twenty  five  Yards 
Dirtance  from  one  another.  But  the  Dome  of  St.  Paul's^ 
London,  is  a  more  confideiable  whifpering' place,  where  ihc 
ticking  of  a  Watch  (when  no  Noife  is  in  the  Streets)  n.ay 

1  4  be 


no  Of  the  Ear.  Book  IV. 

2.  To  the  inward  Part  of  this  admirable  Organ. 
And  here  we  find  the  moll  curious  and  artful  Pro- 
vifion  for  every  Emergency  and  Occafion.  The 
auditory  Paffage^  in  the  firil  Place,  curioufly  tun- 
nelled, and  artfully  turned,  to  give  Sounds  an  eafie 
PafTage,  as  well  as  a  gentle  Circulation  and  Refra- 
6tion  5  but  withal,  fo  as  to  prevent  their  too  furi- 
ous rufliing  in,  and  aflaulting  the  more  tender  Parts 
within. 

And  forafmuch  as  it  is  necefTaiy  that  this  PafT.ge 
fhould  be  always  open,  to  be  upon  the  Watch  k)'y 
therefore  to  prevent  the  Invalion  of  noxious  In- 
fers, or  other  Animals,  (who  are  apt  to  m?ike 
their  retreat  in  every  little  Hole),  Nature  hath 
fecured   this   Paflage   (/),    with   a   bitter   naufeous 


be  nerrd  from  Side  to  Side;  yea,  a  Whifper  may  be  fent  all 
Touni  the  Dome.  And  not  only  in  the  Gallery  below,  but 
above,  upon  the  Scaffold,  I  tried,  and  found  that  a  Whifper 
would  be  carried  over  one's  Head  round  the  top  of  the  Arch, 
notwithftanding  there  is  a  large  Opening  in  the  middle  of  it 
into  the  upper  part  of  the  Dome. 

(k)  Audit  U4  autem  femper  patet :  ejm  enlm  fenfu  etiam  dor- 
tnientes  egemu4  :  A  quo  cum  [onus  efi  acceptttSy  etiar?}  e  fomno 
excitamur.  Flexuojum  iter  habet,  ne  quid  intrare  pcj/it,  Jiftm- 
flex,  CT*  dire5ium  pateret ;  provifum  etiam,  ut  Jiqua  minima 
beftiola  conaretur  trrumpere,  in  fordibus  auriumy  tanquam  in 
'vifco,  inb&refceret.     Cicer.  de  Nat.  Deor.   1.2.  c.  57. 

It  deferves  a  particular  Remark  here,  that  in  Infants  in  the 
Womb,  and  newly  born,  the  Meatus  Auditorius  is  (but  up  ve- 
ry clofely,  partly  by  the  ConftriAion  of  the  Paflage,  and 
partly  by  a  glutinous  Subftance,  whereby  the  Tympanum  is 
guarded  againft  the  Water  in  the  Secundine,  and  againft  the 
Injuries  of  the  Air  as  foon  as  the  Infant  is  born. 

(/)  It  is  remarkable,  that  in  moft,  if  not  all  Animals,  whole 
Ears  are  tunnelled,  or  where  the  Meatus  Auditorius  is  long 
enough  to  afford  Harbour  to  Ear-wigs,  or  other  Infers ;  that, 
I  fay,  in  the  Ears  of  fuch.  Ear-wax  is  conilantly  to  be  found. 
But  in  Birds,  whofe  Ears  are  covered  with  Feathers,  and 
where  the  Tympanum  lies  but  a  little  way  within  the  Skull, 
no  Ear-wax  is  found,  becaufe  none  is  necelTary  to  the  Ears 
fo  well  guardedj  and  fo  little  tunnelled. 

Excrement 


Chap.  III.  Of  the  Ear.  ix, 

Excrement  (w),   afforded  from  the  Glands  (»)  ap- 
pointed for  that  Purpole. 

From  hence  let  us  approach  the  mod  inward 
Parts,  in  which  we  fhall  fee  Strokes  of  the  moft 
exquifite  Art.  To  pafs  over  the  innate  Air.,  that 
moft  Authors  talk  of  (o),  (becaufe  there  is  no  fuch) 

the 


(m)  The  Ear-wax  was  thought  by  the  old  Anatomiftstobe 
an  Excrement  of  the  Brain  :  Humor  biliofus  a  cereiro  expug- 
natus,  the  Bartholines  (ay  of  it,  1.  3.  c.  9.  But  as  Schelham- 
tner  well  obfcrves,  Ntl  aifurdius,  quain  cerebri  excrementum 
hoc  flatuere.  Nam  v  ratio  nulla  fttadet,  ut  in  cerehro  fieri  ex- 
crementum tale  credamus  :  ■  neque  "vts,  patent  per  quas  ab 
eo  feclufum  in  meatum  auditorium  pojjit  inde  penetrare.  As  X.0 
its  Talle,  CaJJerius  gives  Inftances  of  its  being  fvveet  in  fomc 
Creatures.  ^n\.  Schelhatnmerhys,  Ego  vero  femper,  cum  ama~ 
ritie  aliquid  dulcedinii  in  illo  ucprehendi.  Vid.  Schel.  de  Au- 
dit, p  \.  c.  z.  §  10.  But  I  could  never  diftinguifli  any  Sweet- 
nefs  in  it ;  but  think  it  inlipid  mixed  with  a  Bitternefs. 

(  »)  Cerumtna     amara   Arteriolis  exudantia     Willis  de  A- 

nim.   Brut.  par.  l.  c  14.     in  the   Skin are  little  Glands, 

which  furnijh  a  'yellow  and  bitter  Humour.  Monlieur  Dionis'i 
Dem.  18.  An  handibme  Cut  of  thofe  GlanduU  ceruminofs, 
IS  in  Dr.  Drake,   from  Valfalva. 

Pliny  attributes  a  great  Virtue  loXhQ  Ear-ivax  ;  Morfus  ho- 
minis  inter  a/perrimos  numeratur :  medentur  fordes  ex  auribus  : 
ac  ne  quis  miretur,  etiam  Scorpionum  tilibus  Serpentiumque 
ftatim  impofu£.  Plin.  Nat.  Hiit.  /.  28.  c.  4.  And  that  it  hath 
an  healing  Quality,  and  may  be  accounted  a  good  Balfam,  I 
my  felf  have  experienced. 

(0)  That  there  is  fuch  a  Thing  as  the  innate  Air,  (talked 
of  much  by  moft  Authors  on  this  Subjed)  Schelhammer  very 
juftly,  1  think,  denies,  by  Reafon  there  is  a  Paflage  into  the 
inner  iiar  from  the  Throat,  through  which  the  innate  Air 
may  pafs  out,  and  the  outward  Air  enter  in.  V.  Par.  Alt. 
p.  2.  c.  I.  §.  ro.  When  by  flopping  our  Breath,  and  Strain- 
ing, we  force  the  external  Air  into  the  Ear,  it  may  be  heard 
rufhing  in  ;  and  if  much  be  forced  in,  it  may  be  felt  alfo  to 
beat  againft  the  Tympanum.  When  the  Paflage  to  the  Throat 
is  by  any  Means  ilopp'd,  as  by  a  Cold  in  the  Head,  zsyc.  the 
Hearing  thereby  becomes  dull  and  blunt;  by  Reafon  the 
Communication  between  the  outward  and  inward  Air  are  ob- 
ftru(^ed  :  But  when  by  flrong  Swallowing,  or  fuch  like  Moti- 
on of  the  Throat,  the  Pallage  is  opened,  we  perceive  it  by  a 

fuddea 


ii>  Of  the  Ear.  Book  IV. 

the  Paflage  to  the  Palate  (/>),  and  their  Ufes,  with 
divers  other  curious  Things  that  might  be  named  5 
let  us  Hop  a  Httle  at  the  Part  containing  the  reft, 
namely,  the  Bone  {q).  The  particular  Texture  and 
Hardnefs  of  which,  above  other  Bones  of  the  Bo- 
dy, is  very  remarkable  3  whereby  it  ferves  not  only 
as  a  fubftantial  Guard  to  the  Senfory,  but  alfo  to 
oppofe  the  Impulfes  of  the  aetherial  Matter,  that 
there  may  be  no  lofs,  nor  Confufion  in  the  Sound  j 
but  that  it  may  be  conveyed  regularly,  and  intirely 
to  the  auditory  Nerves. 

The  next  Part  I  ihall  take  Notice  of,   may  be 
that  fine  Membrane,  called  the  Tympanum^  or  Meni' 


fudden  Smack  or  Crack,  and  we  immediately  hear  very  clears 
ly ;  the  load  of  feculent  Air  bemg  at  that  Time  difcharged 
from  the  inner  Ear. 

It  is  a  wife  Provifion,  that  the  PafTage  for  the  Air  into  the 
Ear,  is  from  the  Throat;  Ut  non  ftatim  quivis  aer  extemus  ir- 
rumpere  queat  (as  Schdhammer  faith.  Par.  Ult.  c.  4.  §.  8.)  [ed 
tionn'ih'il  immutatui,  ac  temperatus,  calore  ex  medio  ventre  exfpi- 
rante;  imo  fortajfis  non  facile  alius,  nifi  ex  puLmonibus. 

(p)  Valfalva  hath  given  us  a  more  accurate  Defcription  of 
the  Tuba  Eufiachiana,  or  Pajfage  to  the  Palate,  than  any  other 
Author,  to  whom  1  therefore  refer.  Be  Aur.  Human,  c.  i.  §. 
16,  ere. 

The  chief  Ufe  hereof,  he  thinks,  is  to  give  way  to  the  in- 
ner Air,  upon  every  Motion  of  the  Membrana  Tympani,  the 
Malleus,  Incus  and  Stapes.  This  Paffage,  if  it  be  (hut  up, 
Deafnefsenfues:  Of  which  he  gives  two  Inftances:  One  a  Gen- 
tleman, who  loft  his  Hearing  by  a  Polypus  in  the  Nofe  reach- 
ing to  the  Uvula;  the  other  a  Yeoman,  labouring  with  an 
Ulcer  above  the  left  Side  of  the  Uvula ;  which  when  he  ftopt 
with  a  Tent  dipped  in  Medicine,  he  loft  his  Hearing  in  the 
left  Ear,  and  recovered  it,  as  foon  as  the  Tent  was  out.  ibid. 
c.  5   §.  10. 

{q)  Os  [petrofum]  ex  quo  interiors  [Labyrinthi]  eavitatum 
parietes  conjlati  funt,  album,  duriffimum,  necnon  maxime  com- 
pattum.  Id  autem  a  NaturA  it  a  comparatum  ejfe  videtur,  ut 
materia  &therea  Sonorum  objeihrum  imprejftonibus  onufia,  dum 
prididlis  impingitur  Parietibus,  nihil  aut  faltem  fere  nihil  motus 
fui  amittat,  atque  adeo  ilium  qualem  ab  Obje^lis  Jonoris  accepit, 
talem  communicet  fpiritui  animali  contento  intra  expanfiones  rami 
moUioris  Nervorum  auris.  Dr.  Raym.  Vieuffens  of  Montpellier, 
in  Phil  Tranf.  N".  158. 

han0 


Chap.  III.  Of  the  Ear.  113 

brana  T'ympam  (r),  with  its  inner  Membrane  (/); 
together  with  the  four  httle  appcndent  Bones  (/), 
and  the  three  inner  Mufcles  to  move  them,  and 
adjull  the  whole  Compages  to  the  fevcral  Purpofes 

of 


CO  The  Tympanum  of  the  Ear,  or  as  Valfalva  and  the  Mo- 
derns, the  Alemirana  Tympani  was  taken  notice  of  as  early  as 
Jiippocrates's  Time.  In  Buds,  it  is  drained  towards  the  out- 
ward Parts ;  in  other  Animals  towards  the  B:  ain,  or  inner  Parts. 
Monfieur  JDionis  faith,  //  is  not  equally  fajleued  to  the  whole 
Circumference  of  the  bony  Circle,  in  which  it  is  inchafed;  for  on 
the  upper  Side  it  hath  a  free  difengaged  Part,  iy  which  fome  tan 
give  vent  to  the  Smoah  in  their  Mouth.  Demonftr.  8.  That  there 
is  fome  Paffage  I  doubt  nor,  but  I  queflioii  whether  Monfi- 
eur Dionis  ever  faw  the  difengaged  Part  he  mentions.  1  have 
my  felf  carefully  fearched  divers  Subjecfts,  and  do  not  remem- 
ber to  have  feen  any  fuch  Paffage;  and  I  perceive  it  efcapcd 
the  diligent  Schelhammer's  Eye.  Valfalva  alfo  by  injecflini?  ia 
through  the  Tuba  Euflachiana,  could  not  force  any  Liquov 
into  the  Meatus  Auditorius;  but  yet  he  imagines  he  found  the 
Pallage  out  in  another  Place  of  the  Drum,  in  fome  morbid, 
and  one  found  Head.  Valfalv.  de  Aur.  Hum.  c.  z.  §.  8.  Mr. 
Cowper  alfo  affirms  there  is  a  PalTage  by  the  upper  Part  of  the 
Membrane.     Anat.  Ap.  Fig.  8. 

(/)  Dr.  Vieufens,  before-named,  difcovered  a  Membrane, 
tenuiJfimA  ranqtie  admod'um  texturA  intra  cavitatem  Tympani ; 
as  he  defcribes  it.  Whofe  ufe  he  faith  is,  i.  Occluders  Laby- 
rinthi  januam  impedit  ne  naturalis  purijftmus  ac  fubtUiffnnus  Aer 

intra  cavitates communicationem——habeat  cum  acre  craf 

fo.  r.  Labyrinthi  bafin  calefacit,  &c.  ubi  fupra.  Probably 
this  double  Membrane  may  be  fuch,  or  after  the  fame  Man- 
ner as  it  is  in  the  Tympanum  of  Birds :  Of  which  fee  my  Ob- 
fervations  in  Book  VII.  Chap.  x.  Note  {d). 

(t)  The  four  little  Bones  being  treated  of  by  all  that  have 
concerned  themfelves  about  this  Senfe  of  Heaiing,  fmce  thejr 
Difcovery,  I  fliall  take  Notice  of  only  two  Thmgs  concern- 
ing them.  I.  The  Difcovery  of  them  is  owing  wholly  to  tl.c 
Diligence  and  Sagacity  of  the  latter  Ages;  of  which  Schcl- 
hammer  gives  this  Account  from  Fallopius,  Hac  Ojficula  anti- 

quis  Anatomicis ignota  fuere ;    primufcjue  qui  in  lucem  pro- 

duxit  [Malleum  &  Incum]  fuit  Jac.  Carpenfis ;  prnn^ts  quoqut 
procul  omni  dubio  Jnaromicx  artis,  quam  Vejaiius  p.^flc.i  perfeat, 
rcflaurator.  Tertium  [Stapedem]  tnvenit  ac  promuhavit  pri~ 
mus  Jch.  Phil,  ah  Ingrajfiiy   Suul:t:,  Philof'^phus  ac  Medicis  do- 

(liJfimHs, 


114  or  ^^^  ^^^-  Book  IV. 

of  Hearing,  to  hear  all  Manner  of  Sounds,  loud  or 
languid,  harfh  or  grateful  («). 

From 


6l'tjfimiii.  Ciuartum,  Thomd  Bartholin,  tefie,  viro  longe  cele- 
herrimoy  Fran.  Sylvio  debetur  Schel.  ubi  fupr  c.  3.  §.9.  2. 
Their  Difference  in  Animals :  In  Man,  and  Giuadrupeds,  they 
are  four,  cunoufly  in.irii'^ulated  with  one  another;  with  an 
external  and  internal  Mufcle  to  dnw,  or  work  them,  in  ex- 
tending, or  relaxing  the  Drum;  but  in  Fowls  the  Cafe  is  very 
different :  His  unum  Ojficulum  folhm  largua  efi  Natura,  quod 
Collumellam  forte  appellaveris  :  teres  enim  eft  'iy  fubtiltfflnmmj 
hafi  innitens  latiori,  rotunds.  Huic  adnexa  eft  cartilage  iialde 
mobillsy  qui  in  Tympanum  videtnr  terminari.  !d  lb.  §.  8.  In 
the  Ears  of  all  the  Fowl  that  I  c<juld  examine^  I  never  found  a- 
ny  more  than  one  Bone,  and  a  Cartilage,  making  a  Joynt  zvith 
itf  that  was  eafiiy  moveable.  The  Cartilage  had  gene-  ally  an 
Epiphyfe,  or  two,  one  on  each  Side.-  The  Bone  was  very  hard 
and  fmall,  having  at  the  end  of  it  a  broad  Plate,  of  the  fame 
Sttbftance ,  very  thin,  upon  which  it  refted,  as  on  its  Bafts,  Dr. 
Al.  Moulen  in  Phil.  Tranf.  N".  100. 

Thefe  are  the  moft  material  Things  I  find  obferved  by  o- 
thers,  concerning  the  Ears  of  Fowls,  and  fome  of  them 
hardly,  I  believe,  obferved  before.  To  which  I  lliall  fubjoyn 
fome  other  Things  I  have  my  felf  difcovered,  that  I  prefume 
cfcaped  the  Eyes  of  thofe  moft  curious  and  inquifitive  Anato- 
mifts.     Of  which  the  laft  cited  Book  VII.  Chap,  i.  Note  (d). 

(«)  Videtur  quod  Tympanum  Auditionis  inftrumentum  prsili- 
minare,  ct*  quafi  pr&paratorium  fuerit,  quod  Soni  impre/fwnem, 
five  fpecies  fenftbiles  primo  fufcipiens,  eas  in  debita  proportione, 
CT*  apta  conformitate,  versus  Senforium^  quod  adhuc  interius  fi- 
tum  eft,  dirigat :  fimili  officio  fungitur  refpe6lu  Auditils,  ac  tu- 
nicA  Oculi  Pupillam  conftituentes,  refpeSlw  Visus ;  utr&que  Mem- 
brans,  Species  fenftbiles  refringunt  CT*  quafi  emolliunt,  eafque 
Senforio  non  nifi  proportionatas  tradunt,  cui  nudo  ft  advenianty 
teneriorem  ejus  crafin  facile  Udanty  aut  obruant.  Revera  Tym- 
panum non  audit,  fed  meliori  tutiorique  Auditioni  confert.  Si 
h&c  pars  deftruatur,  Senfto  adhuc  aliquamdiu,  rudi  licet  modoy 
peragi  poffit;  quippe  experimento  olim  in  Cane  fa6lo,  Sec. 
^anitoris  officio  ut  Tympanum  re^e  defungi  poffit,  expanfum  e- 
jus  pro  data  occafione  ftringi,  aut  relaxari  debet,  veluti  nimirhm 
Oculi  Pupilla  ^apropter  huic  Auris  Tympana j    non  [ecus 

ac  bellicoy  machine  five  t&niA  quadam  apponuntur,  qu&  fuperfi- 
ciem  ejus  modo  tenfiorem,  modi  laxiorem  reddant :  hoc  enim  effi- 
ciunt  tria  Officnla^  cum  Mufcnbt  &c.  Willis's  de  Anim.  Brut, 
c.  14. 

For 


Chap.  III.  Of  the  Ear,  ii^ 

From  this  Region  of.  the  tympanum^   I  might 

pafs 


For  this  Opinion  of  Dr.  Willis,  Dr.  Schtlhammer  is  very  feverc 
upon  him,  deriding  the  Refradions  he  fpeaks  of;  and  therefore 
ferioufly  proves  that  they  are  the  Humours,  not  Tunicks  of  the 
Eye,  that  refraft  the  Rays  of  Light;  and  then  jeeringly  de- 
mandeth,  Whether  the  fonorous  Rays  are  refraded  by  pafling 
through  a  different  Medium  .^  Whether  the  Convexity  or  Con- 
cavity of  the  Drum  colleds  thofe  Rays  into  a  focal  Point,  or 
fcatters  them  ?  crc  And  then  faith,  Ob  has  rationes  a  clanjf. 
Viri,  ac  de  re  Medico,  praclare  meriti,  fententia.  non  pojjumus  non 
ejjc  alieniores ;  in  quo  uti  ingenium  admiror,  quoties  medicamen- 
torurn  vires,  aut  morborttm  caufas  expUcat,  Jic  ubi  jorum  juum 
egrejjus,  Philofophurti  agir,  ac  vel  Parttutn  ufum,  vel  Chymica- 
rum  return  naturam  fcrtttetur,  ejus  hand  femel  non  modb  judi- 
cium defidero,  verrwi  altquando  ttiam  fidem.  This  is  fo  fcvere 
and  unjuft  a  Cenlure  of  our  truly  famous  Countryman,  (a 
Man  of  known  Probity)  that  might  deferve  a  better  Anfwer; 
but  I  have  only  Time  to  fay,  that  although  Dr.  Schelhamtfjcr 
hath  out-done  all  that  wrote  before  him,  in  his  Book  de 
Auditu,  and  thewed"  himfelf  a  Man  of  Learning  and  Indult- 
ry  ;  yet  as  our  Countryman  wrote  more  than  he,  (though 
perhaps  not  free  from  Errors  too)  fo  he  hath  manifcfted  him- 
felf  to  have  been  as  curious  and  fagacious  an  AnatoraiR,  as 
great  a  Philofopher,  and  as  learned  and  skilful  a  Phylician,  as 
any  of  his  Cenfurers,  and  his  Reputation  for  Veracity  and 
Integrity,  was  no  lefs  than  any  of  theirs  too.  But  after  all 
this  terrible  Clamour,  Dr.  Schelhammer  prejudicately  mifla- 
keth  Dr.  Willis's  Meaning,  to  fay  no  worie.  For  by  utnque 
MembrariA  refringunt.  Dr.  Willis  plainly  enough,  I  think, 
means  no  more  than  a  Reftrit^ion  of  the  Ingrefs  of  too  mnny 
Rays ;  as  his  following  explicatory  Words  manifeft,  -viz..  refrm- 
gunt,  CT"  qteafi  emolliitnt,  eafque  Senforio  non  nifi  proportional  as  tra- 
dunt.  But  indeed  Dr.  Schelhammer  hath  (hewn  himfelf  a  too 
rigid  Cenfor,  by  making  Dr.  Willis  fay,  the  ILar-Drum  hath 
fuch  like  Braces  as  the  War-Drum,  viz.  tj>£<e^  porrl  de  machi- 
nis  feu  t&niis  Tympani  bcUici  adducit,  dicttque  idem  in  Tympa- 
na auditorio  confpici,  id  prorfus  faljijfimum  eft.  I  wonder  Dl. 
Schelhammer  did  not  alio  charge  Dr.  Willis  with  making  it  a 
Porter,  fince  he  faith  in  the  fame  Paragraph,  Janitoris  officio,  &cc. 
But  Dr.  Willis's  Meaning  is  plain  enough,  that  the  little  Bones 
and  Mufcles  of  the  Ear-Drum  do  the  fame  Oflice  in  ftraining 
and  relaxing  it,  as  the  Braces  of  the  War- Drum  do  in  that. 
And  confidering  how  curious  and  folemn  an  Apparatus  there 
is  of  Bones,  Mufcles,  and  Joynts,  all  adapted  to  a  ready  Mo- 
lion;  I  am  dearly  of  Dr.  Willis's  Opinion,   that  cue  great 

Ufe 


ii6  Of  the  Ear,  Book  IV. 

Ufe  of  the  Ear  Drum  is  for  rhe  proportioning  Sounds,  and 
that  by  its  Extenfion  and  RetracHiion,  it  correfponds  to  all 
Sounds,  loud  or  languid,  as  the  Pupil  of  the  Eye  doth  to  fe- 
vera'l  Degrees  of  Light :  And  that  they  are  no  other  than  fe- 
condary  Ufts  affigned  by  Dr.  Schelhammer,  as  the  principal  or 
fole  Ufes  of  keeping  out  the  external  colder  Air,'  Dud,  and 
other  Annoyances ;  but  efpecially  thu,  ob  foliui  aeris  intemi 
fotijfimum  irrumpsntis  vim,  hunc  motum  Tympani  ac  Mallei 
ejfe  conditum,  ut  cedere  primkmy  deinde  fibi  refiitm  queat ;  as 
his  Words  are,  P.  uh.  c.  6.  §.  13. 

It  was  no  improbable  thought  of  Rohault,  nos  attentos  prA' 
here,  nil  aliud  ejl,  nifi  Tympanum,  ubi  ita  opus  eft  fa.£lo,  con- 
tendere aiit  laxare,  ct*  operam  dare  ut  illud  in  ed  pofitione  in- 
tentum  ftet,  in  qua  tremulum  aeris  externi  motum  commodi(ftm)i 
excipere  pojfit.     Roh.  Phyf.  p.  i.  c.  26.  §.  48. 

The  Hearing  of  deaf  Perfons  more  eafily  by  Means  of  loud 
Noifes,  is  another  Argument  of  the  Ufe  of  the  Straining  or 
Relaxation  of  the  T<ympanum  in  Hearing.  Thus  Dr.  Willii 
(ubi  fupra}  Accept  olim  a  viro  fide  digno,  fe  mulierem  novijfet 
qu£  licet  furda  fuerit,  quoufque  tamen  intra  conclave  Tympa- 
num pulfaretur,  verba  quAvis  dare  audiebat :  quare  Maritus  e- 
jus  Tympaniftam  pro  fervo  domeftico  conducebat,  ut  illius  ope, 
colloquia  tnterdum  cum  Uxore  fud  haberet.  Etiam  de  alio  Sur- 
daftro  mihi  narratum  eft,  qui  prope  Campanile  degens,  quotiet 
una.  plures  CampanA  refonarenty  vocem  quamvis  facile  audirey 
CT"  non  alias,   potuit. 

Abfcijfo  Mufculo  [ProcefTus  majoris  Mallei]  in  recenti  aure, 
relaxatur  [Tympani  Membrana].  Valfalv.  de  Aur.  Hum.  c. 
2.  §.  5. 

Upon  confidering  the  great  Difference  in  Authors  Opini- 
ons, about  the  Ufe  of  the  Parts,  and  Manner  how  Hearing  is 
performed,  as  alfo  what  a  curious  Provifion  there  is  made  in 
the  Ear,  by  the  four  little  Bones,  the  Mufcles,  Membrane, 
crc.  I  was  minded  (fince  I  penned  this  Note)  to  make  enqui- 
ry my  felf  into  this  Part,  and  not  to  rely  upon  Authority. 
And  after  a  diligent  fearch  of  various  Subjeds,  I  find  we  may 
give  as  rational  and  eafie  an  Account  of  Hearing,  as  of  See- 
ing, or  any  other  Senfe ;  as  I  have  fliewn  in  my  laft  cited 
Note  id)  Book  VII.  Chap.  2.  with  relation  to  Birds.  And  as  to 
"Man  and  Beafts,  the  Cafe  is  the  fame,  but  the  Apparatus 
more  complex  and  magnificent.  For  whereas  in  Birds,  the 
auditory  Nerve  is  affedted  by  the  Impreffions  made  on  the 
Membrane,  by  only  the  Intermediacy  of  the  CoUumella;  in 
Man,  it  is  done  by  the  Intervention  of  the  four  little  Bones, 
with  the  Mufcles  acting  upon  them ;  his  Hearing  being  to  be 
adjufled  to  all  kinds  of  Sounds,  or  Impreffions  made  upon  the 
Membrana  Tympani.  Which  Impreffions  are  imparted  to  the 
auditory  Nerve,  in  this  Manner,  viz.  Firll  they  ad  upon  the 
Membrane  and  Malleus,  the  Majkus  upon  the  i^f^^j  and  the 


Chap.  III.  Of  the  Ear.  117 

pafs  to  that  of  the  Labyrinth  (w),  and  therein  Purvey 
the  curious  and  admirable  Strudlure  of  the  FcJIibu- 
litm^  the  Semicircular  Canals  {x)^  and  Cochlea-^  par- 
ticularly the  artificial  Gyrations,  and  other  lingular 
Curiofities  obfervable  in  the  two  latter. 

But  I  fhall  not  expatiate  on  thclc  reclufc  Parts  j 
only  there  is  one  fpecial  Contrivance  of  the  Nerves, 
miniflring  to  this  Senfe  of  Hearing,   which  mult 


Incus  upon  the  O;  OrbicuUre  and  Stapes  ;  and  the  Stapes  upon 
the  auditor'^  Nerve:  For  the  Bafc  of  the  Stapes  (the  fame  as 
the  Operculum  in  Birds)  not  only  covers  the  Feuejlra  Ovalis, 
within  which  the  auditory  Kerve  heth,  but  hath  a  Part  of  the 
auditory  Nerve  fprcad  upon  it  too.  It  is  manifeft  that  this  is 
the  true  Procefs  of  Hearing  ;  becaufe,  if  the  Membrane  be 
mov'd,  you  may  fee  all  the  Bones  move  at  the  fame  Time, 
and  work  the  Bafe  of  the  Stapes  up  and  down  in  the  Fenejlra. 
Ovalis,  as  I  fliewed  in  this  Chapter,  Note  {d)  concerning  the 
Mole;  and  as  it  may  be  feen  in  other  Ears  carefully  opened, 
if  the  Parts  remain  in  fitu. 

(w)  I  do  not  confine  the  Labyrinth  to  the  Canales  Semicir- 
culares,  or  any  other  Part,  as  the  elder  Anatomills  feem  to 
have  done,  who  by  their  erroneous  and  blind  Defcriptioiw 
feem  not  well  to  have  underftood  thefe  Parts ;  but  with  thofc 
much  more  curious  and  accurate  Anatomifts,  Monjteur  de  Ver- 
iiay,  and  Dr.  Valfalva;  uiider  the  Labyrinth,  I  comprehend 
the  Canales  Semicircidares,  and  the  Cochlea,  together  with 
the  intermediate  Cavity,  called  by  them  the  Veftibulum. 

(x)  In  the  femicircular  Canals,  two  Things  deferve  to  be 
noted.  I.  That  the  three  Canals  are  of  three  ditferent  Sizes, 
Major,  Minor,  and  Minimus.  2.  Although  in  different  Sub- 
jeSs,  they  are  frequently  different;  yet  in  the  fame  Su&jecfl 
they  are  conftantly  the  fame.  The  Reafon  of  all  which,  to- 
gether with  their  Ufes,  Valjalva  ingenioufly  thinks  is,  that  as 
a  Part  of  the  tender  auditory  Nerve  is  lodged  in  thefc  Canals, 
fo  they  are  of  three  Sizes,  the  better  to  fuit  all  the  Variety  of 
Tones ;  fome  of  the  Canals  fuiting  fome,  and  others,  other 
Tones.  And  although  there  be  fome  Difference  as  to  the 
Length  and  Size  of  thefe  Canals,  in  different  Perfons ;  yet, 
Iclt  there  fliould  be  any  difcord  in  the  auditory  Organs  of  one 
and  the  fame  Man,  thofe  Canals  are  always  in  exadt  Confor- 
mity to  one  another  in  one  and  the  fame  Man.  r.  Valjul. 
ubi  fu^r,  c.  3.  §.  7,  and  c.  6.  §.  4  9. 


ii8  Of  the  Ear.  Book  IV. 

not  be  pafled  by  j  and  that  is,  the  Branches  of  one 
of  the  auditory  Nerves  (y)^  fpread  partly  to  the 
Mufcles  of  the  Ear,  partly  to  the  Eye,  partly  to 
the  Tongue  and  Inftruments  of  Speech,  and  inof- 
culated  with  the  Nerves  to  go  to  the  Heart  and 
Breaft.  By  which  Means  there  is  an  admirable, 
and  ufeful  Confent  between  thefe  Parts  of  the  Bo- 
dy 5  it  being  natural  for  moft  Animals,  upon  the 
"Hearing  any  uncouth  Sound,  to  ere6t  their  Ears, 
and  prepare  them  to  catch  every  Sounds  to  opea 
their  Eyes  (thofe  conftant  faithful  Sentinels)  to  ftand 
upon  their  Watch  5  and  to  be  ready  with  the  Mouth 
to  call  out,  or  utter  what  the  prcfent  Occafion  Ihall 
dictate.  And  accordingly  it  is  very  ufual  for  moft 
Animals,  when  furpriz'd,  and  terrify'd  with  any 
Noife,  prefently  to  fhriek  and  cry  out. 

But  there  is  befides  this,  in  Man,  another  great 
Ufe  of  this  nervous  Commerce  betv/een  the  Ear  and 
Mouth  :  And  that  is,  (as  one  of  the  beft  Authors  on 
this  Subje6t  exprelTeth  it)  (z),  "  That  the  Voice 
"  may  correfpond  with  the  Hearing,  and  be  a  kind 
"  of  Echo  thereof,  that  what  is  heard  with  one 
"  of  the  two  Nerves,   may   be  readily   exprefled 

with  the  Voice,  by  the  help  of  the  other. 


C( 


(y)  Hlcpojlerior  Nervus  extra  cranium  delatus,  in  tres  ramos 
dividitur,  qui  omnes  motibus  patheticis  — — —  inferviunt.    Pri- 

tnu4  mufciilis  Auris  impenditur.     Proculdubio  hujns  aili- 

cne  efficitur,  ut  animaita  quAvts,  a,  fubito  foni  impulfu,  aureSf 
quafi  fonum  nimis  cito  tranfettntem  captaturas  erigant,  Ra' 
mus  alter  — —  verfus  utrumque  oculi  angmum  furculos  emit- 
tit :  qui  mufculis  palpebrarum  attollentibus  inferuntur  ;  quorum 
Cerfe  munus  efi  ad  fubitum  foni   appulfum  oculos   confejitm  ape- 

rire,  eofque  velut  ad  Excubias  vocare    — —  Tertius ramus 

"verfus  LinguA  radicem  dejcendens,  mufculis  ejus  e?  o^s  Hyoei- 
deos  dijiribuitur,  adeoque  organa  quidam  vocisedendAa6luat,&Z.C. 
Willis's  Cereb.  Anat.  c.  17. 

(x,)  Hujufmodi  Nervorum  conformatio  in  Homine  ufum  alium 
infigniorem  prijiat,  nempe  ut  VoXf  &c.    }Vi^is  Ibid, 


Thus 


Chap.  III.  Of  Sound.  119 

Thus  much  Ihall  fufiicc  to  have  fpoken  concern- 
ing the  Organ.     Let  us, 

11.  Take  Notice  of  ihcObJc^  of  this  admirable 
Senlc,  namely,  Sound-,  and  fo  conclude  this  Chap- 
ter. I  ihall  not  here  enquire  into  the  Nature  and 
Poperties  of  Sounds  which  is  in  a  great  Mcafure  in- 
tricate, and  hath  puzzellcd  the  bell  Naturalifts : 
Neither  {hall  I  ilicw  how  this  admirable  Effect  of 
the  divine  Contrivance,  may  be  improv'd  to  divers 
Ules  {aa)  and  Purpofes  in  humane  Life  j  but  my 
Bufinefs  will  be  to  fliew  that  this  Thing,  of  fo  ad- 
mirable Ufc  in  the  animal  World,  is  the  Work  of 

God. 


{aa)  Among  ihe  Ufes  to  which  the  Wit  of  Man  hath  cm- 
ploy'd  Sounds,  we  may  reckon  the  I  nil  rum  cms  ul'eful  m  con* 
vooating  AlTembhcs,  managing  Armies,  and  many  other  Oc- 
calions,  wherein  Bells,  Trumpets,  Drums,  Horns,  and  other 
founding  Inftrumcnts  are  ufed;  the  Particularities  of  which  it 
■would  be  tedious  to  recount :  As  ih  it  tlie  biggefl  Ijcll  in  Z."«- 
rope  is  reckoned  to  be  at  Erfurt  in  German-j,  which  ihey  lay 
may  be  heard  twenty  four  Miles;  with  much  more  to  the 
fame  Purpofe.  I  iliiil  therefore  only  for  a  Sample  take  no- 
tice of  the  Speakm^-l'rumiet;  the  hivention  of  which  is  com- 
monly aTcrihed  to  our  eminent  Sir  Sarnncl  MorUnd;  but  was 
more  probably  Ath.  Kircher's;  at  leall  he  had  contiived  fuch 
an  Inftrument,  bclore  Sir  Samuel  hit  upon  his.  Kircher  in  hi3 
Phonurg.  faith,  the  Tromba  pubh'flicd  laft  Year  in  England,  he 
had  invented  twenty  four  Years  before,  and  publiflied  \n  his 
M'tfurgia  ;  that  'Jac.  Albanus  Ghihl/ejias,  and  Fr.  f.Jchinardui 
afcribe  it  to  him  ;  and  that  G.  Schiitus  teftifieth  he  had  fuch 
an  Inftrumcnt  in  his  Chamber  in  the  Koman  College,  with 
■which  he  could  call  to,  and  receive  Anfwers  from  the  Porter. 
And  confidering  how  famed  Alexander  the  Great's  Tube  was, 
which  is  laid  might  be  heard  loo  Stadia,  it  is  fomewhat 
ftrange  that  no  Body  fooncr  hit  upon  the  Invention.  Of 
this  Stetitorophonick  Horn  of  Alexiinder,  there  is  a  Figure  pre- 
ferved  in  the  Vatican,  which  for  Curiofity  fake,  I  have  from 
Kircher  reprefented  in  Fig.  3.  He  faith  its  Diameter  was  five 
Cubits,  and  that  it  was  lufpended  on  a  Supporter. 

I'or  the  Make  of  the  Spcaking-Trtimptt,  and  the  Rcafott 
■why  it  magnifies  Sounds,  I  Ihall  refer  to  Kircher;  cfpecially 
to  Sir  Satniigl  Merland'%  Tuba.  Stentorophonica  ,  Publilhcd 
ia  1672. 

K  Kinhtr 


J50  Of  Sound.  Book  IV, 

God.  And  this  will  appear,  let  the  fubjed  Mat- 
ter of  Sounds  be  what  it  will  j  either  the  Atmo- 
fphere  {hb)  in  Grofs,  or  the  a:therial  Part  thereof, 
or  foniferous  Particles  of  Bodies,  as  fome  fancy,  or 

whatever 


Kircher  faith,  he  took  one  of  thde  Trumpets  of  fifteen 
Palms  length,  along  with  him  to  the  Mons  Eufiachianus , 
where  he  convocated  2100  Perfons  to  Prayers,  by  means  of 
the  unufual  Sound,  at  two,  three,  four,  and  five  Italian 
Miles  Diitance. 

With  thefe  Belloxotng  Trumpets,  I  fcall  join  fome  Bflloin'ing- 
Caves  for  the  Reader's  Diverfion.  Ol.  Mag>7us  defcnbes  a. 
Cave  in  Finland,  near  V'tburg,  called  Smellen,  into  which,  if 
a  Dog,  or  other  Living  Creature  be  catt,  it  fends  forth  fo 
dreadful  a  Sound,  that  knocks  down  every  one  near  it.  For 
which  Reafon  they  have  guarded  the  Cave  with  high  Walls, 
to  prevent  the  Mifchiefs  of  its  Noife.  Vid.  Ol.  Magn.  Hiftor. 
r.  I  K  c.  4.  Such  another  Peter  Marty  faith  is  in  Mifpaviola^ 
which,  with  a  fmall  Wdght  caft  into  it,  endangers  Deafnefs 
at  five  Miles  Diftance.  And  in  Switzerland,  Kircher  faith, 
in  the  Cucumer- Mountain  is  a  Pit  that  fends  out  both  a  dread- 
ftil  Noife  and  a  great  Wind  therewith;  and  that  there  is  a 
Well  in  his  Country  3000  Palms  deep,  whofe  Sound  is  equal 
to  that  of  a  great  Gun.     Vid.  Kirch.  Phonurg,. 

Ol.  Magnus  fpeaking  of  the  vart  high  Mou-ntains  of  a  Nor- 
thern Province,  call'd  Angermannia  faith,  Vhi  bafes  eorum  iis. 
prcf»)7diijlmo  gurgite  Jiantes,  cafi*  aliquo,  -eel  propofito  Naut£ 
accejjerint,  tantum  horrorcm  ex  altd  flu^uum  coiltfione  perci~ 
piunt,  ut  nifi  prdcipiti  remigio,  aut  valido  I'ento  evaferint,  folo 
pavore  fere  exanimes  fiant,  m/tltoque  dierum  curriculo,  ob  capi- 
tis turbationem,  prijitns.  mentis,  e^  fanitatis  compotes  vix  eva- 
dant.  Habent  bafes  illorum  montium  in  fiuiiuum  ingreffu  ct* 
regreffu  tortuofas  rif^as,  Jive  fciffuras,  fatis  flupendo  naiurA  opi~ 
ficio  fabricatasy  in  qutlus  longa  varagine  formidabilis  Hie  Soni- 
ttti  quafi  fubterraneum  tonitru  generatur.  Ol.  Magn.  1.  2.  C.  4. 
See  alfo  Chap.  iz. 

{bb)  That  the  Air  is  the  Subjedl,  or  Medium  of  Sound,  is 
manifeft  from  the  Experiments  in  rarefied  and  condenfed 
Air.  In  an  unexhaufted  Receiver,  a  fmall  Bell  may  be  heard, 
at  the  Diitance  of  fome  Paces;  but  when  exhaufted,  it  can 
fcarce  be  heard  at  the  neareft  Diftance:  And  if  the  Air  be 
comprelTed,  the  Sound  will  be  loudejif'proportionably  to  the 
Compreffion  or  Quantity  of  Air  crouded  in,  as  1  have  often 
tried  my  felf,  and  may  be  feen  in  Mr.  Haivkfbee's  curious 
Experiments,  p.  97.  Alfo  his  Experiments  ia  Pkil.  Tranf 
fci".  311. 

Neither 


Chap.  III.  Of  Sound.  131 

whatever  elfe  the  Philolophcr  may  think  it.     For 
^vho  but  an  intclhgcnt  Being,   wh.u   Ids  than  iin 

oinni^jotcnt 


Neither  doth  this  fucceed  only  in  forced  Rarefa^ions  and 
Condenfations  of  the  Air,  but  in  luch  alfo  as  arc  iiatuial  ;  as 
is  evident  from  David  trivdiuhms  in  Vareums ,  upon  the 
highefl:  hmineocies  ot  Cirpathtts,  near  Kejr.;urckt  w^  Hungary. 
The  Story  of  FniJlichius  \s  this,  /'.go  Moifs  Ju/iii  1015.  turn 
adclefcens,  fublnnitatttn  horum  tnonoum,  cinn  diiobHs  cow  it  i- 
bui  Scholanbui,  cxperiri  votcns,  uli,  chm  in  f>nmi.  lupis  verti- 
ce,  magnj  laiore,  me  [urnmutn  lerwiniim  ajjecntum  ejj'e  puta- 
rem,  dcwum  Ji-jC  obiuiit  alia  multo  attior  i antes,  ubi  perva/la 
eaque  %\icillantia  faxa.    (quorum  unum,  Jt  loco  a  viatore  ditKO- 

ie:ur alijuot  centena ■ —  rapit,  c/  quidem  tanto  cum 

fragore,  ut  illi  tnetuendum  fit  »i  totus  Mans  conuat,  eumque 
obruat )  enixus  ejjem,  iterum  alia  fublimior  prudiit,  &cc.  donee 
fiummo  vitA  fericiib  ad  Jitpiemum  cacumen  pane: r aver im.  Ex 
decliviorJbus  monttbus  cum  in  fubjetfas  valles,  •    •■  nil  nifi 

0bfcuratn  notfem,  aut  ccxruleum  qti.d,  infiar  profundi  aeris, 
quod  vulgo  fudutn  caelum  appellatur,  obfervare  potui,  mihique 
vidcbar,  fi  de  monte  cailercrfj,  non  in  terraw,  fed  retTe  in  jo- 
lum  me  prolapfurum.  Kimia.  enim  declivitate,  fpecies  vifibtles 
extenuate  o-  hebetate  fuerunt.     Cum  vero  altiorem  montem  pe- 

terem,    quafi    intra   nebulas   denfffimas  hsrebavj Ut   cum 

non  procul  a  fummo  veriice  ejjtm  de  fublimi  q.'iiefceiis  profpext 
C?'  animadverti  its  in  locis,  nbt  mihi  antea  videbar  imra  nebu- 
las h^fjje,  compitlas  at  que  alias  fefc  movere  nubcs,  fupra  quas, 
per  aliquot  milliaria,  cr  ultra'  lenni/ios  St^pufi  commodits  mihi 
profpecius  paiutt.  Alias  tawcn  etuim  nubes  altiore,  alas  :tetn 
humiliores,  necnon  quafdam  aqualiter  a  terr.i  diftaiiits  iiJi. 
uitque  hmc  tria  intellexi,  I.  Me  turn  traufi^ijc  pnncipiutn 
tnediA    Aeris  regionis.     X.   Diflaniiam  nubium  ii  tcrr-i,  non  efft 

Aqualem. 3.  Dijlantiam  nubiurn non  71  Mill  Ger.  ut 

quidam fed  tantuvj   dimidiatum   Mill.   Ger.     In  fumvium 

mantis  vcrticem  cttm  perveniffem,  aJeo  ti unquilluT/i  C"  Jubti- 
lem  a'erem  ibi  offcndi,  ut  nc  pili  quiJem  motum  jentirem,  ciitn 
tamen  in  depre/fionbus  ventum  vthementem  expenus  fim  :  um'e 
coltegi  fummum  cacumen  ijiius  montis  Carp.ifliici  ad  Mill.  Gerrr » 
a.  radicibus  fuis  imis  exfurgere,  CT"  ad  fupiemam  Ujque  aens  ic- 
gionem,  ad  qiiam  I'enti  non  afcendunt,  pertingere.  Fxplofi  in 
ed  fummitate  Sclopetum  :  quod  non  majorim  fonitum  primo  put, 
fe  tulitf  qui'jm  Ji  ligillum  vcl  bacillum  confregifjem;  p^'jl  vittf^ 
vallum  aut  cm  ttmpons  murmur  prulixum  invaluit,  jnfir:orefqu* 
montis  panes,  convalles  cr  fylvas  oppievit.  DeJcendenJ  ptr 
nives  annofas  intra  convalles,  cum  iterum  Sclopetum  exonera- 
rsmf  major  cr  hornbilior  fragor,   qu^m  ea  urmtnn  capacijfimo 

K  z  indt 


132,  Of  Sound.  Book.  IV. 

omnipotent  and  infinitely  wife  God  could  contrive, 
and  make  fuch  a  fine  Body,  fuch  a  Medium,  fo 
fufceptible  of  every  Imprellion,  that  the  Senfe  of 
Hearing  hath  occalion  tor,  to  empower  all  Animals 
to  exprcTs  their  Senfe  and  Meaning  to  others  j  to 
make  known  their  Fears,  their  Wants,   their  Pains 


tnde  exor'icbatur :  hinc  'verehar  ne  totus  tnons  conctijfiis  mecum 
corrueret  -.  duravitque  hie  [onus  per  [emic^uadrantem  hor&  ujque 
dum  abfirufijfimas  cavernas  penetrajj'et,  ad  quas  aer  undiq;  mul- 
tiplicat'M  refililt.  — —  In  his  celjis  montibus,  plerumq;  nmgit 
grandtnatve  media  &jlate,  quoties  nempe  in  fubje^a  o'  vicina 
planitie  pluit,  uti  hoc  ipfum  expertus  fum.  Nives  diverforum 
annorum  ex  colore  cr  cortice  duriore  dignofci  pojfunt.  Varen, 
Georg.  Gen.  1.  r.  c.  19.  Prop.  ult. 

The  Story  being  diverting,  and  containing  divers  Things 
remarkable,  I  have  chofen  to  note  the  whole  of  it  (altho' 
fomevvhat  long)  rather  than  fingle  out  the  Paflages  only  which 
relate  to  the  diminifliing  the  Sound  of  his  Piftol,  by  the  Ra- 
rity of  the  Air  at  that  great  Afcent  into  the  Atmoiphere; 
and  the  mrignifying  the  Sound  by  the  Polyphonifms  or  Re- 
percuffions  of  the  Rocks,  Caverns,  and  other  Phonocamp- 
tick  Objeds  below  in  the  Mount. 

But  'tis  not  the  Air  alone  that  is  capable  of  the  Impreffions 
of  Sound,  but  the  Water  alfo,  as  is  manifeft  by  ftrikingaBell 
under  Water,  the  Sound  of  which  may  plainly  enough  be 
heard,  but  it  is  much  duller,  and  not  fo  loud  ;  and  it  is  alfo 
a  fourth  deeper,  by* the  Ear  of  fome  great  Judges  in  Mufical 
Notes,  who  gave  me  their  Judgments  in  the  matter.  But 
Merfenne  faith,  a  Sound  made  under  Water,  is  of  the  fame 
Tone  or  Note,  if  heard  under  Water;  as  are  alfo  Sounds 
made  in  the  Air,  when  heard  under  Water.  Vid.  Mer/en, 
Hydraul. 

Having  mentioned  the  hearing  of  Sounds  under  Water, 
there  is  another  Curiofity  worth  mentioning,  that  alfo  far- 
ther proves  Water  to  be  fufceptible  of  the  Impreffions  of 
Sound,  ^'i^..  Divers  at  the  bottom  of  the  Sea,  can  hear  the 
Noifes  made  above,  only  confufedly.  But,  on  the  contrary, 
thofe  above  cannot  hear  the  Divers  below.  Of  which  an  Ex- 
periment was  made,  that  had  like  to  have  been  fatal:  One 
of  the  Divers  blew  an  Horn  in  his  Diving-Bell,  at  the  bot- 
tom of  the  Sea;  the  Sound  whereof  (in  thatcomprefled  Air) 
was  fo  very  loud  and  irkfome,  that  ftunned  the  Diver,  and 
made  him  fo  giddy,  that  he  had  like  to  have  dropt  out  of  his 
Bell,  and  to  have  been  drowned.  Vid,  Sturmii  Colleg.  Cur, 
Vol.  z.  Tent  am.  i, 

and 


Chap.  III.  Of  Sound.  133 

and  Sorrows  in  mclancholick  Tonfs;  tlicir  Joys 
and  Plciifurcs  in  more  harmonious  Notes  j  to  fend 
tlicir  Minds  at  great  Dillances  {cc)^  in  a  fhorc 
Time  (^^),  in  loud  Boations  j  or  to  exprcfs  rhcir 
Thoughts  near  at  hand  with  a  gentle  Voice,  or  in 
fccrct  Whirpers]  And  to  fay  no  more,  who  lels 
than  the  Tame  moll   wife  and  indulgent  Creator, 

could 


(fc)  As  to  the  Diftance  to  wliich  Sound  may  be  font,  ha- 
ving fome  doubt,  whether  there  was  any  Difference  be- 
tween the  Northern  and  Southern  Parts,  by  the  Favour  of 
my  learned  and  illultriims  Friend  Sir  Henry  Newton,  her  Ma- 
jeily"s  hue  Eiivoy  at  Florence:  I  procured  lornc  Experiments 
to  he  made  for  me  in  Italy.  His  molt  Serene  Highnels  the 
Great  Duke,  was  pleaieJ  to  order  great  Guns  to  be  tir'dfor  this 
purpoie  at  Florence,  and  Perfons  were  appointed  on  fiurpofe 
to  ooierve  them  at  Leghorve,  which  they  compute  is  no  lefs 
than  55  Miles  in  a  Ibait  Line.  But  notwithlhnding  the  Coun- 
try between  being  Ibmewhat  hiily  and  woudy,  and  the  Wind 
alfo  was  not  favourmg,  only  very  cah:i  and  llill,  yet  the 
Sound  was  plainly  enough  heard.  And  they  tell  me,  that 
the  Leghorne  Guns  are  ofien  heard  f>6  Miles  ofl',  at  Forto  Fer- 
raio;  that  when  the  French  bombarded  Ger.oa,  tlicy  heard  it 
near  Leghome,  90  Miles  dilhnt:  and  in  the  Mclfwa  ln[iirre£l'i~ 
on,  the  Guns  were  lieard  from  thence  as  far  as  Augufta  and 
Syracufe,  about  100  Italian  Miles.  Thcfe  DiHances  being  (o 
confidcrable,  give  me  Reafon  to  fufped,  that  Sounds  tly 
as  far,  or  nearly  as  far  in  the  Southern,  as  in  the  Northern 
Parts  of  the  World,  notwithltanding  we  have  a  fewlnllances 
of  Sounds  reaching  farther  Diltanccs.  As  Dr.  Heam  tells  us 
of  Guns  fired  at  Stockholm  in  1685,  that  were  heard  180 
nngli/Jj  Miles.  And  in  the  Dutch  War,  1672,  the  Guns  were 
heard  above  100  Miles.  Vid.  Phil.  Trarif.  N'o.  113.  Alfo 
there  is  this  farther  Reafon  of  Sufpicion,  that  the  Mercury 
in  the  Barometer  rifeth  hit;her  without  than  within  the  Tro- 
picks,  and  the  more  Northerly,  rtiil  the  higher,  which  may 
encreafe  the  Strength  of  Sounds,  by  Note  {Ob). 

(dd)  As  to  the  Velocity  of  Sounds,  by  Reafon  the  moft 
celebrated  Authors  differ  about  it,  I  made  divers  nice  Expe- 
riments my  lelf,  with  good  Inflrunients  ;  by  which  I  found, 
I.  That  there  is  fome,  although  a  fmall  Difference  in  the 
Velocity  of  Sounds,  with  or  againft  the  Wind:  which  alfo  is, 
%.  Augmented  ordiminilhed  by  the  Strength  or  Weakncfs  ot' 
the  Wind.    But  that  nothing  elfe  doth  accelerate  or  retard  it, 

K  3  noif 


134  ^f  So^^^-  Book  IV, 

cpulJ  form  fuch  an  OEconomy,  as  that  of  Melody 
and  Mufick  is !  That  the  Medium  Should  (as  I  faid) 
fo  readily  receive  every  Jmprtflion  of  Sound,  and 
convey  the  melodious  Vibration  of  every  mufical 
String,  the  harmonious  Pulfes  of  every  animal 
Voice,  and  of  every  mufical  Pipe>  and  the  Ear  be 
as  well  adapted,  and  ready  to  receive  all  thefe  Im^ 
prcfTions,  as  the  Medimn  to  convey  them  :  And  laft- 
ly,  that  by  Means  of  the  curious  Lodgment,  and 
Inofculations  of  the  auditory  Nerves  before-menti- 
oned, the  Orgafms  of  the  Spirits  fhould  be  allay'd, 
and  Perturbations  of  the  Mind,  in  a  great  Meafure 
quieted  and   ftilled   {e^}:    Or  to  expicfs   it  in  the 

Words 


not  the  Differences  of  Day  or  Night,  Heat  or  Cold,  Summer 
or  Winter,  Cloudy  or  Clear,  Barometer  high  or  low,  csrc. 
3.  That  all  kinds  of  Sounds  have  the  fame  Motion,  whether 
they  be  loud  or  languid,  of  Bells,  Guns,  great  or  fmall, 
or  any  other  fonprous  Body.  4.  That  they  fly  equal  Spaces 
in  equal  Times.  Fifthly  and  Laftly,  That  the  Mean  of  their 
Flight  is  at  the  Rate  of  a  Mile  in  9  ^r  half  Seconds,  or  1141 
Feel  in  one  Second  of  Time.     Vid.  Phil.  Tranf.  ibid. 

(ee)  Timothy  a  Mufician  could  excite  Alexander  the  Great  to 
Arms  with  the  Phrygian  Sound,  and  allay  his  Fury  with  ano- 
ther Tone,  and  excite  him  to  Merriment.  So  Ericus  King 
of  Denmark,  by  a  certain  Mufician,  could  be  driven  to  fuch  a 
Fury,  as  to  kill  fome  of  his  beft  and  moll  trufty  Servants- 
More  of  this  Power  of  Mufick  over  the  Affedions,  may  be 
feen  in  Ath.  Kirch.  Phonurg.  L.  z.  §.  i,  Alfo  in  if.  Vojfius  de 
Poematum  cantu,  cr  Rythmi  "jiribus. 

And  not  only  upon  the  Affedtions,  but  alfo  on  the  Parts  of 
the  Body.  Mufick  is  able  to  exert  its  Force,  as  appears  from 
the  Gafcoign  Knight,  Cui  Phormingis  fono  audita  Vefica  ftatim 
ad  Urinam  reddendam  veUicabatur.  Such  another  we  have  in 
A**.  I.  Ephem.  Nat.  Curiof.  Obferv.  134.  Alfo  Morhojf  de 
Scyph.  vitr.  per  cert,  human,  vocis  fonumfra5lo :  where  there 
is  not  only  the  Account  of  the  Dutchman  ^t  Amjierdam,  one 
Nich.  Peter,  that  brake  Romer-GIalfes  with  the  Sound  of  hi$ 
Voice;  but  alfo  divers  other  Inftances  of  the  Powers  and  Ef- 
i'tils  of  Sound.  But  to  the  Story  of  the  Ga/coigne  Knight, 
Mr.  Boyl,  from  Scaliger,  adds  a  pleafant  PaflTage,  That  one  he 
had  diibbliged,  to  be  even  with  him,  caufed  at  a  Feaft,  a 
g^g-pipe  tq  bp  played,  when  h(s  was  hemmed  in  with  the 


Chap.  III.  Of  Sound.  135- 

Company  ;  which  made  tlic  Knight  be:  ifs  himfclF,  to  iJ.c 
great  Diverfion  of  the  Company,  as  well  as  Contufiun  vi 
liiinfclf.  Bo'yl's  h.JJ'jy  of  the  l:jfed  of  Lavg.  Moiicn.  In  the 
f.inic  Hook  arc  other  Matters  that  may  be  noted  here  One 
>vhore  Arm  wis  cut  off,  was  exceedingly  toimcntcd  with  the 
dilcharge  or  the  great  Guns  at  Sea,  althoii^li  he  was  at  a 
gicai  Diilance  on  Land.  And  a  great  Ship-Commandcr  ob« 
I'ervcd  his  wounded  Men,  with  broken  Limbs,  luffcied  in  like 
manner  at  the  Enemies  Dilcharges.  An  ingcr.ious  Domc- 
l\ick  of  his  own  would  have  his  Gums  bleed  at  the  tearing 
of  Brown-Paper.  And  an  ingenious  Gentlem.in  of  Mr.  Uo-yl'^ 
Acquaintance  confcffcd  to  htm,  that  he  w*s  incHncd  to  the 
Knight  of  Gafcoj^ne's  Dillemper,  upou  hearing  the  Noife  of 
a  Tap  running.  The  dancing  to  certain  Tunes,  of  Perfons 
bK  with  the  Tarantula,  he  wasaiTured  of  by  an  ingenious  Ac- 
quaintance at  TarcntufHj  who  faw  fevera!,  among  the  rctl  a 
Phyiician,  aUefted  with  that  Dilkmper.  And  many  other 
Accounts  of  this  kind,  feemingly  credible,  are  related  in  .(Wor- 
hojf,  Kircher,  and  many  others;  although  Dr.  Comelio  que- 
llions  the  Matters  of  Fad  relating  to  the  cure  of  the  Taian- 
tttla-bnc,  in  Phil.  Tranf.  N°.  83.  Mr.  Boyl  alio  laith,  a  fo- 
ber  Mulician  told  him,  he  could  make  a  certain  Woman 
weep,  by  playing  one  Tune,  which  others  would  be  little  at- 
fefted  at.  And  he  iaith,  that  helnmi'clf  had  a  kind  of  (liive- 
ring  at  the  repeating  two  Verfes  in  Lucan.  And  I  add,  that 
1  very  well  know  one  to  have  a  fort  of  chill  about  his  Pncor- 
dia  and  Head,  upon  reading  or  hearing  the  53^1  Chapter  of 
Ifaiab;  as  alio  David's  Lamentations  for  S.ml  and  Jonathan, 
I  Sam.  i. 

Neither  are  our  own  Minds  and  Bodies  only  affedcd  with 
Sounds,  but  inanimate  Bodies  are  fo  alio.  Of  which  many 
Stories  may  be  met  with  in  Ktrcher,  particularly  a  large  Stone 
that  would  tremble  at  the  Sound  of  one  particular  Organ- 
Tipe;  \n  Morhojf  Mo,  who  among  many  oilier  Relations  hath 
this,  Memtni  ct'.rn  ipfi  [clarif.  JVilli^o'j  d-e  expcnmento  Vitn  per 
"vocem  jKiii'li  narranm,  ex  eo  auMvifl'e,c^uod  in  Adibm  Muficis  ftbi 
•vicinis  alicjHOties  collapfuvt  pavimcntum  ftnrit  ;  quod  tpfe  Jonn 
tnntmuis  adfcribere  non  dubnavit.  MorholT  cap.  12.  Mrrfenne 
alfo,  among  many  Relations  in  his  Harmon,  and  other  Books, 
tells  a  lar  more  probable  Story,  of  a  particular  Part  of  2 
Faveinent,  that  would  iliake,  as  if  the  I'.arth  would  open, 
when  the  Organs  played,  than  what  he  relates  about  Antipa 
thy,  in  his  6)M^yZ.  Comment  in  Genef.  viz.  That  the  Sound  of 
a  Drum  made  of  a  Wolfs  Skin,  will  break  another  made  of 
Sheep  s  Skin:  That  Hens  will  fly  at  the  Sound  of  an  Harp 
ftruiig  with  P^ox-Gut-Strings,  and  more  to  the  fame  purpofc. 
Mr.  Boyl  alfo,  in  his  laft  cited  Book  tells  us.  Seats  will  trem- 
ble at  the  Sound  of  Organs;  and  that  he  hath  felt  his  H.u 
to  do  fo  too  under  his  Hand,  at  ceratain  Notes  both  of  Or- 

K  4  gjns. 


13^  Of  Sound.  Book  IV. 

Words  of  the  laft-ciied  famous  Author  (//"),  "  That 
*'  Mufick  iliould  not  only  affc6t  the  Fancy  with 
"  Deh'ght;  but  alfo  give  ReHef  to  the  Grief  and 
"  Sadnefs  of  the  Heart }  yea,  appeafe  all  thofe  tur- 
"  bulent  Padions,  which  are  excited  in  the  Bread 
"  by  an  immoderate  Ferment,  and  Fluduation  of 
*'  the  Blood". 

And  now,  who  can  re{ie6b  upon  all  this  curious 
Apparatus  of  the  Scnfc  of  Hearings  and  not  give 
the  great  Creator  his  due  Praife  !  Who  can  fuivey 
all  this  admirable  Work,  and  not  as  readily  ovv'ii 
it  to  be  the  Work  of  an  omnipotent,  and  infinitely 
wife  and  good  GOD  {g£)t  as  the  moft  artful  Me- 
lodies we  hear,  are  the  Voice  or  Performances  of  a 
living  Creature ! 


gans,  and  in  Difcourfe,  thnt  he  tried  an  Arch  that  would  an- 
fwer  to  C  fa-ut,  and  had  done  fo  an  loo  Years;  and  that  an 
exp'^eiienced  Builder  told  him  any  well-built  Vault  will  anfwer 
Ibme  determinate  Note.  And  at  Eajlbury-Houje  near  Bark- 
ing, I  my  felf  dil'covered  the  Porch,  (having  firm  Brick- 
Wails,)  not  only  to  found  when  ftruck  on  the  Bottom,  but 
alfo  to  give  almoft  as  loud  a  Sound,  when  I  founded  the  fame 
Note  with  my  Voice. 

(//)  Willis,  ubi  fupra. 

iSZ)  ^^^'^  ^^^^  ^ft  ^^'  ^'^^  calamo  tantum  cantare,  cr  a- 

grefte,  atque  incondifAm  carmen  ad  aitqunm  tanthm  olleilatio' 
niitn  modular'i  docuit,  fed  tot  artes,  tot  I'ocum  •var'tetates,  tot 
Jonas,  alios  fpiritu  nojlro,  altos  externa  cantH  editnros  cora- 
ment'M  efi,     Senec.  de  Beuef.  1.  4.  cap.  6. 


CHAP. 


^37 


CHAP.    IV. 

Of  the  Senfe  of  Smelling. 

THIS  Senfc  I  fliall  difpatch  in  kfs  Compafs 
than  the  two  lafl,  bccaufe  its  Apparatus  (al- 
though fufficicntly  grand  and  admirable,  yet)  is  ncx: 
fo  multiplicious  as  of  the  Eye  and  Ear  i  it  being 
fufficient  in  this  Scnfe,  that  the  odoriferous  EfHuvia 
of  Bodies  {a)  can  have  an  cafy,  free  Paflagc  ro  the 
olfaftory  Nerves,  without  the  Formalities  of  Re- 
fractions, and  other  Preparations  necellary  to  the 
Perfection  of  the  two  former  Senfcs.  Accordin_^ly 
the  all-wife  Creator  hath  made  fufTicient  Provifion 
for  the  Reception  of  Smells,  by  the  Apertures  of 
the  Nolbils  [h)  j  made  not  of  Flclli,  or  Bone,  but 
cartilaginous,  the  better  to  be  kept  open,  and 
withal,  to  be  dilated  or  contracted,  as  there  is  oc- 
cafion:  For  which  Service  it  hath  fcvcral  proper 
and  curious  Mufcles  {c). 


(4)  A  Piece  of  Amhergreafe  fufpended  in  a  Pair  of  Scales, 
that  would  turn  with  a  very  fniall  Part  of  a  Grain,  loll  no- 
thing of  its  Weight  in  3  4-  bays;  neither  did  AjJ'a  fi^tida  in 
5  4-  Days;  but  an  Ounce  of  Nut7negs  loft  5  '-  Grains  in  6 
Days;  and  Cloves  7  -|  Grains.     Bo'yl'%  Subtil,  of  rjfl:tv.  C.  5. 

{b)  Nares,  eo  quod  otnnis  Odor  a^  fuperiora  fertur,  ;ecTeJur- 
fum  funt  :  Et  ejubd  Cibi  cj'  Potion'n  judicium  t7)agnum  earur/t 
eji,  non  fiv.e  causii  vicimtatem  Oris  Jccuu  funt.  Cicciu  dc 
Nat.  Deor.  1.  1.  c.  56. 

(c)  Had  not  the  Contriver  of  Animal  Bodies  been  minded 
that  his  Work  fliould  have  all  the  Signatures  of  Accuracy,  this 
Senfe  might  have  been  performed  vvuh  a  bare  Aperture  of 
the  Nofe  ;  but  that  noching  might  go  imperfedt  out  of  his 
Hand,  he  hath  made  a  part  of  the  Nofe  ealily  moveable,  and 
given  a  Set  of  Mufcles  10  lift  up,  and  open  and  (luit  the  Nof- 
trils  ;  and  fo  adjullitto  crvery  Occallon  of  this  Senfe. 

And 


138  Of  the  Smell.  Book  IV, 

And  forafmuch  as  it  is  by  Breathing  (^),  that 
the  odorant  Particles  are  drawn  in,  and  convey'd 
to  the  Senfory  j  therefore  there  is  a  very  wife  Pro- 
vifion  made  in  the  Lamina^  with  which  the  upper 
Part  af  the  Nofe  is  barricaded,  which  ferve  to  two 
excellent  Ufes:  Partly,  to  fence  out  any  noxious 
Subftances  from  entering  the  breathing  Paflages  in 
our  Sleep,  or  when  we  cannot  be  aware  {e)  j  and 
part^y,  to  receive  the  Divarications  of  the  olfa6iory 
Nervesy  which  are  here  thick  fpread,  and  which  do 
by  thcfe  Means  meet  the  Smells  entring  with  the 
Breath,  and  flriking  upon  them. 

And  accordingly,  the  more  accurate  this  Senfe  is 
in  any  Animal,  the  longer  we  may  obferve  thofe 
l^amiriie  arej  and  more  of  them  in  number  folded 
up,  and  croudcd  together,  to  contain  the  more 
nervous  Filaments,  and  to  detain  and  fetter  the 
odoriferous  Particles  in  their  Windings  and  Turn- 

Av\d  an  admirable  Provifion  this  is,  which  the 
great  Creator  hath  made  for  the  good  of  brute 
Creatures  (/)  5  the  chief  A€is  of  many  of  whofe 
Lives,  are  performed  by  the  Miniiby  of  this  Senfe. 

In 


(d)  Qdorem  non  aliud,  quam  mfuHHtn  Aer^f  intelligi  pojje. 
Plin.  Nat.  Hift.  1.  9.  c.  7. 

(e)  For  a  further  Guard  againft  the  Ingrcfs  of  noxious 
Things,  the  Vibriffi,  or  Hairs  placed  at  the  Entrance  of  the  Nof- 
tri'.s  lerve,  which,  in  feme  meafiire,  Hop  the  Entrance  of 
Things  improper,  or  however  give  Warning  of  them,  but 
at  the  fame  Time  allow  an  eafy  Faflage  to  the  Breath  and 
Odours. 

(/)  Mulio  pnclarius  ewicat  [^Olfa^us]  in  brutis  animalibus^ 
quam  in  homine  :  ifia  tuitnque  hoc  fob  indice,  herharum,  ali- 
crumque  corporum  priifs  ignotorum  virtutes  certilfme  dignofcunt^ 
quin  (J'  vtcium  fuum  abfentem,  lel  in  abftrufo  pofittim,  OJo- 
rattt  venantur,  ac  facilitme  inve/iigant.  Slu'bd  autem  minus  fa^ 
q,aces  funt  homintim  nares,  illud  non  facultatis  hiijus  abufui 
prout  nonnulii  voiunt )  aftribi  debet,  verhm  in  causa  eft  ipfiui 
Orgam  defeHus :  hoc  cntm  circa  viiliif  humani  criteria  (ubi  ra- 
tio. 


Chap.  IV.  Of  the  Smell.  139 

In  Inkds,  and  many  other  Cic.irurc;,  it  is  of  great 
\J{'c  in  the  Propagation  of  their  Kindj  as  particu- 
larly in  helping  them  to  fafc  and  convenient  Places 
for  the  Incubation  of  their  EgL^s,  and  breeding  up 
their  Young.  Others  are  by  the  Accuracy  of  this 
Scnfe,  of  Ufe  to  Mankind,  which  would  be  other- 
wife  of  little  or  no  Ufe  (g).  And  moll  of  the  ir- 
rational Animals,  Birds,  Beafts,  and  creeping  Things, 
do,  by  their  Smell,  find  out  their  Food  j  fome  at 
great  Dillanccs,  and  fome  at  Hand.  With  what 
Sagacity  do  fome  difcovcr  their  Food  in  the  Midft 
of  Mud  and  Dirt  (Z?)?  With  what  Curiofity  do  the 
herbaceous  Kind  pick  and  chufc  I'uch  Plants  as  af- 
ford them  wholfome  Food,  or  fometimcs  fuch  as 
are  Medicinal  (/),  and  rekife  luch  as  would  hurt 
and  dcllroy  them  ?  And  all  by  the  Help  principally, 
if  not  only,  of  the  Smell,  aflilled  by  its  near  Ally 
the  Talk.  Of  which  I  fliall  in  the  next  Place 
fpeak  very  briefly. 


tio,  c  intclletlus  adj'unt )  non  ita  accuratum  reqtitntur  :  Prop- 
terea.  enim  inferiorcs  potent't&  in  homiae,  n  natiird  minus  per- 
feti&  exijlunt,  ut  fupfriorum  rtiltui  ar  exercitio  relinaueretur 
locus.     VVillis  de  Anim.  Brut.  cap.  13. 

ig)  Thus  the  chief  Ufe  of  Hounds  is  to  hunt;  and  other 
Dogs,  to  be  i.  Watch  and  Guard  to  our  Houfes  by  Night. 
For  which  Services  (particularly  in  Houiids)  their  OlfaUiory 
Herves  are  not  only  remarkably  large,  (like  as  they  are  in 
other  Brutes,)  but  their  Branches  and  Filaments  are,  in  the 
LaminA  of  the  Nolhils,  both  nu)re  and  larger  than  1  have 
feen  in  any  other  Creature  Nvhatfoevcr.  Alio  there  are  more 
Convulfions  of  the  Lamim  than  1  ever  remember  to  have 
found  in  any  other  Animal. 

The  Sagacity  of  Hounds  is  prodigious,  of  which  fee  an  In- 
flance  in  Eeok-  IV.  Chap.  11.   Note  {hhh). 

{h)   See  £(?o/:  VII.  Chap.  1.   Note  i^e). 

(i)  Vid.  Plin.  Hiji.  Nat,  1.  8.  cap.  zy.  6UfA  animal'ia  quas 
hfrbas  ojlcndernnt. 


CHAP. 


i,40  Book  IV. 

C  H  A  P.  V. 

Of  the  Tap  {a). 


IN  this,  as  in  the  laft  Senfe,  we  have  an  Jppara- 
tus  abundantly  fufficient  to  the  Senfe  j  Nerves 
curioufly  divaricated  about  the  Tongue  (/'),  and 
Mouth,  to  receive  the  Imprellions  of  every  Gufto  -, 
and  thefe  Nerves  guarded  with  a  firm  and  proper 
Tegument  to  defend  them  from  Harms ;  but  with- 
alj  fo  perforated  in  the  papillary  Eminences,  as  to 
give  a  free  Admiflion  to  Taftes. 

But 


(a)   T«  5    ei'J'jj  T   ypXk>ij  &c.     Sapornm  genera, dulc'n, 

flngais,  anfierus,  acerbus,  acris,  faljus,  ajnarus,  acidus.  The- 
©pkr.  de  Cauf.  Plant.  1.6.  c.  i.  What  may  the  Cauie  of  the 
tiifference  of  Talks,  he  faith  is  hard  to  aliign,  zrore^-j  yi  tali 
'ssdSiTiy  &c.  Vtrum  affetlionihus  Senfunm  — ■■ —  an  figuris,  qui- 
hms [ingidi  eonfiant,  ut  Democritus  cenfet.  id-  ib.      A^fjiox-e/l®"  3> 

&c.     Democruus dulcem  ejje  faporem  qui  rotundus  :    acer- 

friitn  qtti  Jigura  magna.;  afperum  qui  multis  angulis,  Scc  id.  ib. 
&c.  But  of  the  Diverfities  and  Caufes  of  Taftes,  fee  Dr. 
Crew,  Leil.6.  and  Dr.  Willis  de  Anim.   Brut.   c.  ii. 

{b)  Intelleiiui  Saporum  efi  ceteris  in  prima  lingua  :  Hominiy 
f^  in  palato.  Plin.  1.  ii.  c.  37. 

The  Opinions  of  Anatomifts  concerning  the  Organ  of 
Tajle,  are  various.  Bauhin,  T.  Barthnlin,  Barihclerte,  Vejlinge^ 
Detifinge,2ic.  place  it  in  the  hxer,  flediy  Parts  of  the  Tongue. 
Our  famous  Wharton,  in  the  Gland  at  theRoot  of  the  Tongue  : 
Laursntius  in  the  thin  Tunick  covering  the  Tongue  ;  but  the 
Learned  Malpighi  with  great  Probability  concludes,  becaufe 
the  outward  Cover  of  the  Tongue  is  perforated,  under  which 
lie  papillary  Parts,  (of  which  Mr.  Cozvper  hath  very  good 
Cuts  in  his  Anat.  Tak  13.)  that  in  thefe  the  Taftelieth.  Mal- 
pight  sWords  are,  6luare  cum  diciis  meatihm  infignibus  occur- 
rant  papillaria  corpora,  probabilius  efi  in  his  ultimo,  ex  fubin- 
tranti  fapido  humore  titillationem,  c  mordicationem  qHandam 
fiiri,  qn£  Gajium  eficiat.  ^4alpig.  Op.  Tom.  z,  De  Lingua, 
pag.  iS. 


Chiip.  V.  OftbeTafte.  141 

But  I  Ihall  fay  no  more  of  this  Scnfe;  only  a 
Word  or  two  of  its  Confcnt  with  tlie  Smell,  and 
the  Siru:ition  of  them  both  :  Their  Situation  is  in 
the  moft  convenient  Place  imaginable,  for  the  Dif- 
charge  of  their  Offices;  at  the  firfl:  Entrance  (c), 
in  the  Way  to  the  grand  Receptacle  of  our  Food 
and  Nouriihment  >  to  furvey  what  is  to  be  admit- 
ted therein ;  to  judge  between  what  is  wholibme, 
and  fit  for  Nounlhment,  and  what  is  unfavoury 
and  pernicious.  And  for  this  End,  the  all-wile 
Creator  fecms  to  have  eflablidi'd  a  great  Confent 
between  the  Eye,  the  Nofe,  and  Tongue,  by  or- 
dering the  Branches  of  the  (arae  Ntrves  {d\  to  each 
of  thole  three  Parts ;  as  alfo  indeed  to  divers  other 
Parts  of  the  Body,  which  I  may  have  occadon  to 
mention  in  a  more  proper  Place   ie).     By  which 


Pra-cipuum  acrfere  folum  Gufiatus  organon  ejl  Lingua',    cut 

aliquarenus  fubovfcure  tamen  Palatum,  o"  fuperior  GuU  pars 
cotijcnitttnt :  tn  omnibtis  vcfo  fibn  nervo[&  tmniedlata  fenjion'is 
iiijirumenta  Junt.  Square  obftrvare  efi,  Linguam  pn  alia  qt*»~ 
■VIS  parte  injtgniter  Jibrofam  ejjt,  eiiam  texturd  -valJe  pi-rosd 
conjiare,  in  e urn  nempe  finetn,  ut  partictU  re:  fapiJ£  Crpiofi:4s  ac 

pemtiiti  intra   Senj'oni   meatus  admittantur Kervrirutcm 

i^ui  fibns  LingUA  detjfijftmc  intertextis  fatmiltintur,    ac  faporutn 

imprejfiones  tJ  ts-^otrtij  tticSr^jti^^ui  communicant,   funt Servi 

e  paribus  turn  qKinto,-  turn  nono  ;  c/  ubique  cum  dt-asa  propa- 
giniim  Jerir  per  tot  am  ejus  ccmpajcm  dijlributi.      Willis  ibid. 

(c)  Gujlatus,  qui  jcntire  eorum  <juihus  xefcimur  genera  de- 
bet, habitat  ;«  ea  parte  Oris,  qua  efculentis  CP*  poculentis  iter 
natura  patefecit.  Ciccr.  de  Nat.  Dcor.  J.  l.  c.  56.  Vid.  quoque 
fi4pr.  Note  {b).  Chap.  4. 

{d)  Alulta  hujus  [quinti  paris]  l^ervi  propagines  Mafltcatio>- 
nis  open-  deftinantur ;  ideoque  quoniam  alimcnta  ingerenda  nan 
tnodo  Gu/iiis,  afl  etiam  OLj'atltis  <jr  VisUs  examen  fubirc  debint^ 
ab  eodem  Nervo,  cujus  rami  ad  Palatum  CT*  Fauces  mifft,  Man- 
ducat  tonis  negotium  peragunt,  propagines  alii,  -vclut  extlnratri' 
ces,  ad  Karcs  cr  Oculos  feruntur,  netnpe  ut  ijih.u  aiiorum  fen- 
fuum  organa,  etiam  ad  objedfa  Guflus  tnelms  digncjcenda  proba.* 
ttonum  auxiliis  quibufdam  inJlrtiantHr.  Willis  Nerv.  Defcrip. 
&  Ulus.  cap.  21. 

(*)  Sc«  bock  V,  Chap,  8, 

Means, 


x^z  Of  the  Tajie.  Book  IV. 

Means,  there  is  all  the  Guard  that  can  be,  againft 
pernicious  Foodi  forafmuch  as  before  it  is  taken 
into  the  Stomach,  it  is  to  undergo  the  Trial  of 
three  of  the  Senfesj  the  Scrutiny  of  the  Eye,  the 
ftri6i:  Surveyor  of  its  outward  Appearance  >  and 
the  Probation  of  the  Smell  and  Talle,  the  two 
feverefb  Judges  of  its  natural  Conllitution  and  Com- 
pofition. 


CHAP.    VI. 

Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling  {a). 

HAving  fpent  fo  much  Time  upon  the  other 
Senfes,  and  therein  given  fuch  ample  Proofs 
of  the  infinite  Creator's  Wifdom  i  I  ihall  but  briefly 
take  Notice  of  two  Things  relating  to  this  laft 
Senfe. 

One 


(4)  Malpight  is  of  this  Opinion,  that  as  Ta(le  is  performed 
by  the  Va^dU  in  the  Tongue,  fo  is  Feeling  by  fuch  hke  PapilU 
under  the  Sl^in.  From  ieveral  DifTecftions,  and  other  Obl'er- 
varions,  he  thus  concludes.  Ex  his  CT"  fimdibiis  videbatur  ani- 
mus  abundi  certior  redditus,  earundem  Papiliarum  pyramida- 
Itum  copiam,  quas  alias  in  Lingua  defcripfi,  in  locis  prAcipue 
acqui/itiori  Tatlui  dicatis  reperiri,  eodem  progigni  nervofo  c?" 
cuticsilari  corpore  ,  JImulque  circumvolvi  reticulari  involu- 
cre ,  cr  extimatn  cuticulam ,  'veluti  ultitnutn  terminum  at" 
tingere.  — ^— —  Alicrofcopio  quilibet  in  maniis  dorfo  pro  fudore 
orificta  quidam  tniro  ordine  difperfa  intueri  poteft,  circa  qux 
frequentia  qu<&Jam  capitula  aJJ'urgunt  ;  hxc  vera  ftmt  Papil- 
iarum fines,  dam  a  cute  iiJJ'urgentes  interpofitum  fuperant  rete^ 
fimulque  extimum  cuticuLirn.  H£c  repetitts  fetlionibus  depre- 
hendi;  ex  quibus  non  improbabiiicer  deducam,  ficuti  ex  elatio' 
riiiis  •  pai'iUis    ■  /»  Lingtta,  Gtiflus  Organon  elicitur, 

• ita  ex  loptosd  harum   Papiliarum   congerie in  or' 

ganis,  ubi  t/taxime   anitnalia   iailki  nutione  ajficmntur,  ■ 

adaquatitm 


Chap.  VI.  Of  Feeling,  143 

One  is  its  Organ,  the  Nerves.  For  as  all  Senfa- 
tion  is  performed  by  the  Nerves  {h)^  and  indeed  the 
other  Senfes  (performed  by  Nerves)  are  a  kind  of 
Feeling-,  Co  is  this  Senfe  of  Feeling  perlormed  by 
Nerves  likewife,  fpread  in  the  molt  incomparable, 
curious  Manner  throughout  the  whole  Body.  But 
to  defcribe  their  Origine  in  the  Brain,  and  Spinal- 
Marrow,  their  Ramifications  to  all  the  Parts  j  their 
Inofcuiations  with  one  another  >  and  other  Matters; 
whereby  not  only  the  Scnfe  of  Feeling  is  pcrform'd, 
but  alfo  animal  Motion,  and  an  admnable  Confenc 
and  Harmony  of  all  the  Parts  of  the  Body  is  cffctb- 
cd :  (To  defcribe,  I  fay,  thcfe  Things)  would  take 
up  too  much  Time,  and  I  have  already,  and  fhall, 
as  I  go  along,  give  fome  Hints  thereof. 

The  other  Thing  1  fhall  take  Notice  of,  is,  the 
Difperfion  of  this  Senfe  throughout  the  Body,  both 
without,  and  within.  The  other  Senfes,  I  have  ob- 
ferv'd,  are  feated  in  the  very  bell:  Place  for  the 
Relief  and  Comfort,  the  Guard  and  Benefit  of  the 
Animal.  And  foralmuch  as  it  is  neccfl'ary  to  the 
Being,  and  well-being  of  the  Body,  that  every 
Part  llrould  be  fcnfible  of  Things  fafe,  or  Things 
prejudicial  to  it  felf;  therefore  it  is  an  admn'able 
Contrivance  of  the  great  Creator,   to  difperfe  ihvs 


adsquatum  Ta51us  organum  fufficiennr  habtr't.  Malpig.  dc  ex- 
tern. Tac't.  Org.  p.  2.6.      Coujul.  quoque  ejujd.  I'it.   p.  z8. 

'I'hefe  Oblcrvations  of  Malpighi,  our  late  curious  and  dili- 
gent Mr.  Cowpcr  hath  contirmed,  and  given  us  very  elegant 
Cuts  both  of  the  Sfun,  and  the  PapilU,  and  the  Nerves, 
Glands,  erf.  under  it,  from  Microfcopical  Oblcrvations.  Vid. 
Cowptr's  Anat.   Introd.  and  Tab.  4. 

(Jf)  Although  the  Eye  be  the  ufual  Judge  of  Colours,  yet 
feme  have  been  able  to  dilbnguilh  them  by  their  Feeling. 
Gh<'tdntn  futt  qui  vinit  ad  M.  Due.  Hetruri»e  attlaw  qui  colorts 
fer  Tiictttm  cognojcebac  Pro  expertmsTtto  velum  Jencum,  uni- 
formuer  textuiDy  cr  plurihus  colonbui  tir)Clu7n,  cj/erebaiiir,  c?* 
veracirer  de  color*  tn  Jmgulis  parttbus  judtcabar.  Grinuid.  dc 
Lum.  3c  CoJ.  prop.  43.  §.  s'J> 

Senfe 


144  Of  Feeling.  Book  IVo 

Senfe  of  Feeling  throughout  every  Part  [c) ;  to  di- 
flinguilh  between  Pleafure  and  Painj  Things  falu- 
tary,  and  Things  hurtful  to  the  Body. 

Thus  in  the  five  Senfes  of  Animals,  we  have  an 
OEconomy  worthy  of  the  Creator,  and  manifeftly 
demonftrating  his  Power,  Wifdom  and  Indulgence. 
For  whether  we  confider  the  Mechanifm  of  the 
Organs,  or  the  great  Ufe  and  Convenience  of  each 
Senfe,  we  find  it  noble  and  grand,  curious  and  ar- 
tificial 5  and  every  way  worthy  of  its  infinite  Ma- 
ker, and  beyond  the  Wit  and  Power  of  any  Thing 
but  a  GOD :  And  therefore  we  muft  even  deny  our 
Senfes,  by  denying  them  to  be  God's  handy-worlc. 

And  now  from  thofe  chief  Machines  of  animal 
Performances  and  Enjoyments,  the  five  Senfes  5  let 
us  pafs  to  another  Thing  in  common  to  all  the  Sen- 
fitive  Creatures,  which  is  Refpiration. 


(c)  Ta6lus  autem  toto  corpore  aquahiliter  fufus  efi,  ut  omnes 
i6lus,  omnefque  nimios  O"  frigoris,  ziy  caloris  appulfus  /entire 
pofflmus.     Cicer.  ubi  fupr. 

Tadlus  fenfus  omnibus  efi,  et'iam  quibus  nullus  alius  ;  nam 
&  Oftreis,  er  terrefiribus  Vermibus  quoque.  Exiftimaverim  om- 
nibus fenfum  ^  Gufiattts  efj'e.  Cur  enim  alios  alia  faporei  ap- 
petunt  ?  in  qu'o  vil  pr&cipua  Nature  archite^io.  Piin.  Nat. 
Hift.  1.  lo.   c.  71. 


CHAR 


CHAP.  VII. 

Of  Refpiration. 

OF  all  the  Afts  of  Animal  Life,  this  is  one  of 
the  chief,  and  moft  neccfHiry.     For  whatfo- 
ever  hath  Animal  Life,  hathalfo  the  Faculty  of  Re- 
fpiration,  or  fomevvhat  equivalent  thereto  {a).     In- 
deed 


(4)  The  Ufes  aflign'd  to  Refplrat'ion  by  all  the  Anatomifts 
before  Alalpighi's  Dilcoveries  of  the  Strudure  of  the  LungSj 
are  fo  various,  and  many  of  them  fo  improbable,  that  it 
would  be  frivolous  to  recount  them.  But  the  more  eminent 
modern  Anatoraifts  aflign  thefe  Ufes.  Willis  thus  lums  up  his 
Opinion,  Pr^cipua  Pulfnonum  funtlio,  u'nfus  ftint,  fanguincm 
CT*  aerem  per  tolas  partttim  compages,  intimofque  recejj'us,  atq; 
duilus  quojque  minutijfnnos  traducere,  CT*  ubique  invicetn  com- 
tfiitrere ;   in    eum  ncmpe  fincm,  ut  fanguis   vcnofus    a  circuitu 

reduXf  <y  ch'^mo  rccenti  dilutus,  turn  perfeHiiis  mifcea- 

tur  V  velnt  fubigatur,  turn  potijfimum  ut  fecundUm  omnes  fuas 
partes  ab  aere  nitrofo  ds  novo  accendatur.  Pharmaceut.  p.  2. 
S.  I.  c.  z.  §.  2.  Mayow  faith  rightly,  that  one  grand  Ufe  of 
Expiration  is,  Ut  cum  aere  expul/o,  etiam  vapores  e  fanguine 
exhalantes,  fimul  exftijfientur.  And  as  for  Jnfpiration,  that  it 
coveyeth  a  nitro-aenal  ferment  to  the  Blood,  to  which  the 
Animal-Spirits  are  owing,  and  all  Mufcular-Motion.  Mayovi 
de  Kefpir.  p.  21.  zsrc  mea.  Edit. 

Somewhat  of  the  Opinion  of  thefe  tv/o  lad:  cited,  if  I  mi- 
ftake  not  (it  being  long  fince  I  read  their  Trads,  and  have 
them  not  now  at  hand,^  were  Ent,  S-jlvius,  Szvammerdamt 
Diewerbroek,  and  my  P'riend  Mr.  Ray  in  an  unpublilhed  Traft 
of  his,  and  in  his  Letters  now  in  my  Hands. 

But  our  Dx.Thurfton,  for  good  Reafons,  rejedls  thefe  from 
being  principal  Ufes  of  Refpiration,  and  thinks,  with  great 
Reafon,  the  principal  Ufes  to  be  to  move,  or  pafs  the  Blood 
from  the  right  to  the  left  Ventricle  of  the  Heart.  Upon 
which  account  Perfons  hanged,  drowned,  or  ftrangled  by 
Catarrhsj  fo  fuddenlydie,  namely,  becaufe  the  Circulation  of 
their  Blood  is  (topped.  For  the  lame  Reafon  alio  it  is,  that 
Animals  die  fo  foon  in  the  Air-Pump.  Among  other  Proofs 
he  inftanceth  in  an  Experiment  of  Dr.  Croon,  Profcj]'.  Grejh. 
Which  he  made  before  our  R.  s.  by  ftiangUng  a  Pullet,  fo 

L  tb«t 


1^6  Of  Rejftratton.         Book  IV. 

deed  fo  congenial  is  this  with  Life ,   that  Breath 
and  Life  are  in    Scripture   Phrafe    and  Common 

Speech 


that  not  the  leaft  Sign  of  Life  appcar'd;  but  by  blowing 
Wind  into  the  Lungs  through  ihe  Trachea,  and  fo  fetting  the 
Lungs  a  playing,  he  brought  the  Bird  to  Life  again.  Ano- 
ther Experiment  was  once  tried  by  Dr.  Walter  Needham,  be- 
fore Mr,  Boyl,  and  others  at  Oxford,  by  hanging  a  Dog,  fo 
that  the  Heart 'ceafed  moving.  But  haftily  opening  the  Dog, 
and  blowing  Wind  into  the  Du£Ihs  Pecquetlanus,  he  put  the 
Blood  in  Motion,  and  by  that  means  the  Heart,  and  fo  re- 
covered the  Dog  to  Life  again.  V.  Thurfton  de  Refpir.  Uf. 
p.  60,  and  63.  mea,  Edit. 

Such  an  Experiment  as  Dr.  Croons  my  Friend,  the  late 
juftly  renowned  Dr.  Hook  (hewed  alfo  our  R.  S.  He  cut  a- 
way  the  Ribs,  Diaphragm,  and  Pericardium,  of  a  Dog  ;  alfo 
the  top  of  the  Wind-Pipe,  that  he  might  tie  it  on  to  the  Nofe 
of  a  Pair  of  Bellows;  and  by  blowing  into  the  Lungs,  he  re- 
stored the  Dog  to  Life;  and  then  cealing  blowing,  the  Dog 
would  foon  fall  into  dying  Fits;  but  by  blowing  again,  he  re- 
covered ;  and  fo  alternately  would  die,  and  recover,  for  a 
confiderable  Time,  as  long,  and  often  as  they  pleafed.  Phi- 
lof.  Tranf,  No.  i8. 

For  the  farther  Confirmation  of  Dr.  Thurflon's  Opinion, 
the  ingenious  Dr.  Mafgrave  cut  off,  and  clofe  flopped  up  the 
Wind-Pipe  of  a  Dog  with  a  Cork,  and  then  threw  open  the 
Thorax;  where  he  found  the  Blood  ftagnating  in  the  Lungs, 
the  Arteria  Puhnonaris  the  right  Ventricle  and  Auricle  of  the 
Heart,  and  the  two  great  Trunks  of  the  Cava,  diftended  with 
Blood  to  an  immenfe  Degree;  but  at  the  fame  Time,  theF^- 
na  Pulmonaris,  the  left  Ventricle  and  Auricle  of  the  Heart  in  a 
manner  empty,  hardly  a  fpoonful  of  Blood  therein.  Phihf. 
Tranf.  N".  240.  Or  both  the  Experiments  may  be  together 
met  with  in  Lowth.  Abridg.  Vol.  3.  p.  66,  67. 

This  Opinion  of  our  learned  Thurfton,  the  late  learned  E/- 
mullerus  efpoufed,  who  being  particular  in  reckoning  up  the 
Ufes  of  Refpiration,  I  fhall  therefore  the  more  largely  cite 
him.  Refpiration,  faith  he,  ferves,  r.  Ad  Olfa^um.  2.  Ad 
Screatum  O'  Sputationem.  3.  Ad  Ofcitationem,  Tujftm,  Ster- 
nutationem,  Emun^ionemque.  4.  Ad  liquidorum  Sorbitionem, 
Su£lionemve.  5.  Ad  Loquelam,  Cantum,  Clamorem,  Rifum, 
Jletum,  Flatum,  &C.  6.  Ad  f&cum  Alvi,  Urins,,  Foetus  Mo- 
tive,  necnon  Secundinarum  expuljionem.  7.  Ad  promovendi 
Ventriculi,  Inteftifzorum,  LaHeorumque  vaforum.  Sec.  contenta. 
%.  Ad  halitHS  aqueos  Sanguinis  'e  pulmonibtts,  aeris  ope,  export 

iandos. 


Chap.  Vlf.       Of  Rcfpiratiott.  T47 

Spech  taken  as  fynonytnous  Things,  or  at  Icafl 
ncccflary    Concomitants    of   one    another.     Mo- 

y^ 

tandos,     9.  Ad  Diapnoen.      lo.  Ad  exadltorcm  Ch^li,  L'jmpht- 

que,  necnon  Sarigu'ims mifcelam.      ir.  Ad  conciliafjdum  Jan- 

guini'       •coccineam  ruhcd'tnem,    &C.      \i.   Nee  morose   ve^abi- 

mus,    a'crein pultnoriesy    cr   fanguinem  illos  tranfcurretucmi 

minus  calida  reddere,  &c.  1 3.  §lu'od  dcnique  acr  far.guini  fn- 
gitlis  Refpirat'tonibiis  aliquant'tlla,  fui  parte,  admixtus,  paucijft- 
mas  quiifdam  in  fpirituum  animalium  elaboratione  particulas 
fimul  contribitat.  All  thefe  Ufes,  although  of  great  Confe- 
quence,  yet  he  thinks  rather  conduce  to  the  JVcU-Bei^g,  than 
the  Being  of  the  AniiTi.^1 ;  becaufe  without  any  of  them,  the 
Animal  would  not  fo  fpcedily  die,  as  it  doth  by  Strangling,  or 
in  the  Air-Pump.  He  therefore  affigns  a  I4«'^  and  the  prin- 
cipal Ufe  of  Refpiration  to  be.  For  the  pajfmg  of  the  Blood 
through  the  Lungs,  that  is  throzvn  into  them  by  the  Heart. 
Etmull.  DilTert.  2.  c,  10.  §.  i.  &16. 

But  the  late  Dr.  Drake,  with  great  Ingenuity  and  Addrefs, 
(like  a  Perlon  fo  confiderable  for  his  Years,  as  he  was  in  his 
Time,)  not  only  eftablifli'd  this  Notion  of  Refpiration,  but 
alfo  carries  it  farther,  making  it  the  true  Caufe  of  the  Dia- 
ftole  of  the  Heart ;  which  neither  Borelli,  Lower,  or  Coii-per, 
much  lefs  any  before  thofe  great  Men,  have  well  accounted 
for.  That  the  Heart  isaMufcle,  is  made  evident  beyond  all 
doubt  by  Dr.  Lower.  And  that  the  Motion  of  all  Mufcles 
confills  in  Conftri(f^ion,  is  not  to  be  doubted  alfo.  By  which 
means  the  Syftole  is  eafily  accounted  for.  But  forafmuch  as 
the  Heart  hath  no  Antagonift-  Mufcle,  the  Btafide  hath  puz- 
iled  the  greateft  Wits.  But  Dr.  Drake  with  great  Judgment, 
and  much  Probability  of  Reafon,  maketh  the  Weight  of  the 
Incumbent  Atmofphere  to  be  the  true  Antagonifi  to  all  the 
Mufcles  which  fcrve  both  for  ordinary  Infpiration  and  the 
Conftridion  of  the  Heart.  The  Particulars  of  his  Opinion 
may  be  feen  in  his  Anatomy ^  1.  2.  c.  7.  And  in  Philof. 
Tranf.  281. 

And  I  remember  when  I  was  at  the  Univerfity,  my  mod 
ingenious  and  learned  Tutor  Dr.  Wills,  when  he  read  Ana- 
tomy to  us,  yfas  of  Opinion,  that  the  Lungs  were  blown  up 
by  the  WeigTit  of  the  incumbent  Air,  and  reprefented  the 
manner  of  Refpiration  in  this  manner,  viz..  He  put  a  Bladder 
into  a  Pair  of  Bellows,  turning  back  the  Neck  of  the  Blad- 
der, and  tying  it  fall,  fo  that  no  Air  might  enter  in  between 
the  Bladder  and  Bellows.  This  being  done,  when  the  Bel- 
lows were  opened,  the  Bladder  would  be  blown  up  by  the 
Weight  of  the  incumbent  Air;  and  when  (hut,  the  Air 
would  be  thereby  preffed  forcibly  out  of  the  Bladder,  ^0  as  ts 


J4^  Of  Refftration.  Book  IV. 

fes  (h)  exprefTeth  animal  Life,  by  [The  Breath  of 
Life~].  Saith  he,  Gen.  vii.  ii,  21.  Jll FlcJJj  that  mo- 
*ved  on  the  Earthy  Fowl,  Cattle,  Beaft,  creeping 
Things,  and  Man-,  all  in  whofe  Noflrils  was  the 
Breath  of  Life  in  the  dry  Land  died.  So  the  PGil- 
iniftj  Pfal.  civ.  zp.  'fhou  takejl  away  their  Breath, 
they  die.  So  grand  an  Aft  therefore  in  common  to 
all  Animals,  may  julHy  deferve  a  Place  in  this  Sur- 
vey of  the  Works  of  God  in  the  animal  Kingdom. 

And  here  I  might  launch  out  into  an  ample  De- 
fcription  of  all  the  Parts  miniftering  to  this  necefla- 
ry  Adj  and  fliew  the  curious  Contrivance  and  ar- 
tificial Stru6lure  of  them  j  but  a  tranfient  View 
fhall  fuffice.  1  might  begin  with  the  outward 
Guards,  the  Nofe  and  Mouth  •■,  but  thefe  have  been 
already  touched  upon.  But  the  exquifite  Mecha- 
nifm  of  the  Larynx,  its  Variety  of  Mufclcs,  its 
Cartilages,  all  fo  exquifitcly  made  for  the  Purpofe 
of  Refpiration,  and  forming  the  Voice  {c),  are  very 

admirable : 


blow  the  Fire.  This  Experiment  I  take  Notice  of  here;  be- 
caufe  (befidesthe  Illuftration  it  gives  to  Reipiration)  that  great 
Gemtts  feems  to  have  had  a  truer  Notion  of  this  Ph^nomenont 
than  was  very  common  then,  viz..  about  the  Year  1677  or 
78;  as  alfo,  becaufe  I  have  in  fome  Authors  met  with  the 
fame  Experiment,  without  mention  of  Dr.  Wills,  whofe  I 
take  it  to  have  been. 

Another  Ufe  of  great  Confideration,  the  already  commend- 
ed Dr.  Cheytte  aiTigns;  namely,  to  form  the  elaftick  Globules 
of  which  the  Blood  principally  confifls,  without  which  there 
would  be  a  general  Obftruflion  in  all  the  capillary  Arteries, 
Cheynes  Phil.  Prin.  of  Nat.  Rel.  or  Harris's  Lex.  Tech.  in  Lungs. 

(l)  Gen.  ii.  7.  vi,  17.  and  vii.  15. 

{c)  Becaufe  it  would  be  endlefs  to  fpecify  the  curious  Me- 
chanifm  of  all  the  Parts,  concurring  to  the  Formation  of  the 
Voice;  I  fliall  therefore  for  a  Sample  note  only  two  Things, 
I,  There  are  thirteen  Mufcles  provided  for  the  Motion  of  the 
five  Cartilages  of  the  Larynx,  Glbf.  Anat.  /.  2,.  c.  14.  a  Sign  of 
the  careful  and  elaborate  Provifion  that  is  made  for  the  Voice. 
2..  It  is  a  prodigious  Faculty  of  the  Glottis,  in  contrafting  and 
dilating  it  felf  with  fuch  Exquifitenefs,  as  to  form  all  Notes. 

Fes 


Chap.  VII.        Of  Rcfptration.  149 

admirable:  And  no  Icfs  fo  is  the  Tongue  (</),  which 
minillcrs  to  that,  and  many  other  Ufcs  too. 

Next,    the  Fabrick  of  tlie  {e)  Tr.^cbea  defervcs 
cfpecial  Remark.     Its  Valve,  the  Epiglottii  on  the 

Top, 


For  (as  the  ingenious  Dr.  Keil  Uitli)  fuppopno  the  ^rtuttft  Di- 
Jlarice  of  the  tzvc  Sides  of  the  Glottis,  to  be  one  tenth  Part  "f  an 
Inch  in  founding  li  Notes,  (to  which  the  Voice  eafily  reaches;) 
this  Line  mujl  be  divided  into  12.  Parts,  each  of  w huh  giues  the 
jiperture  reqrtifite  for  fuch  a  Note,  with  a  certain  stretigth. 
But  if  we  confider  the  Sub-divifion  of  Notes,  into  which  the  Voice 
can  run,  the  Motion  oj  the  Sides  of  the  Glottis  is  jhil  'vajily  ni- 
cer. For  if  two  Chords  founding  exatliy  Uniji  ns,  one  be  JJjort- 
ened,  4-rT^  P^f^  of  't^  Length,  a  jufi  Ear  will  perceive  the 
Difagreement,  and  a  good  Voice  zvill  found  the  Difference,  which 
ii  -pr,-;^  Part  of  a  Note.  But  fuppo'e  the  Voice  can  divide  a  Note 
into  100  Parts,  it  follows  that  the  different  j4pertures  of  the 
Glottis  actually  divide  the  tenth  Part  of  an  Inch,  into  liOO 
Parts,  the  F.ffcCl  of  each  of  which  produces  a  fcnfible  Alteration 
upon  a  good  Ear.  But  becaufe  each  Side  of  the  GlotliS  moves 
jufl  equally,  therefore  the  Divifions  are  jufl  double,  or  the  Sides 
of  the  Glottis,  by  their  Motion  do  ailually  divide  one  tenth  Part 
of  an.  Inch  into  14CO  Parts.     Keil's  Anat.  c.  3.  Se(5t.  7. 

(d)  Among  the  Inftruments  of  Speech,  the  Tongue  is  a  ne- 
cellary  one;  and  fo  necellary,  that  it  is  generally  thought  no 
Speech  can  be  without  it.  But  in  the  third  Tome  of  the  H- 
fhetn.  Germ,  is  publillied,  jac.  Rclandi  Aglnffoflomographia,  fi- 
ve Dcfcriptio  Oris  fine  Lingua,  quod  perfetie  loquitur,  c/  reli- 
quas  fuas  funtlibnes  naturalit'er  exercet.  The  Perlon  dcicribed 
is  one  Pet.  Durand,  a  trench  Boy  of  e'ght  or  nine  Years  old, 
who  at  five  or  fix  loft  his  Tongue  by  a  Gangrene,  occafioned 
the  Small-Pox.  Notwithftandmg  which,  he  could  (as  the  Ti- 
tle faith)  fpeak  perfertly,  as  alfo  tafte,  fpit,  fwallow,  and  chew 
his  Food;  but  this  latter  he  could  do  only  on  that  Side  he  put 
it  into,  not  being  able  to  turn  it  to  the  other  Side  his  Mouth. 

In  the  fame  Tradt,  Chap.  6.  is  this  Obfervation  of  ventrilo- 
quous  Perlons,  Metnini  me  a  qitodam  fat  celebri  Anatomica  au" 
dtviffe.  Hum  de  dupl/catura  Medtafiini  ageret,  ft  Mcmbrana  ijla. 
duplex  naturalittr  unit »  in  duas  partes  dtvidatur,  loquelam  qua- 
fi  ex  peilore  procedere,  ut  circumflantes  credant  Dimoniacum 
hunc,  aut  Sternomythum. 

(e)  The  Variation  of  the  Wine-pipe  is  obfervable  in  every  Crea~ 
ture,  according  as  it  is  neceffary  for  that  of  the  Voice.  In  an 
Urchin,  which  hath  a  very  Jmall  Voice,  'tis  hardly  more  than 
membranous.     And  in  a  Pigeon,    which  hath  a  low  and  fcft 


1^0  Of  Refptration.  Book  IV. 

Top,  to  fence  againft  all  Annoyances}  its  cartilagi- 
nous Rings  (/)  nearly  environing  it,  with  its  mem- 
branous Part  next  the  Gullet,  to  give  the  freer  Paf- 
fage  to  the  Defcent  of  the  Food.  And  Laftly,  Irs 
inner  Tegument  of  exquifite  Senfe  to  be  readily  af- 
fefted  with,  and  to  make  Efforts  againft  every 
Thing  that  is  hurtful  or  offenfivc }  thefe,  1  fay,  do 
ail  jultly  deferve  our  Admiration. 

And  no  lefs  prodigious  are  the  Parts  farther  with^ 
jnj   the  Bronchi^  the  Feftculcs  (g),  with  their  muf- 

cular 


iJote,  'tis  partly  cartilaginous,  and  partly  membranous.  In  an 
Owl,  which  hath  a  good  audible  Note,  'tis  more  cartilaginous-, 
iut  that  of  a  ]zy,  hath  hard  Bones  infiead  of  Cartilages ;  and 
fo  of  a  Linnet :  Whereby  they  have  both  of  them  a  louder  and 
fironger  Note,  &c. 

The  Rings  of  the  Wind-pipe  are  fitted  for  the  Modulation  of 
the  Voice :  For  in  Dogs  and  Cats,  which  in  the  Expreffion  of 
divers  Paffions  ufe  a  great  many  Notes,  (us  Men  do,)  they  are  o- 
pen  and  flexible,  a,s  in  Man.  Whereby  all,  or  any  of  them  are 
dilated,  or  contra^ed,  more  or  lefs,  as  is  convenient  for  a  high- 
er or  deeper  Note,  6cc.  whereas  tn  fome  other  Animals,  us  in 
the  Japan- Peacock,  which  ufsth  hardly  more  than  one  fingle 
Jflote,  they  are  entire,  8cc.  Grew's  Cofmolog.  Sacr.  Book  I. 
Chap.  5.  §.  9,  10. 

(/)  It  is  a  farther  manifeft  Indication  of  fingular  Defign  in 
the  cartilaginous  Rings  of  the  afpera  Arteria,  that  all  the  Way 
•where  they  are  contiguous  to  the  Oefoph.igus,  they  are  mem^ 
Isranous,  to  afford  an  eallePafTage  to  the  Food;  but  after  that, 
in  the  Bronchi;  they  are,  fome  compleatly  annular,  fome  tri- 
ungijlar,  cc.  And  another  obfervable  is,  the  lower  Parts  of 
the  fuperior  Cartilages,  receive  the  upper  Parts  of  the  inferi- 
or, in  the  Bronchi;  v/hereas  in  the  afpera  Arteria,  the  Carti- 
lages run  and  remain  parallel  to  one  another;  which  is  a  no- 
Ible  Difference  or  Mechanifm  in  this  (in  a  Manner)  one  and 
the  fame  Part,  enabling  the  Lungs  and  Bronchi  to  contra<fl 
themfelves  in  Expiration,  and  to  extend  and  dilate  themfelves 
in  Infpiration. 

{g)  I  fliall  not  here  intrench  fo  much  upon  the  Anatomifl's 
Province,  to  give  a  Defcription  of  the  Lungs,  although  it  be 
a  curious  Piece  of  God's  VVorkmanfliip;  but  refer  to  Seignior 
jkialpighi,  the  firfl  Difcoverer  of  their  VcftcuU  in  1660,  m  his 
two  L,ei:ters  to  B<irell}  dp  Palmon.    Alfo  to  Dr.  ff/^i/s  Pbarm, 


.hap.  VII.        Of  Rcffiration.  1 5* I 

lar  Fibres  (/^),  as  fome  afTeit  they  have,  together 
with  the  Arteries  and  Veins,  which  every  where 
accompany  the  airy  Pafl-iges,  for  the  Blood  to  re- 
ceive there  its  Impregnations  from  the  An*. 


rat.  p.  2.  S.  r.  c.  I.  de  Refpir.  Orig.  o'  Vf.  who  as  he  wrote  af- 
ter Malpighl,  fo  hath  more  accurately  defcribed  thole  Parts ; 
and  to  Mr.  Cozuper's  Anat.  Tab.  24,  25.  And  if  the  Reader 
hath  a  Mind  to  fee  what  Oppolition  Seignior  Malpighi's  Dif- 
coveries  met  with  at  Home  and  Abroad,  and  what  Cuntro- 
verfies  he  had  on  that  Account,  as  alfo  his  Cenfures  of  Dr. 
Willis's  Defcriptions  and  Figures,  he  may  confult  Malpighi'g 
Life  written  by  himfelf,  pag.  4.  to  21. 

That  tl.e  Lungi  confift  of  VeftcuU,  or  Lobuli  of  VeficuU  ad- 
mitting of  Air  from  the  Bronchi,  is  vifible,  becaufe  they  may 
be  blown  up,  cleanfcd  of  Blood,  and  fo  dried.  But  Mr.  Cow- 
per  faith,  he  could  never  part  the  Lobuli,  (\o  as  to  make  Dr. 
Willis's  Fig.  r.  Tab.  3.  &  4.)  fo  that  probably  the  VeficuU  are 
contiguous  to  one  another  throughout  each  Lobe  of  the 
Lungs.  And  not  only  Air;  but  Diemerbroeck  proves,  that 
the  VeficuU  admit  of  Dull  alfo,  from  two  allhmatick  Perfons 
he  opened;  one  a  Stone  cucter's  Man,  the  VeficuU  of  whofe 
Lungs  were  fo  ftufFed  with  Duft,  that  in  cutting,  his  Knife 
went  as  if  through  an  Heap  of  Sand;  the  other  was  a  Fea- 
ther-driver, who  had  thefe  Bladders  filled  with  the  fine  Dull 
or  Down  of  F'eathers. 

{h)  There  is  a  confulcrable  Difference  between  Dr.  IVillis, 
and  EtTn:dler,  -viz..  Whether  the  VeficuU  of  the  Lungs  have 
any  mufcular  Fibres  or  not.'*  Etmuller  exprcflly  faith,  Kullas 
Fibras  mufciilofas,  tfiiho  minus  rubicundam  Alufculorum  compur 
gem  (funt  enim  VeficuU  albid/t  cr  Jere  diaphansj  in  ipfis  reperiri. 
ubi  fupr,  c.  6.  §.  2.  And  afterwards,  $.  3.  Pulmones  ejje  mot- 
les  flextlefque  mufculofis  fibris  ceu  propria  expUcationis  organis  de- 
fiitutos.  Hut  Dr.  Willis  as  exprcllly  alTerts  they  have  mufcu- 
lous  Fibres,  and  aHigns  an  excellent  Ule  of  them  ;  CellnU  iftt, 
'veficulares,  ut  nixus  pro  expiratione  contraclivos  edant,  etiam 
fibras,  ut)  per  Microfcopium  plane  confpicere  eft,  mufculares  obti- 
nent,  ubi  fupr.  §.  16.  And  m  the  next  §,  Ut  pro  data  occafiott 
majorem  aeris  copiam  exfuffient,  aut  materiam  extujfiendam  ejici- 
ant,  fibris  mufculartbus  donat&,  fiefe  arfiihs  contrahunt,  conten- 
taque  fiia  penitits  exterminant  Et  entm  ordinari&  pectoris  Sy- 
fioU,  quas  tnufculorufn  relaxationes  ex  parte  efficiunt,  aerem 
forfan  totum  a  Trachea  cr  Bronchiis,  haud  tattien  a  VeficuUs, 
qudque  vice  eficiunt :  propter  has  (quoties  opus  eritj  inaniendaSf 
cr  totitu  Pectoris  cavitas  plurimum  anguftatur,  C/"  celluU  ipfi 
veficulures  a  propri'n  fibris  confiriclis  coarClantur, 

h  ^  From 


f$%  Of  Refplration.  Book  IV. 

From  hence  I  might  proceed  to  the  commodious 
Form  of  the  Ribs  (z),  the  curious  Mechanifm  of 
thelntercoftal-Mufcles  (^)j  the  Diaphragm,  and  all 
the  other  Mufcles  (/)  minifbing  both  to  the  or- 
dinary, and  extraordinary  Offices  of  Refpiration. 

But 


(i)  Circa  has  motus  \_Scil.  Pediorts  dilatationem,?^c~\  d'tv'mi 
Conditorls  mechanicen,  ad  regulas  Mathematicas  plane  adapta- 
tam,  fat'ts  admirari  non  pojfumus ;  fiquidem  nulla  alia  in  re 
manifefiiks  'O  ©to?  yeM/ut.i'l^eiy  videtur.  <^ippe  cum  pe^orisy 
turn  ampliatioy  turn  coar6latio  a  quibufdam  Mujculis  (quorum 
tnuniis  unicum  efi  contrahere )  perfici  del/eat;  res  ita  infiitutr 
tur,  ut  CofiA  qu&  thoracis,  ■velut  parallelogrammi  ohlongi  verfus 
c^lindrum  incurvati,  latera  effortnant,  in  figuram  modo  qua- 
dratam,  cum  angulis  reS^lis,  pro  pe^oris  ampliatione ;  modo  in 
rhomboeidem,  cum  angulis  acutis  pro  ejujdern  contraitione,  di*- 
(antur,6cc.     Willis,  ubi  fupr.  §.  i8. 

Galen  having  fpoken  of  the  Parts  miniftring  to  Refpiration, 
Concludeth,  Nihil  ufquam  a  Natura  ullo  patio  per  incuriam, 
fuijfe  prAteritum,  qu&  cum  omnia  prafentiret  o"  provideret,  qua 
funt  neceJJ'aria  ilia,  quA  caufa  alicujus  extiterunt,  confecutura, 
omnibm  tnfiaurationes  parare  occupavit,  cujus  apparatus  copioja 
facultas  admirabdem  Sapientiam  tejlantur.  De  uf.  part.  1.  5. 
c.  15.     See  alfo  L  6.  c.  1. 

(k)  For  the  Struiflure  of  the  Intercojials,  Midriff,  8cc.  I 
fhall  refer  to  Dr.  Willis,  and  other  Anatomifts.  But  Dr.  Drak? 
taxeth  Dr.  Willis  with  an  Error  in  fancying  there  is  an  Oppo- 
lition  in  the  Office  of  the  intercojials,  by  reafon  that  the  Fi- 
bres of  the  external  and  internal  Intercojials  decufl'ate;  that 
therefore  the  external  ferve  to  raife  the  Ribs,  the  internal 
to  draw  them  down.  But  Dr.  Drake  is  of  Steno's,  and  Dr. 
i^f^jjiiju-'s  Opinion,  that  notwithflanding  the  Decuffation  of  their 
f'ibres,  the  Power  they  exert  upon,  and  the  Motion  they 
elfed:  in  the  Ribs,  is  one  and  the  fame.  Drake's  Anat,  1.  x, 
c.  7.  and  1.  4.  c.  5.  Alayow  de  Refpir.  c.  7. 

(/)  Although  Dr.  Drake  and  fome  others  deny  the  Inter- 
cojials being  Antagonift-Mufcles,  as  in  the  preceding  Note, 
yet  they,  and  moft  other  Anatomifts  that  I  have  met  with, 
attribute  a  confiderable  Power  to  them  in  the  ad  of  Refpira- 
tion, as  they  do  alfo  to  the  Subclavian  and  Triangular  Muf- 
fles:  but  the  learned  Etrnuller  denies  it  for  thefe  three  Rea- 
fons,  I.  ^lia  refpirando  nullum  in  illis  contra£lionern  fentio. 
%.  &uia  — —  fibi  invicem  non  adducuntur,  &c.  3.  6)«/4 
CoJIa  omnss  ab  aliis  modo  enarratis  mufcults  moventur,  idquf 


Chap.  VII.        Of  Refp'iration.  15-3 

But  pnfTing  them  by,  I  lliall  Hop  at  one  prodigious 
Work  of  Nature,  and  manifcit  Contrivance  ot  the 
Almighty  Creator,  which  although  taken  notice  of 
by  others  (w),  yet  cannot  be  cafily  paflcd  by  in  the 
Subjeft  I  am  upon  ;  and  that  is  the  Circulation  of 
the  Blood  in  the  Fostus  in  the  Womb^  fo  different 
from  the  Method  thereof  after  it  is  Born.  In  the 
Womb,  whillt  it  is  ns  one  Body  with  the  Mother, 
and  there  is  no  Occafion,  nor  Place  for  Refpiration, 
there  are  two  Palliiges  («)  on  purpofe  for  the  Tranf- 
mifTion  of  the  Blood  without  paffing  it  through  the 

Lungs. 


f;niul,  Sec.  Inlercoflales  itaque,  necnon  Subclavioi  Mufculot 
Coj'iis,  parletum  mjlar,  ad  complenda  interjlitia  intercojlaliaf 
fej:Iuj'ljue  Integrandum,  ac  Coftas  connedendas,  tnterttClos  ejj'e, 
probabiliHr  concludo  ;  quo  murere  triangulates  etiam fun- 
gi, rationi  confentaneum  eft.     Etmul.  DilTert.  z.   cap.  4.   §.  6. 

But  as  to  the  Ule  of  the  Triangular  Mufcle  in  Kei'piration, 
we  may  judge  of  it,  from  its  remarkable  Size,  and  Ufe  in  a 
Dog;  of  which  Dr.  /-f^;///;  gives  this  Account  from  Fallopius : 
In  Homme  parvtu  ddeo  or  fubtilis  i/le  [Muiculus]  e/l,  ut  vix 
fro  Mufculo  accipj  queat  :  in  Cans  per  totutn  os  pectoris  proten- 
ditur,  CT*  cartilagines  omneSy  etiam  verarum  Coftarum  fternoin- 
ofculatas,  occupat :  Cujus  di/criminis  ratio  divinam  circa  Ani^ 
nmlium  jabncas  Providentiarn  plane  indigttat.  *^ippt  ciif»hoe 
animal,  ad  curjus  velocijfnnos  cr  din  continuandos  natutn,  quo 
fanguis,  dum  tntenjihs  agitatur,  rit~e  accendatur  evtntileturque, 
herein  celerrime  cr  fort  iter  uti  infpirare,  it  a  etiam  exfpirare  de- 
bet    idcirco  propter  hunc  attitm  frmius   ol/eunJutn    (cujus 

in  Homiiie  haud  magnus  eft  ufus )  mufculus  caninus  molem  in- 
gentem  cr  tanto  operi  parem  fortiiur.     WiUis  ubi  [iipr.   §.  31. 

{m)  Ray's  Wifdom  of  God  in  the  Creation,  p.  343. 

(n)  Mr.  Chefelden,  an  ingenious  and  moft  accurate  Anato- 
milt,  having  fomewhat  particular  in  his  Obfervations  about 
the  Circulation  of  the  Blood  through  the  Heart  of  the  Fcc- 
tus,  I  flnll  prefent  the  Reader  with  fome  of  his  Obfervati- 
ons, which  he  favoured  me  with  the  Sight  of.  The  Blood 
(faith  he)  which  is  brought  to  the  Htart  by  the  a/cending  Cava, 
pajf'es  out  of  the  right  Auricle  into  the  left,  through  a  Paffage 
called  Foramen  Ovale,  in  the  Septum  [common  to  ilicm 
toth]  without  pajftng  through  the  right  Ventricle  (as  after  the 
^irfhj  while  the  Blood  from  (he  defcending  Cash  p^Jfeth  through 

th$ 


1 5*4  0/  Refpration.         Book  IV. 

Lungs.  But  as  foon  as  the  Foetui  is  Born,  and  be- 
come thereby  a  perfcdiy  dillind  Being,  and  breathes 
for  it  felf,  then  thele  two  PaiTages  are  fhut  up :  one 
nearly  obliterated,  the  other  becomes  only  a  Liga- 
ment, except  in  fome  Creatures  that  are  Amphibi- 
ous, or  are  forced  to  lie  long  under  Water,  in  whom 
thefe  Paflages  probably  remain  open  (o). 

And  now  what  A6tinn  of  any  rational  Creature, 
what  is  there  in  a  Man's  Life,    that   doth  more 

plainly 


the  right  Auricle  and  Ventricle  into  the  pulmonary  Artery,  and 
thence  into  the  Aorta  through  the  Du^,  betwixt  that  and  the 
fulmonary  Artery,  called  Dudtus  Arteriofus,  whilfi  a  fmall 
Portion  of  the  Blood,  thrown  into  the  pulmonary  Artery  pafj'eth 
through  the  Lungs,  no  more  than  is  fufficient  to  keep  open  the 
pulmonary  Vejfels.  Thus  both  Ventricles  are  employed  in  driv- 
ing the  Blood  through  the  Aorta  to  all  Parts  of  the  Fcetus,  and 
to  the  Mother  too.  But  after  the  Birth,  the  Blood  being  to  be 
driven  from  the  Aorta  through  the  Foetus  alone,  and  not  the 
Mother  too,  one  Ventricle  becomes  fufficient,  zvhilfl  the  other  is 
employed  in  driving  the  Blood  through  the  Lungs,  the  Dudtus 
Arteriofus  being  fljut  up  by  means  of  the  Alteration  of  its  Pofiti- 
on,  which  happens  to  it  from  the  raijing  the  Aorta  by  the  Lungs 
•when  they  become  inflated.  After  that  the  Blood  is  thus  driven 
into  the  Lungs,  in  its  return  it  flouts  the  Valve  of  the  Fora- 
men Ovale  againfl  the  Foramen  it  felf ,  to  zvhofe  Sides  it  foon 
adheres,  and [o  flops  up  the  Paffage.  The  Dudus  Arteriofus, 
or  Ductus  Arteriofus  in  Ligamentum  verfus,  is  feldom  to  be 
difcerned  in  adult  Bodies,  but  the  Figure  of  the  Foramen  O- 
vale  is  never  obliterated. 

(o)  It  hath  been  generally  thought  to  be  not  improbable, 
but  that  on  fome  Occafions  the  Foramen  Ovale  may  remain 
open  in  Man.  In  a  Girl  of  four  or  five  Years  of  Age,  Dr. 
Connor  found  it  but  half  clofed,  and  in  the  Form  of  a  Cref- 
cent.  And  he  thinks  fomewhat  of  this  kind  might  be  in  the 
Perfon  whofe  Skeleton  was  found  to  have  no  Joynts  in  the 
Back-Bone,  Ribs,  ere  Of  which  a  Defcription,  with  Cuts, 
may  be  fou-.d  in  Phil.  Tranf.  No.  215.  and  more  largely  in  his 
T>iffert.  Med.  Phyf.  de  flupendo  Ojfmm  coalitu,  where  he  adds 
to  the  Girl,  in  whom  the  For.  Ov.  was  not  fhut,  a  like  Ob- 
fervation  of  another  Girl  he  opened  at  Oxford  of  three  Years 
Old,  In  qua  Foramen  Ovale  fer'e  erat  occlufum,  in  medio  ta- 
fmn,  exili  forammt  pr  quod  Turmdam  facile  tranfmift,  erat 

perviHW^ 


Chap.  VII.         Of  Reffirat'ion.  T^^ 

plainly   fhcw  Defign  ,  Reafon  ,  and   Contrivance  , 
than  this  very  A61  of  Nature  doth  the  Contrivance 

and 


fervium,  pag.  30.  So  Mr.  Cowptr  (than  whom  none  more 
accurate  and  a  better  Judge)  faith,  1  have  often  found  the  Fo- 
ramen Ovale  open  m  the  Adult.  Anat.  Append.  Fig.  3.  But 
Mr.  chcfelden  is  of  a  different  Opinion.  Of  which  in  the 
following  Note. 

I'rom  lomcwhat  of  this  Caufe  I  am  apt  to  think  it  was 
that  the  Tronningholm  Gardiner  efcaped  drowning,  and  forae 
others  mentioned  by   Pechlin.     His  Stories   are,  Hortulanut^ 
Tronningholmenfis  etiamnum   vivem,  annos  natus  65,  pro  ilia 
dtate  fiitii  adhuc  valens  c/  vegetus,  cum  ante  18  annos y  alii  /» 
aquas  delapfo  opem  ferre  vellet,  forte  fortune  cr  ipfe  per  glacierrt 
incautiiis  procedens,  aquas  incidit  18  ulnas  profundas  :  ubi  tile, 
corpore    ereCio  quafi    ad  pcrpendiculum,  pedibus  fundo  adhifit. 
Conflitit  fie  per    16    horas,    antequhin   produceretur  in   auras. 
Dixit  autem,  fimul  ac  infra   aquarum  fiiperficiem  fuit   demer^ 
fus,  flatim  obriguijfe  tot  urn,  c?-,  fi  quern  turn  habuit  motutn  (j" 
fenfum,  amififje,  ntfi  quod  fonantes  Stockolmii  campanas  etiam 
fub  aquis  obfcuriits  percipere  fibi  fit  vifus.     Senfit  etiam,  fiattm 
fefe  velut  veficulam  ori  applicdjfe,  adeb  ut  aqua    nulla  os  pene- 
traverit,  in  aures  vero  tranfiium,   etiam  fentiente   illo,   habue- 
rit ;  atque  inde  auditum  fuum  debilitatum  aliquandiu  ejfe.    Hoc 
fialu  dum  16  horas  permaafit  frujira  quifittu,  tandem  repertum, 
conto  in  caput  infixo,   cujns  etiam  fenjum  fe  habiujj'e  dixit,  fun- 
do  extraxerunt,   fperantcs  ex  more  aitt  perfuafione  gcntis  revi- 
flurum  eJJ'e.     Itaque  pannis  linteifque  produClum   obvolvunt,  ne 
a'er  admttti  poffit  perniciofus  futurus  fubito  illapfu  :   cuflodttum 
fie  fatis  ah   a'ere  fenfim  fenfimque  tepidiori   loco  admovent  tnox 
calidis  adoriuntur  fafciis,   fricant,    radunt,  u'  fufflaminatutn 
tot  horis  Janguinis  corporifque  motum   negotiosa  ilia  opera  redu- 
cunt  :  denique  antapopleHicis   cr  genialibus  liquoribus  vits.  red- 
dunt  o"  prifiins.   mobilitati.     Retulit  is  atque  oftendit  fe  etiam- 
num in  capite    circumferre  veftigia  violentis    a   conto  tllati,  ct* 
fephalalgiis  vexari  graviffimis.     Et  propter  hunc  ipjum  cafum, 
religiose    a  popularibus,  c/  hujufce   rei  teftibus  probatum,  Sere- 
niffimi  RegitiA    matris  munificentta  CT  annuo  fttpendio  eft  dona- 
fus  — -  c?"  Serenif.  Principi  —  oblatus,  vivus  fui  teftis  <• 

Confignatam  manu  habes  Hiftoriam  D.  Tilafii,  Biblioth.  Reg. 
Pr-ifecli,  qui  teftatns  eft  fe  prdnoviffe  mulierem,  qu&  tres  ipjos 
dies  fub  aquis  hifit.  O'  fimilcm  in  modum,  quo  Hortulanus  tile, 
refufciiata,  adhuc  dum  lucts  plena  fruitur  ufurd.     Accedit  Nob. 

BHrmmm  ■'•^  fides,  qui   (onfcjjus   eft,  fe  in  pago  Bonefs 

pareihi4 


i$6  Of  Refpiratlon,  Book  IV. 

and  Defign  of  the  great  GOD  of  Nature  ?  What  is 
Thought  and  Contrivance,  if  this  be  not  ?  Namely, 
That  there  fhould  be  a  temporary  Part  in  the  Body, 
made  juft  for  the  prefent  Exigence  5  to  continue 
whilft  there  is  occafion  for  it,  and  to  ceafe  when 
there  is  none  5  in  fome  Creatures  to  remain  always, 
by  Reafon  of  their  amphibious  Way  of  Living,  and 
in  Land-animals  (purely  fuch)  to  ceafe  ? 

Another  excellent  Contrivance,  a-kin  to  the  lafl, 
is,  for  the  Prefervation  of  fuch  Creatures  whofe  oc- 


farochiA  Pithoviae  concionem  frequentajfe  funehrem,  in  qudf 
dum  aila  recenferet  Prdco  Senis  cujufdam  feptuagenar'ti  Laur.  Jo- 

nae  •  audiverit  ex  ore  Coicionatorts,  vivum  eum,  adolef- 

centem  11  annorum,  aquis  fubmerfum,  7  demum  hehdomada 
(rem  frodtgiofam  ! )  extrachim  ad  fe  rediijfe  vivum  er  mcoln- 
tnem.     Pechlin,  de  Aer.  &:  Alim.  def.  c.  10. 

Shall  we  to  this  Caufe,  or  to  the  Offification,  or  more 
than  ordinary  Strength  of  the  Wind-Pipe,  attribute  the  Re- 
covery to  Life  of  Perfons  hanged?  Of  which  Pechlin  gives 
an  Initance  that  fell  under  his  own  Knowledge,  of  a  Woman 
hanged,  and  in  all  Appearance  dead,  but  recovered  by  a  Phy- 
fician  accidentally  coming  in,  with  a  plentiful  Adminiftration 
of  Spir.Sal.  Armon.  Pechl.  ib.  c.7.  And  the  Story  of  Anne 
Green,  executed  at  Oxford,  Bee.  14.  1650.  is  ftill  well  remem- 
bered among  the  Seniors  there,  she  was  hanged  by  the  Neck 
near  half  an  Hour,  fome  of  her  Friends  in  the  mean  Time 
thumping  her  on  the  Breafl,  others  hanging  with  all  their  Weight 
upon  her  Legs,  fometimes  lifting  her  up,  and  then  pulling  her 
down  again  with  a  fudden  Jirk,  thereby  the  fooner  to  difpatch 
her  out  of  her  Pain:  as  her  printed  Account  wordeih  it.  Af- 
ter llie  was  in  her  Coffin,  being  obferved  to  breath,  a  lufty 
Fellow  ftamped  with  all  his  Force  on  her  Bread  and  Stomach, 
to  put  her  out  of  her  Pain.  But  by  theaffiftance  of  Dr  Peity, 
Dr.  Willis,  Dr.  Bathurfl,  and  Dr.  Clark,  ftie  was  again  brought 
to  Life.  I  my  felf  faw  her  many  Years  after,  after  that  (he 
had  (I  heard)  born  divers  Children.  The  Particulars  of  her 
Crime,  Execution  and  Reftauration,  fee  in  a  little  Pamphlet, 
called  News  from  the  Bead,  written,  as  I  have  been  inform- 
ed, by  Dr.  Bathurft,  (afterwards  the  moft  vigilant  and  learn- 
ed Prefident  of  Trinity^  College,  Oxon,)  and  publilhed  ia 
j6si.  with  Verfes  upon  the  Occafion. 

cafions 


Chap.  Vir.        Of  Rejplration.  IJ7 

cafions  frequently  neccflitate  them  to  live  without, 
or  with   but  little   Rcfpiration :    Fifhcs  might  be 
named    here,    whofc   Habitation  is  always  in   the 
Waters i    but  thefe  belong  to  an  Element  which  I 
cannot  at  prefcnt  engage  in.     But  there  arc  many 
Animals  of  our  own  Element,    or  partly  fo,  whofc 
Organs  of  Rcfpiration,  whofe  Blood,  whofe  Heart, 
and  other    Inllruments  of  Life,   are  admirably  ac- 
commodated to  their  Method  of  Living:  Thus  ma- 
ny amphibious  Creatures  (/>),    who  live  in  Wate^ 
as  well  as  Air  i    many  Quadrupeds,   Birds,   Infefts, 
and  other  Animals,  who  can  live  fome  Hours,  Days, 
yea,  whole  Winters,  with  little  or  no  Rcfpiration, 
in  a  Torpitudc,   or  fort  of  Sleep,   or  middle  State 
between  Life  and  Death :  The  Provifion  made  for 
thefe  peculiar  Occafions  of  Life,  in  the  Fabrick  of 
the  Lungs,  the  Heart,   and  other  Parts  of  fuch 


(;.)  The  Sea-Calf  \\n\\  the  Foramen  Ovale,  hy  which  means 
it  is  enabled  to  Hay  long  under  the  Water,  as  the  Panf.  A- 
natomifls.     Of  which  fee  in  Bock  VI.  Chap.  5.  Note  {c). 

But  the  fore-commended  Mr.  Chefelden  thinks  the  Foramen 
Ovale  is  neither  open  in  amphibious  Creatures,  nor  any  adult 
Land- Animals.  When  1  firji  (faith  he)  applied  my  fclf  to  the 
Difeclion  of  Human  Bodies,  I  had  no  dijirufi  of  tie  frequent 
Accounts  of  the  Foramen  Ovale  hsin^  open  in  Adults  :  but  I 
find  fin ce,  that  I  mifiooh  the  Odium  Venarum  Coronaiiarum 
for  the  Foramen.  The  like  I  fuppofe  Authors  have  done,  zi'ha 
aJJ'ert  that  it  is  always  open  in  amphibious  Animals :  for  we  have 
made  diligent  Enquiry  into  thofe  Animals,  and  never  found  it 
open.  Neither  zvould  that  (as  they  imagine  )  ferve  theft  Crea- 
tures to  live  under  Water,  as  the  Foetus  doth  m  Uteto,  unlefs 
the  Dudus  Arteriofus  was  open  alfo. 

This  Opinion  of  Mr.  Chefelden  hath  this  to  render  it  pro- 
bable, that  the  Ofiium  Venarum  Coronariarum  is  fo  near  the 
Foramen  OvaU,  that  without  due  regard,  it  inay  be  eafily 
miilaken  for  it.  Such  therefore  as  have  Opportunity  of  cx- 
aminmg  this  Fart  in  amphibious  Animals,  or  any  other  Sub- 
jca,  ought  to  feek  for  the  Ofiium,  whenever  ihey  fufpcdt 
fhey  have  met  with  the  Foramen. 

Creatures 


3f58  Of  Refftratlon.  Book  IV. 

Creatures  (^),  is  manifeftly  the  Work  of  him,  who 
as  St.  Paul  faith  (r),  giveth  to  all  Breathy  and  Life^ 
and  all  Things. 


(q)  Of  the  fingular  Conformation  of  the  Heart  and  Lungs 
oi  the  Tortoife,  which  is  an  amphibious  Animal.  SeeBookWl, 
chap.  5.   Note  {b). 

(r)  A^ti  xvii.  zj. 


CHAP.    VIII. 

Of  the  Motion  of  Animals, 

NEXT  to  the  two  grand  A6ts  of  animal  Life, 
their  Senfe  or  Refpiration,  I  fhall  confider 
their  Motion^  or  locomotive  Faculty  5  whereby  they 
convey  themfelves  from  Place  to  Place,  according 
to  their  Occafions,  and  Way  of  Life  :  And  the  ad- 
mirable Apparatus  to  this  Purpofe,  is  a  plain  De- 
monftration  of  God's  particular  Forefighr,  Care, 
and  efpecial  Providence  towards  all  the  animal 
World. 

And  here  I  might  view  in  the  firfl;  Place  the 
Mufcles,  their  curious  Structure  {a)^  the  nice  tackr 
ing  them  to  every  Joynt,  to  pull  it  this  Way,  and 
that  Way,  and  the  other  Way,  according  to  the 
fpecial  Purpofe,  Defign,  and  Office  of  every  fuch 
Joint :  Alfo  their  various  Size  and  Strength ;  fome 

large 


{a)  That  the  Mufcles  are  compounded  of  Fibres,  is  vifi- 
ble  enough.  Which  Fibres,  the  curious  and  ingenious  Borel- 
U  faith,  are  cylindraceous  ;  not  hollow,  hut  filled  with  a 
fpungy,  pithy  Subftance,  after  the  manner  of  Elder,  as  he 
difcovered  by  his  Microfcopes.    Bonl.  de  Mot.  Animal.  Parti, 

6  Thefs 


Chap.  VIII.       the  Motion^  &c.  15-9 

large  and  corpulent,  others  lefs,  and  fomc  fcarce 
vifiblc  to  the  naked  Eyej  all  cxadly  fitted  to  every 
Place,  and  every  ufe  of  the  Body.  And  laftly,  I 
might  take  Notice  of  the  mufcular  Motions,  both 
involuntary  and  fpontaneous  {h). 

Next,  I  might  furvey  the  fpecial  Fabrick  of  the 
Bones  (^),  miniilring  to  animal  Motion.     Next,  I 

might 


Thefe  Fibres,  he  faith,  are  naturally  white;  but  derive 
their  Rednefs  only  from  the  Blood  in  them. 

Thefe  Fibres  do  in  every  Mufcle,  (in  the  Belly  at  leaft  of 
the  Mufcle,)  run  parallel  to  one  another,  in  a  neat  orderly 
Form.  But  they  do  not  at  all  tend  the  fame  Way,  but  fomc 
run  aflant,  fome  longways,  g~c.  according  to  the  Artion  or 
Pofition  of  each  refpedive  Mufcle.  The  Particulars  of  which, 
and  of  divers  other  Obfcrvables  in  the  Mufcles,  would,  be- 
fides  Figures,  take  up  too  much  room  in  thefe  Notes ;  and 
therefore  I  mufl  refer  to  the  Anatomifts,  particularly  Stcno^ 
Borelli,   Coivper,  6cc. 

{i)  The  infinite  Creator  hath  generally  exerted  his  Art  and 
Care,  in  the  Provifion  made  by  proper  Muicles  and  Nerves, 
for  all  the  different  Motions  in  animal  Bodies,  both  involun- 
tary, and  voluntary.  It  is  a  noble  Providence  that  moft  of 
the  vital  Motions,  luch  as  of  the  Heart,  Stomach,  Guts,  ^c. 
are  involuntary,  the  Mufcles  adtmg  whether  we  fleep  or  wake, 
whether  we  will  or  no.  And  it  is  no  lefs  providential  that 
fome,  even  of  the  vital  Motions,  are  partly  voluntary,  part- 
ly involuntary,  as  that  for  Inlhnce,  of  Breathing,  which  is 
performed  both  fleeping  and  waking;  but  can  be  intermitted 
for  a  riiort  Time  on  occafion,  as  for  accurate  hearing  ony 
Thing,  crc.  or  can  be  encreafed  by  a  ftronger  Blall,  to  make 
the  greater  Difcharges  of  the  Blood  from  the  Lungs,  when 
that  any  Thing  overcharges  them.  And  as  for  the  o- 
ther  Motions  of  the  Body,  as  of  the  Limbs,  and  luch  as 
are  voluntary,  it  is  a  no  lefs  Providence,  that  they  are  abfo- 
lutely  under  the  Power  of  the  Will;  fo  as  that  the  Animal 
hath  it  in  his  Power  to  command  the  Mufcles  and  Spirits  ot 
any  part  of  its  Body,  to  perform  fuch  Motions  and  Adtions 
as  it  hath  Occafion  tor. 

(c)  ^id  di:am  de  Ojftbus  '  quA  fuhje^a  cor  per  i  mirabiles 
comtnijjurai  hal^evt,  ct'  ad  ftabilitaiem  apta<,  cr  ad  artus  jini- 
endos  accommodatas,  cjr  ad  7?iotut?t,  ct'  ad  ovrntm  torf^ns  aiVi- 
inem.    Cicer.  de  Nat.  Deor.  1.  2.  c.  55. 


i6o  The  Motion  Book  IV. 

By  Reafon  it  would  be  endlefs  to  mention  alUhe  Curiofi- 
ties  obfervable  in  the  Bones,  I  (liiil  for  a  Sample,  fingle  out 
only  n  loftance  or  two,  to  manifeft  that  Dcfign  v/as  ufed  m 
the  Strufi:ure  of  thefe  Parts  in  Man. 

The  firft  (hall  be  in  the  Bach  Bone.,  v^-hich  (among  many 
others)  hath  thefe  two  Things  remarkable,  i.  Its  different 
AiL.  )lations  from  the  other  Joynts  of  the  Body.  For  here 
moll:  of  the  Joynts  are  flat,  and  withal  guarded  with  Afperi- 
ties  nnd  Hollows,  made  for  catching  and  holding  ;  fo  as 
firmly  to  lock  and  keep  the  Joynts  from  Luxations,  hut  with- 
al to  afford  them  fuch  a  Motion,  as  is  neceffary  for  the  In- 
curvations of  the  Body.  2.  The  difference  of  its  own  Joynts 
in  the  Neck,  Back  and  Loins.  In  the  Neck,  the  Adas,  or 
upper  Vertebra,  as  alfo  the  Dentata,  are  curioufly  made, 
and  joynted  (differently  from  the  reft)  for  the  commodious 
and  eafie  bending  and  turning  the  Head  every  way.  In  the 
Thorax,  or  Back,  the  Joynts  are  more  clofe  and  firm  ;  and 
in  the  Loins,  more  lax  and  pliant ;  as  alfo  the  Sp;nes  are  diffe- 
rent, and  the  Knobs  and  Sockets  turned  the  quite  contrary 
way,  to  anfwer  the  Occalions  the  Body  hath  to  bend  more 
there,  than  higher  in  the  Back.  I  (hall  clofe  this  Remark 
with  the  ingenious  Dr.  Keil's  Obfervation. 

The  Strutiiire  of  the  Spine  is  the  very  befl  that  can  be  con- 
trived;  for  had  it  been  all  Bone,  zve  could  have  had  no  Moti- 
on in  our  Backs;  had  it  been  of  tzvo  or  three  Bones  articulated 
for  Motion,  the  Medulla  Spinalis  muft  have  been  necejfarily 
bruifed  at  every  Angle  or  Joynt  ;  befides,  the  whole  would  not 
have  been  fo  pliable  for  the  fever al  Poftures  zve  have  occafion  to 
put  our  felves  in.  If  it  had  been  made  of  feveral  Bones  with- 
out intervening  Cartilages,  zve  fJjould  have  had  no  more  life  of 
it,  than  if  it  had  been  but  one  Bone.  If  each  Vertebra  had 
had  its  own  diflinii  Cartilages,  it  might  have  been  eafily  diflo- 
cated.  And  lafily.  The  oblique  Procejj'es  of  each  fuperior  and  in- 
ferior Venehrz,  keep  the  middle  one  that  it  can  neither  be  thrufl 
hackvjards  nor  forivards  to  comprefs  the  Medulla  Spinalis* 
Keiis  Anat.    c.  5.  §.8. 

Compare  here  what  Galen  faith  of  the  Articulations,  Li- 
gaments, Perforation,  eye.  of  the  Spine,  to  prove  the  Wifdonl 
and  Providence  of  the  Maker  of  animal  Bodies,  againft  fuch 
as  found  fault  with  Nature's  Works ;  among  which  he  names 
Diagoras,  Anaxagoras,  Afclepiadcs  and  Epicurus.  V.  Galen.de 
Uf  Part.  L.  11.  init.  and  Chap,  rr,  z^c.  alfo  L.  13.  intt.. 

2.  The  next  Inftance  (hall  be  in  one  or  two  Things,  where- 
in the  Skeletons  of  Sexes  differ.  Thus  the  Pelvis  made  in 
the  Belly  by  the  Ilium^  Ojfa  Coxendicis  and  Pubis,  is  larger 
in  a  Female  than  Mvil:-  Skeleton,  that  there  may  be  more 
room  for  the  lying  of  the  Vijcera  and  Tcstus.  So  the  Car- 
tilage bracing  together  the  two  Offa  Pubis,  or  Shareboni.', 
Bartholine  faith,  is  twice  thicker  and  laxer  in  Women  than 
6  Men 


Chap.  VIII.         of  Animals,  161 

might  take  notice  of  the  Joynts  (^/l,  their  com- 
plcat  Form  adjullcd  to  the  Place,  and  Office  they 
are  employed  in  j  their  Bandage,  keeping  them 
from   Luxations  j  the  oily  Matter  {c)  to  lubricate 

them. 


Men  :  As  alio  is  the  Cartilage  that  tieth  the  Os  Sacr;nn  to  its 
Vertebra  ;  and  all  to  give  way  to  the  I'aflage  ot  the  Ycetus. 

Another  coniidcrable  DifttTence  is  in  the  cartilaginous  Pro- 
duction ot"  the  feven  long  Ribs,  whereby  they  are  braced  to 
the  Brealt-Bone.  Thele  are  harder  and  firmer  in  VVoiueu 
than  in  Men;  the  better  to  fupport  the  Weight  of  the 
Breads,  the  fucking  Infant,  crt. 

{^d)  It  is  remark.iblc  in  the  Joynts,  and  a  manifeft  Atfl  of 
Caution  and  Delign,  i.  That  altho'  the  Motion  of  ihe^Linibs 
be  circular,  yet  the  Center  of  that  Motion  is  not  in  a  Point, 
but  an  ample  Superficies.  In  a  Point,  the  Bones  would  wear 
and  penetrate  one  another ;  the  Joynis  would  be  exceedingly 
weak.o^'c.  but  the  Joynts  conlillmg  of  two  large  Supnficies, 
Concave  and  Convex,  foine  furrowed  and  ridded,  fome  like 
a  Ball  and  Socket,  an<i  all  lubricated  with  an  oily  Subltance, 
they  are  incomparably  prepared  both  for  Motion  and  Strength. 
2.  That  the  Bones  next  the  Joynt  aie  not  fpungy,  as  their 
Extremities  commonly  aie,  nor  hard  and  brittle,  but  capped 
with  a  llrong,  tc)U;:;h,  fmooth,  cartilaginous  Subllance,  ierv- 
ing  both  toSirengiii  and  Motion. 

But  let  us  here  take  notice  of  whit  Galen  mentions  on  this 
Subje(fl.  Articnlorum  unufqiiifque  lim'mentia}n  Cavitati  im- 
tnijjam  habet  :  I'eruntamen  hoc  fortajjc  7ion  adeo  rnirabde  eft  : 
Sed  ft,  confidcratd  otnniu/n  totins  corporis  o;fi:im  m.'ftua  connexi- 
one,  Etninenlias  cavitatibus  fufcipicntibus  dquales  [cm^ir  mvc' 
f}eris ;  Hoc  mirabile.  Si  enim  jufto  am^lior  ejjet  Cavttas,  lax:ii 
fane  ct*  inftrtnus  fieret  Articulus ;  fi  flriciior,  mocus  difficulter 
fterety  ut  qui  nullam  verftonem  haberct ;  ac  periciilitm  effet  Hon 
parvum,  eminentias  ojjtmn  ari^laias  frangi  :  fedhorum  i^eutrum 
ja^lum  eft.  <  Sed  quoniatn  ex  tarn  fecura  conjlruilione  perl- 
ciilum  erat,  nc  tnotiona  dijficiliUs  fterent,  c:r  cminentid  offtum 
exterereniur,  duplex  rur/us  auxiltum  in  id  Natura  woiita  eft. 
I.  Carttlagine  os  utrtunque  fubun^ens,  at  que  olUnens  :  altt- 
rum,  ipjis  CartilagimiHs  humorem  unilno[um,  velut  oleum, 
fuperfunJcns ;  per  quern  facile  mobtlis,  c?-  attritu  coniumax  cm- 
nis  articiilatij  Ojfi:tm  fa:la  eft.  Ut  undiq;4e  dili^enter  Ar- 
ticulus omnis  cuftjdireiitr,  Ligamenta  quidam  ex  utroq-ie  cjfe 
frodtixit  Natura.     Galen  de  Uf.  Part.  1.  r.  c.  15. 

(e)  For  the  affording  this  oily  or  mucilaginous  Matter, 
there  are  Glandules  very  commodioufly  placed  ne^r  the  Joynts, 

M  fo 


i6z  The  Matton  Book  IV. 

them,  and  their  own  Smoothnefs  to  facilitate  their 
Motion. 

And  laftly,  I  might  trace  the  various  Nerves 
throughout  the  Body  j  fenr  about  to  niinifler  to  its 
various  Motions  (/).  I  might  confider  their  Ori- 
gine  (g),  their  Ramifications  to  the  feveral  Parts, 
and  cheir  Inofculations  v/ith  one  another,  according 
to  the  Harmony  and  Accord  of  one  Part  with  ano- 
ther, necedary  for  the  Benefit  of  the  Animal.  Bue 
fome  of  thofe  Things  1  have  given  fome  Touches  up- 


io  as  not  to  fuiFer  too  gre.ir  ComprefTion  by  the  Motion  of 
the  neighbouring  Bones,  and  yet  to  receive  a  due  PrefTure, 
fo  as  to  caufe  a  llifficient  Emiffion.  of  the  Mucilage  into  the 
Joynts.  Alfo  another  Thing  conliderable  is,  that  the  excre- 
tory Duft:s  of  the  mucilapnoHs  Glatids  have  fome  Length  in 
their  Parage  from  the  Glands  to  their  Mouths ;  which  is  a 
good  Contrivance,  to  prevent  their  Mouths  being  opprefledby- 
the  Mucilage,  as  alio  to  hinder  the  too  plentiful  Etfufion 
thereof,  but  yet  to  afibrd  a  due  ExprelTure  of  it  at  all  Times, 
and  on  all  Occafions,  as  particularly  in  violent  and  long-con- 
tinued Motions  of  the  Joynts,  when  there  is  a  greater  thaa 
ordinary  Expence  of  it.     See  Cowper's  Anat.  Tab.  79. 

(/)  There  is  no  doubt  to  be  made,  but  that  the  Mufcles 
receive  their  Motion  from  the  Nerves.  For  if  a  Nerve  be 
out,  or  ftraighdy  bound,  that  goes  to  any  Mufcle,  that  Mul- 
cle  ftiall  immediately  lofe  its  Motion.  Which  is  doubtlefs- 
the  cafe  of  Paralyticks  ;  whole  Nerves  are  fome  of  them  by 
Gbftrudlions,.  or  I'uch  like  Means,  reduced  to  the  fame  State 
as  if  cut  or  bound. 

And  this  alio  is  the  caufe  of  that  Numnefs  or  sleep'mefs  we 
find  oftentimes,  by  long  fitting  or  lying  on  any  Part. 

Neither  is  this  a  modern  Notion  only:  For  G^/ew  faith, 
Principiu'n  Nervorum  omnium  Cerebrum  eft,  ^  fpinalis  Me- 
dulla.   Et  Nervi  a  Cerelro  animalem  virtuietn  acctpiunt  — 

Nervorum  utiUtas  eft  jaadtatem  Sensiis  CT*  Motth  a,  pnnciplo  in 
partes  diducere.  And  this  he  intimates  to  have  been  the  Opi- 
nion of  Hippocrates  and  Plato.  De  UL  Part.  1.  s.  c.  16.  cp* 
fajfim. 

{g)  Dr.  Willis  thinks,  that  in  the  Brain  the  Spirits  are  ela.- 
borated  that  minifter  to  voluntary  Motion;  but  in  the  Cere- 
helium,  fuch  as  effcd  involuntary,  or  natural  Motions;  fuch. 
as  that  of  the  Heart,  the  Lungs,  c^'f.     Csrtbri  Anat.  c.  ij. 


oa 


Chap.  VIII.  of  Animals.  163 

on  already,  and  more  I  fliall  mention  hereafter  (^), 
and  it  would  be  tedious  here  to  infillupon  them  all. 

I  fliall  therefore  only  fpcak  dirtinftly  to  the  Loco- 
motive Ad  it  felf,  or  what  directly  relates  to  it. 

And  here  it  is  admirable  to  confider  the  various 
Methods  ot  Nature  (/),  fuited  to  the  Occafions  of 
various  Animals.  In  lome  their  Motion  is  fwift, 
in  othcrsflow.  In  fome performed  with  two,  four, 
or  more  Legs :  in  fome  with  two,  or  four  Wings: 
in  fome  with  neither  ik). 

And  firil  for  fwift  or  How  Motion.  This  we  find 
is  proportional  to  the  Occafions  of  each  refpedivc 
Animal.  Kept  He  Sj  whofe  Food,  Habitation,  and 
Nefh,  lie  in  the  next  Clod,  Plant,  Tree,  or  Hole, 
or  can  bear  long  Hunger  and  Hardlliip,  they  need 
neither  Legs  nor  Wings  for  their  Tranfportationj 


{h)   See  Book  V.   Chap.  8. 

(0  To  the  foregoing,  1  (liall  briefly  add  fome  Examples  of 
the  Ifecial  ProvUion  made  for  the  Motion  of  fome  Animals 
by  Temporary  Parts.  Frogs  and  Toads,  in  their  Tadpole-Jlate, 
have  Tails,  which  fall  off  when  their  Legs  are  grown  out. 
The  Lacerta  aqaatica,  or  IVater-Nezvt,  when  Young,  hath 
four  neat  ramified  Fins,  two  on  a  Side,  growing  out  a  little 
above  its  Fore-Legs,  to  poifc  and  keep  its  Body  upright, 
(which  gives  it  the  Refemblance  of  a  young  Fiftr,)  which 
fall  oft'  when  the  Legs  are  grown.  And  the  Nympl/d  and 
ylurdU,  of  all  or  molt  of  the  Inlcdts  bred  in  the  Waters,  as 
they  have  particular  Forms,  difTerent  from  the  Infeds  they 
produce;  fo  have  alfo  peculiar  Parts  afforded  them  for  their 
Motion  in  the  Waters:  Oars,  Tails,  and  every  Part  adapted 
to  the  Waters,  which  arc  utterly  varied  in  the  Infccfts  ihem- 
felves,  in  their  mature  State  in  the  Air. 

(k)  Jam  vera  alia  ammalia  gradicndo,  alia  fcrpendo  ai 
pafium  accedunty  alia  volando,  alia  nando.  Cic.  de  Nat.  De- 
or.  1.  2..  c.  47. 

Compare  alfo  what  Galen  excellently  obferves  concerning 
the  Number  of  Feet  in  Man,  and  in  other  Animals  ;  and  the 
wife  Piovilion  theieby  made  for  the  Ufe  and  Benefit  of  the 
refpedive  Animals.  De  Vf.  Part,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
third  Book. 

M  2,  but 


1^4  ^^^^  Motion  Book  IV. 

but  their  vermicular  or  finuous  Motion  (performed 
with  no  lefs  Art,  and  as  curioufly  provided  for  as 
the  Legs  or  Wings  of  other  Creatures :  This,  I 
fay,)  is  fufficient  for  their  Conveyance. 

Man  and  Beafls^  whofe  Occafions  require  a  large 
Room,  have  accordingly  a  fvvifter  Motion,  with 
proper  Engines  for  that  Service  j  anfwerable  to 
their  Range  for  P'ood,  their  Occupation  of  Bufi- 
nefs,  or  their  want  of  Armature,  and  to  fecure 
them  againft  Harms  (/). 

But  for  the  wingf-d  Creatures  (Birds  and  Infefts,) 
as  they  are  to  traverfe  large  Trafts  of  Land  and  Wa- 
ter, for  their  Food,  for  their  commodious  Habi- 
tation, or  Breeding  their  Young,  to  find  Places  of 
Retreat  and  Security  from  Mifchiefs;  fo  they  have 
accordingly  the  Faculty  of  flying  in  the  Air  ;  and 
that  fwiftly  or  flowly,  a  long  or  fhort  a  Time,  ac- 
cording to  their  Occafions  and  Way  of  Life.  And 
accordingly  their  Wings,  and  whole  Body,  are  cu- 
rioufly prepared  for  fuch  a  Motion  5  as  I  intend  to 
Ihew  in  a  proper  Place  {m). 

Another  remarkable  Thing  in  the  motive  Faculty 
of  all  Creatures,  is  the  neat,  geometrical  Perfor- 
mance of  it.  The  mod  accurate  Mathematician, 
the  mofl  skilful  in  mechanick  Motions,  can't  pre- 
fcribe  a  nicer  Motion  (than  what  they  perform)  to 
the  Legs  and  Wings  of  thofe  that  walk  or  fly  i^)^ 


(I)  As  I  flvall  hereafter  (liew,  that  the  indulgent  Creator 
hath  abundantly  provided  for  the  Safety  of  Animals  by  their 
Cloathing,  Habitations,  Sagacity  and  Inftruments  of  De- 
fence ;  fo  there  appears  to  be  a  Contemperament  of  their 
Motion  with  thefe  Provifions,  They  that  are  well  armed  and 
guarded,  have  commonly  a  flower  Motion  ;  whereas  they  that 
are  deftitute  thereof,  are  fwifter.  So  alfo  timid  helplels  Ani- 
mals are  commonly  fwift ;  thus  Deer  and  Hares:  But  Ani- 
mals endowed  with  Courage,  Craft,  Arms,  o^.  comraoiily 
have  a  flower  Motion. 

(m)  See  BookVll.  chap.  i. 

(»)  SicBook  Vil.  Chap,  i.  the  end. 

or 


Chap.  VIII.  of  Animals:  i6^ 

or  to  tlic  Bodies  of  tliofe  that  creep  (o).  Neither 
can  the  Body  be  more  compleatly  poifcdfor  the  Mo- 
tion it  is  to  have  in  every  Creature,  than  it  already 
cidually  is.  From  the  largell:  Elephant,  to  thcfmal- 
\ei\  Mite,  we  find  the  Body  artfully  balanced  (/)). 
The  Head  not  too  heavy,  nor  too  light  for  the  rcll 
of  the  Body,  nor  the  rell  of  the  Body  for  it  (y). 
The  Fifccra  are  not  let  loofe,  or  fo  placed,  as  to  fwag, 
over-balance,  or  over-fet  the  Body  j  but  well-braced, 
and  dilhibuted  to  maintain  the  acquipoifc  of  the  Bo- 
dy. The  motive  Parts  alfo  are  admnably  wcU'fixed 
in  refpect  to  the  Center  of  Gravity  ;  placed  in  the 
very  Point,  fitted  to  fupport  and  convey  the  Body. 
Every  Leg  beareth  his  true  Share  of  the  Body's 
Weight.  And  the  Wings  fo  nicely  are  fct  to  the 
Center  of  Gravity,  as  even  in  that  fluid  Medium^ 
the  Air,  the  Body  is  as  truly  balanced,  as  we  could 
have  balanced  it  with  the  nicell  Scales. 

But  among  all  Creatures,  none  more  elegant 
than  the  fizing  the  Body  of  Man,  the  gauging  his 
Body  fo  nicely,   as  to  be  able  to  Hand  ercd,   to 


(<?)  See  Book  IX.  Chap.  i.  Hote  (c.) 

{p)  Siquis  unquam  alius  OpifeXy  xqualitatis  cr  proport'iovif 
magriam  hahuit  providentiam,  certe  Natura  habuit  in  anim.i- 
liiim  cot  paribus  conformandis ;  unde  Hippocrates  earn  rettijfnne 
jufiam  notninat.     Galen.de  Uf.  Part.  l.i.  c.  i6. 

(^)  The  Make  of  the  Bodies  of  fome  Water-Fowl,  feems 
to  contradift  what  I  here  fay,  the  Heads  and  long  Necks  of 
fome,  as  of  Swans,  Ducks  and  Geefc  ;  and  the  hinder  Parts 
of  oilier?,  as  of  the  Doucker  and  More-hen,  and  fome  other 
Kinds,  feeming  to  be  too  heavy  for  the  rclt  of  their  Body. 
But  inllead  of  being  an  Argument  againft,  it  is  a  notable  In- 
ftance  of,  the  divine  Art  and  Providence,  thefe  Things  being 
nice  Accommodations  to  their  way  of  Life.  Of  luch  as 
have  long  Necks,  fee  Book  VII.  chap.r.  Note  (;). 

And  as  for  fuch  whofe  hinder  Parts  Teem  to  over-balance 

their  foremoit  Parts,  whereby  they  t]y  with  their  Bodies  in  a 

•manner  ered,    this  alfo  is  an  excellent   Accommodation   to 

their  wiy  of  Life,  which  is  Diving  rather  than  I'^lying.     I'id. 

Book  VI 1.  Chap.  4.  Note  (/>). 


M  5  iloop, 


i66  Of  the  Tlace  Book  IV. 

floop,  to  fir,   and  indeed  to  move  any  way,  only 
with  the  Help  of  fo  fmall   a  Stay  as  the  Feet  (r): 
whofe  Mechanifm  of  Bones,  Tendons  and  Mufcles 
to  this  purpofe,  is  very  curious  and  admirable. 


CHAP.    IX. 

Of  the  Tlace  allotted  to  the  fever al  Tribes 
of  Animals. 

HAving  difpatched  the  Motion  of  Animals,  let 
us  in  the  next  Place  confider  the  Place  which 
the  infinitely  wife  Creator  hath  appointed  them  to 
move  and  a6t,  and  perform  the  Offices  of  the  Crea- 
tion in.  And  here  we  find  every  Particular  well 
ordered.  All  Parts  of  our  Terraqueous  Globe  fit 
for  an  Animal  to  live  and  a6t  in,  are  fufficiently 
itocked  with  proper  Inhabitants :  The  watery  Ele- 
ment (unfit,  one  would  think,  for  Refpiration  and 
Life)  abounding  with  Creatures  fitted  for  it  j  its 
Bowels  abundantly  ftorcd,  and  its  Surface  well  be- 
fpread.  The  Earth  alfo  is  plentifully  flocked  in  all 
its  Parts,  where  Animals  can  be  of  any  Ufe ;  not 
probably  the  deepeft  Bowels  thereof  indeed,  being 
Parts  in  all  likelihood  unfit  for  Habitation  and  Adti- 
on,  and  where  a  living  Creature  would  be  ufelefs  in 
the  World  j  but  the  Surface  every  where  abundant? 
ly  flored. 

But  that  which  is  mod  confiderable  in  this  Mat- 
ter, and  plainly  fheweth  the  divine  Management  in 
the  Cafe,  is,  that  thofe  Creatures  are  manifeftly 
defigned  for  the  Place  in  which  they  are,  and  the 
Ufe  and  Services  they  perform  therein.    If  all  the 


(r)  See  'Book  V.  C%,  1.  ^Qtt  {li). 


Chap.  IX.  of  Animals.  \6y 

Animals  of  our  Globe  had  been  made  by  Chance, 
or  placed  by  Chance,  or  without  the  divine  Provi- 
dence, their  Organs  would  have  been  othciwifc 
than  they  are,  and  their  Place  and  Ilcfidcnce  con- 
fufed  and  jumbled.  Their  Organs  (for  Indance) 
of  Refpiration,  of  Vifion,  and  of  Motion,  would 
have  fitted  any  Medium^  or  have  needed  none  j 
their  Stomachs  would  have  ferved  anv  Food,  and 
their  Blood,  and  Covering  of  their  Bodies  been 
made  for  any  Clime,  or  only  one  Clime.  Conle- 
qucntly  all  the  Animal  World  would  have  been  in  a 
confufed,  inconvenient,  and  diforderiy  Commixture. 
One  Animal  would  have  wanted  Food,  another  Ha- 
bitation, and  moll  of  them  Safety.  They  would 
have  all  flocked  to  one,  or  a  few  Places,  taken  up 
their  Rell  in  the  Temperate  Zones  only,  and  covet- 
ed one  Food,  the  eaiiell  to  be  come  at,  and  moll 
fpccious  in  fhew  j  and  fo  would  have  poifoned,  ilarv- 
ed,  or  greatly  incommoded  one  another.  Burasihc 
Matter  IS  now  ordered,  the  Globe  is  equally  bcfpread, 
fo  that  no  Place  wanteth  proper  Inhabitants,  nor 
any  Creature  is  deltitute  of  a  proper  Place,  and  all 
Things  neceflary  to  its  Life,  Health,  and  Pleafure. 
As  the  Surface  of  the  Terraqueous  Globe  is  co- 
vered with  different  Soils,  with  Hills  and  Vales, 
with  Seas,  Rivers,  Lakes  and  Ponds,  with  diveis 
Trees  and  Plants,  in  the  feveral  Places  i  fo  all  thefe 
have  their  Animal  Inhabitants,  whofe  Organs  of 
Life  and  A6tion  are  manifeilly  adapted  to  fuch  and 
fuch  Places  and  Things  j  whofe  Food  and  Phy- 
fick,  and  every  other  Convenience  of  Life,  is  to 
be  met  with  in  that  very  Place  appointed  it.  The 
watery,  the  amphibious  (^),    the  aiiy  Inhabitants, 

and 


{a)  Efi  etiam  admiratio  nonnulU  in  befilis  aquatilibus  its, 
t^HA  gi^nuntur  m  terra  :  veluti  Crocodili,  f.uviaulefqtie  Tcjiu- 
iitnes,  (jHxdjtf;jue  Serpentes  orts.  extra  aquafn,  Jifti:d  ac  Jui- 
fnurp  nin l>oJjn?jt,  atjuam  pirfiff^uuntur,     ^jl^in  tiiam  Anath^n 


i68       •  Of  the  Numbers         Book  IV. 

and  thofe  on  the  dry  Land  Surface,  and  the  Sub- 
terraneous under  it,  they  all  live  and  act  with  Plea- 
fure,  they  are  gay,  and  flourifli  in  their  proper  E- 
lement  and  allotted  Place,  they  want  neither  for 
Food,  Cloathing,  or  Retreat  >  which  would  dwin- 
dle and  die,  deftroy,  or  poifon  one  another,  if  all 
coveted  the  fame  Element,  Place,  or  Food, 

Nay,  and  as  the  Matter  is  admirably  well  order- 
ed, yet  confidering  the  World's  increafe,  there 
would  not  be  fufficient  Room,  Food,  and  other 
Neceflarics  for  all  the  living  Creatures,  without 
another  grand  A£t  of  the  divme  Wifdom  and  Pro- 
vidence, which  is  the  Balancing  the  Number  of  Indi- 
*viduals  of  each  Species  of  Creatures,  in  that  Place 
appointed  thereto  :  Of  which  in  the  next  Chapter. 


C  H  A  P.    X. 

Of  the  Balance  of  Anmals^  or  the  due  Tro- 
portion  in  which  the  World  is  flocked  with 
them. 

TH  E  whole  Surface  of  our  Globe  can  afford 
Room  and  Support  only  to  fuch  a  Number  of 
all  Sorts  of  Creatures.  And  if  by  their  doubling, 
trebling,  or  any  other  Multiplication  of  their 
Kind,  they  fhould  encrcafe  to  double  or  treble  that 
Number,  they  mufl  flavve,  or  devour  one  another. 
The  keeping  therefore  the  Balance  even,  is  mani- 
feftly  a  Work  of  the  divine  Wifdom  and  Provi- 
dence.   To  which  end,  the  great  Author  of  Life 


9'va  Gall'm'is  ftpe  fupponimus  — —  [Pulli]  delude  eas  [matres] 
relmquunt  — —  ^  ejfugiunt,  citm  primiiTn  aquam,  quafi  natU' 
r*hm  domumi  viden fotPterunt,    Cic.  de  Nat,  Deor.  \,z.  c-48« 

hath 


Chap.X.  of  Animals.  1^9 

liath  determined  the  Life  of  all  Creatures  to  fuch  a 
Length,  and  their  Incrcale  to  luch  a  Number,  pro- 
portional to  their  Ulc  in  the  World.  'IJic  Life  of 
fomc  Creatines  is  Ic'U^,  imd  their  Increafcbut  I'mall, 
and  by  that  means  they  do  not  ovcr-ilock  the  World. 
And  tlicfamc  Benefit  iseflcftcd,  where  the  Increafc 
is  great,  by  the  Brevity  of  fuch  Creatures  Lives,  by 
their  great  Ufe,  and  the  frequent  Occafions  there 
are  of  them  for  Food  to  Man,  or  other  Animals. 
It  is  a  very  rcmuikablc  A61  of  the  Divine  Provi- 
dence, that  ufcful  Creatures  are  produced  m  great 
Plenty  {a),  and  others  in  le(s.  The  prodigious  and 
frequent  Increafe  o\  Ink^ls,  both  in  and  out  of 
the  Waters,  may  exemplify  the  one>  and 'tis  ob- 
fervable  in  the  other,  that  Creatures  lefs  ufeful,  or 
by  their  Voracity  pernicious,  have  commonly  fewer 
Young,  or  do  feldomer  bring  forth  :  Of  which 
many  Inlfances  might  be  given  in  the  voracious 
Beaih  and  Birds.  But  there  is  one  l"o  peculiar  an  A- 
nimal,  as  if  made  for  a  particular  In  fiance  in  our 
prefent  Cafe,  and  that  is  ihcCuntnr  o^  Pei  n  {b):  A 
Fowl  of  that  Magnitude,  Strength  and  Appetite,  as 
to  fcize  not  only  on  the  Sheep,  and  Idler  Cattle,  but 
even  the  larger  Bcalfs,  yea,  the  very  Children  too. 
Nowthefe,  as  they  arcthc  moll  pcrniciousof  Birds, 

fo 


{a)  Benlgna  circa  hoc  Natura,  'wnocua  cr  efctt'cntii  a^tiima- 
Ua  fvcunda  gencravit.     Plin.  Nat.  Hift.  1.  8.  c.  55. 

{b)  Captain  J.  ^\.\or\ggave  vie  this  Account,  together  with  a. 
(PlHdl- Feather  of  the  [Cuntur  or  Connor  of  Feru]  On  the  Coajl 
of  Chili,  they  met  ivith  this  lUi-i  in  about  33°  S.  Lat.  not  far 
from  Mocha,  nn  Ijland  in  the  bouth-Sea,  > they  f)ot  it  fit- 
ting on  a  Ciijf,  by  the  Sea- fide  ;  that  it  was  \6  Feet  from  Wing 
TO  iVing  extended  ;  that  the  Spanifh  Inhabitants  tcld  them  they 
were  afraid  of  theft  Birds,  left  they  ji)onld  prry  upon  their 
children.  And  the  Feather  he  gave  me  (faith  the  J^ocflor)  is 
1  Feet,  4  Inches  long  ;  the  &uillpart  5  ^-  Inches  long,  and  I  { 
Inch  about  in  the  largefl  Part.  It  zveighed  3  dr.  1 7 -1  gr.  and 
is  of  a  dark  brovcn  Colour.     Dr.  Sloans  in  Fhil.  Tranl.  N»  zoS. 

To 


170  Of  the  Numbers         Book  IV. 

fo  are  they  the  mofl:  rare,  being  feldom  feen,  or 
only  one,  or  a  few  in  large  Countries  5  enough  to 
keep  up  the  Species  j  but  not  to  over-charge  the 
World. 

Thus  the  Balance  of  the  animal  World,  is, 
throughout  all  Ages,  kept  evenj  and  by  a  curious 
Harmony,  and  jull  Proportion  between  the  In- 
creafe  of  all  Animals,  and  the  Length  of  their 
Lives,  the  World  is  through  all  Ages  well  5  but 
not  over-ftored :  One  Generation  pajfeth  away^  and 
another  Generation  cometh  [c) ;  fo  equally  in  its 
Room,  to  balance  the  Stock  of  the  terraqueous 
Globe  in  all  Ages,  and  Places,  and  among  all 
Creatures  J  that  it  is  an  aclual  Demonftration  of 
our  Saviour's  Afiertion,  Mat.  x.  2p.  that  the  moft 
inconsiderable,  common  Creature,  Even  a  Sparrow 
(two  of  which  are  fold  for  a  Farthing)  doth  not  fall 
en  the  Ground  without  our  heavenly  Father. 


To  this  Account,  the  Doftor,  (in  a  Letter  to  Mr.  i?<?y, 
March  31,  1694,  with  other  Papers  of  Mr.  JR^y's,  in  my 
Hands,)  adds  the  Tellimony  of  5"/  Acofla,  1.  4.  c.  7.  and 
Garcilajf.  de  la  Vega,  who  1.  8.  c.  19.  faith,  There  are  other 
Jowls,  call'd  Cuntur,  and  by  the  Spaniards  corruptly  Condor. 
Many  of  thefe  Fowls  having  been  kill'd  by  the  Spaniards,  had 
their  Proportion  taken,    and  from  End   to  End  of  their   Wings 

meafured  15  or    l6   Teet. Nature,    to  temper  and  allay 

their  Ttercenefs,  deny'd  them  the  Talons  which  are  given  to  the 
t'/agle;  their  Feet  being  tipp'd  zvith  Claws  like  a  Hen:  Hozfever^ 
their  Beak  is  firong  enough  to  tear  off  the  Hide,  and  rip  up  the 
Bowels  of  an  Ox.  Tvjo  of  them  will  attempt  a  Cow  or  Bull, 
and  devour  him  :  ^nd  it  hath  often  happened,  that  one  of  them 
alone  hath  affaulted  Boys  of  ten  or  twelve  Tears  nf  yige,  and 
eaten  them.  Their  Colour  is  black  and  white,  like  a  Magpie. 
Jt  is  well  there  are  but  few  of  them  ;  for  if  they  were  many^ 
they  would  very  much  deftroy  the  Cattle.  They  have  on  the 
forepart  of  their  Heads,  a  Comb,  not  pointed  like  that  of  a  Cock; 
h-u:  rather  even,  in  the  Form  of  a  Razor.  When  they  come  to 
alight  from  the  Air,  they  make  fuch  an  humming  Noife,  with 
the  fluttering  of  their  Wings,  as  ii  enough  to  ajionifhy  or  make 
fi  Man  deaf. 

{■)  Ecclef.  i.  4; 

Thii 


Chap.  X.  of  Anhnals.  \yi 

This  Providence  of  God  is  remarkable  in  every 
Species  of  living  Creatures:  But  that  cfpccial  Ma- 
nagement of  the  Recruits  and  Decays  of  Mankind, 
fo  equally  all  the  World  over,  deferves  our  cfpe- 
cial  Obfervation.  In  the  Beginning  of  the  World, 
and  fo  after  Noah's  Flood,  the  Longaevity  of  Men, 
as  it  was  of  abfolute  Ncceflity  to  the  move  fpeedy 
peopling  of  the  new  World  -,  fo  is  a  fpccial  In- 
stance of  the  divine  Providence  in  this  Matter  (d). 
And  the  fame  Providence  appears  in  the  following 
Ages,  when  the  World  was  pretty  well  peopled, 
in  reducing  the  common  Age  of  Man  then  to  i  lo 
Years,  {Gen.  vi.  3.)  in  Proportion  to  the  Occafions 
of  the  World  at  that  Time.  And  lalUy,  when  the 
World  was  fully  peopled  after  the  Flood,  (as  it 
was  in  the  Age  of  Mofes^  and  fo  down  to  our  pre- 

ient 


{d)  The  Divine  Providence  doth  not  only  appear  in  the 
Longevity  of  Man,  immediately  after  the  Creation  and 
Flood  ;  but  alfo  in  their  dilfcrer.t  Longacvity  at  thofc  two 
Times.  Immediately  after  the  Creation,  when  the  World 
was  to  be  peopled  by  one  Man,  and  one  Woman,  the  Age 
of  the  greateft  Part  of  thofe  on  Record,  was  900  Years,  and 
upwards.  But  after  the  Flood,  when  there  were  three  Per- 
fons  by  whom  the  World  was  to  be  peopled,  none  of  thoic 
Patriarchs,  except  Shem,  arriv'd  to  the  Age  of  500;  and  on- 
ly the  three  firlt  of  Shem's  Line,  viz.  Arphaxad,  Salah,  and 
Eber,  came  near  that  Age ;  which  was  in  the  full  Century- 
after  the  Hood.  But  in  the  fecond  Century,  we  do  not  find 
any  reached  the  Age  of  240.  And  in  the  third  C'entury,  (a- 
bout  the  latter  End  of  which  Abraham  was  born,)  none,  ex- 
cept Terab,  arriv'd  to  loo  Years:  By  which  Time  the  World 
was  fo  well  peopled,  (that  Part  of  it,  at  leaft  where  Abraharn 
dwelt,)  that  they  had  built  Cities,  and  began  to  be  cantoned 
into  diftinfl  Nations  and  Societies,  under  their  refpedivc 
Kings;  fo  that  they  were  abJe  to  wage  War,  four  Kings  a- 
gainll  five.  Gen.  xiv.  Nay,  if  the  Accounts  of  Aniun,  Bero- 
fus,  Manetho,  and  others,  yea,  Afncanus  be  to  be  credited; 
the  World  was  fo  well  peopled,  even  before  the  Times  wc 
fpeak  of,  as  to  afford  fufficient  Numbers  for  the  great  King- 
doms of  AJJyria,  yEgypt,  Ptrfia,  6cc.  But  learned  Men  ge- 
nerally, with  great  Hcafon,  reject  thefe  as  lejendaiy  Ac- 
counts, 

II 


172'  Of  the  Numbers         Book  IV. 

fent  Time)  the  IctTening  the  common  Age  of  Man 
to  70  or  80  Years  (^),  (the  Age  mentioned  by  Mo- 
fes^  Pfal.  xc.  10.  this,  I  fay,)  is  manifeftly  an  Ap- 
pointment of  the  fame  infinite  Lord  that  ruleth  the 
World;  For,  by  this  Means,  the  peopled  World 
is  kept  at  a  convenient  Stay ;  neither  too  full,  nor 
too  empty.  For  if  Men  (the  Generality  of  them, 
I  mean)  were  to  live  now  to  Methufalah's  Age  of 
p6p  Years,  or  only  to  Abraham'' s^  long  after  the 
Flood,  of  i7f  Years,  the  World  would  be  too 
much  over-run  5  or  if  the  Age  of  Man  was  limited 
to  that  of  divers  other  Animals,  to  ten,  twenty,  or 
thirty  Years  only;  the  Decays  then  of  Mankind 
would  be  too  fail :  But  at  the  middle  Rate  menti- 
oned, the  Balance  is  nearly  even,  and  Life  and 
Death  keep  an  equal  Pace.  Which  Equality  is  fo 
great  and  harmonious,  and  fo  manifeft  an  Inftance 
of  the  divine  Management,  that  1  fhall  fpend  fome 
Remarks  upon  it. 

It  appears  from  our  beft  Accounts  of  thefe  Mat- 
ters, 


]f  the  Revider  hath  a  Mind  to  fee  a  Computation  of  the 
Increafe  of  Mankind,  in  the  three  firft  Centuries  after  the 
Flood,  he  may  find  two  diiferent  Ones  of  the  mo(t  learned 
Ajchbiftiop  Vjher,  and  Petavius  ;  together  with  a  Refutation 
cf  the  fo  early  Beginning  of  the  AJjyian  Monarchy ;  as  alfo 
Reafons  for  placing  Abraham  near  100©  Years  after  the  Flood, 
in  our  mod  learned  Biflnop  Stillin^fieet's  Orig.  Sacr,  Book  III. 
Chap.  4.  §.  9. 

(e)  That  the  common  Age  of  Man  hath  been  the  fame  in 
all  Ages  fince  the  World  was  peopled,  is  manifeft  from  pro- 
phane,  as  well  as  facred  Hiltory.  To  pafs  by  others :  Plato 
lived  to  the  Age  of  81,  and  was  accounted  an  old  Man.  And 
thofe  which  Pliny  reckons  up,  /.  7.  c.  48.  as  rare  Examples  of 
long  Life,  may  for  the  moft  Part  be  match'd  by  our  modern 
Hiftories ;  efpecially  luch  as  Pliny  himfelf  gave  Credit  unto. 
Dr.  Plot  hath  given  us  divers  Inftances  in  his  Hiftory  of  Ox- 
ferdjlnre,  c.  i.  §.  3.  and  c.  8.  §.  54.  and  Hiftory  of  Stajford- 
fmre,  c.  8.  §.  91,  ^c.  Among  others,  one  is  of  twelve  Te- 
nants of  Mr.  Biddidth'Sy  that  together  made  1000  Years  of 

Age. 


Chap.  X.  of  Animals,  ^1}, 

Age.  But  the  mod  contidcrable  Lxamplcs  of  aged  Pcrfons  a- 
nioiig  us,  is  of  old  Varre  of  Shropjhire,  who  lived  151  Years 
9  Months,  according  to  the  learned  Dr.  Harvey's  Account ; 
and  Henry  ^eytkins  of  lorkJJiirc,  who  hvcd  169  Years,  accor- 
ding to  the  Account  of  my  learned  and  ingenious  Friend  Dr. 
Tixncred  Robinfon  ;  of  both  which,  with  others,  fee  Lozvth. 
Abndg.  Phil.  Tranf.  V.  3.  p.  306.  The  great  Age  of  Vane  of 
Shropfjire,  niinds  me  of  an  Obfervation  of  the  Reverend  Mr. 
Plaxton,  that  in  his  two  Pariflies  of  Ktnardjey  and  Dcnington 
in  Shropflj'tre,  every  lixth  Soul  was  60  Years  of  Age,  or  up- 
wards, Phil.  Tranf.  No.  310. 

And  if  we  ftep  farther  North  into  Scotland,  we  dial!  find 
divers  recorded  I'or  their  great  Age:  Of  which  I  fli.all  prelent 
the  Reader  wiih  only  one  modern  Example  of  one  Laurence^ 
who  married  a  Wi.^e  after  he  was  100  Years  of  Age,  and 
would  go  out  to  Sea  a  Fifliing  in  his  liitle  Boat,  when  he 
was  140  Years  old  ;  and  is  lately  dead  of  no  other  Didcm- 
per  but  mere  old  Age,  laiih  Sir  Rob.  bibbald,  Prcdr.  H'tft.  Kat. 
Scot.  p.  44.  and  1.  3.  p.  4. 

As  for  Foreigners,  the  Examples  would  be  endlefs ;  and 
therefore  that  of  'i}oh.  Oitele  llull  fufficc,  who  was  as  famous 
for  his  Beard,  as  for  being  115  Years  of  Age.  He  was  but 
two  Brabant  Flls -]  high;  and  liis  long  grey  Beard  was  one 
Lll  ^  long.  His  Picture  and  Account  may  be  leen  in  Fphem. 
Germ.  T.  3.  Obf.  163. 

As  for  the  Story  Roger  Bacon  tells,  of  one  that  lived  900 
Years  by  the  Help  of  a  certain  Medicine,  and  many  other 
fuch  Stories,  I  look  upon  them  as  fabuhni?.  And  no  better  is  that 
of  the  Wandring  ^ezv,  named  Joh.  Buttadxta,  laid  to  h.ivc  been 
prefent  at  our  Saviour's  Crucifixion;  although  very  ferious 
Stories  are  told  of  hrs  being  Icen  at  Ant-juerp,  and  in  France^ 
about  the  Middle  of  the  lall  Century  but  one  ;  and  before  in  Ann. 
1S42.,  converfed  with  by  Paul  of  EitJ'en,  Bifliop  of  Slejzvkk; 
and  before  that,  i-iz,.  in  iiz8,  feen  and  convcis'd  with  by  an 
Armenian  Arcbbijhop's  Gentleman  ;  and  by  others  at  other 
Tunes. 

If  the  Reader  hath  a  Mind  to  fee  more  F.xamplcs,  he  may 
meet  with  fome  of  all  Ages,  in  the  learned  HakciviU's  Apol. 
p.  i8r.  where  he  will  alfo  find  that  learned  Author's  Opinion 
of  the  Caufes  of  the  Brevity  and  Length  of  humane  Life. 
The  Brevity  thereof  he  attributcth  to  a  too  tender  Lducation, 
fucking  ftrange  Nurfes,  too  hally  Marriages ;  but  above  all, 
to  Luxury,  high  Sauces,  ftrong  Liquors,  c-c.  The  Longae- 
vity  of  the  Ancients  he  afcribes  to  Temperance  in  Meat  and 
Drink,  anointing  the  Body,  the  Ufe  of  Saffron  and  Money, 
warm  Clothes,  lefTcr  Doors  aud  Windows,  lefs  Thylick  and 
more  Exercife. 

(/)  The 


174  Of  the  Numbers         Book  IV. 

icrs^  that  In  our  European  Parts  (/),  and  I  believe 
the  fame  is  throughout  the  World  5  that,  I  fay,) 
there  is  a  certain  Race  and  Proportion  in  the  Pro- 
pagation of  Mankind ;  Such  a  Number  marry  (^), 

fo 


(/)  Tlie  Proportions  which  Marriage^  bear  to  Births,  and 
Births  to  Burials,  in  divers  Parts  of  Europe,  may  be  feen  at 
an  eafy  View  in  this  Table: 


Names  of  the  Places. 

Marriages  to 
Births:  As 

Births  to 
Burials : 

as 

I 

Enq^land  in  I'enerai 

I   to 

4'63 

[ '  11  to 

London. 

i  to 

A' 

I         lol'i] 

Hamfljire,  from  1569,  to  1658. 

r  to 

4' 

I'i     Co 

I 

Xiverto7i  in  Devon,    1560,  to  1649. 

I   to 

3'7 

r'z6  to 
t'6    to 
i'6    to 

I 
I 
I 

Cranbrook  \n  Kent,    1^60,   to   1C140. 

I   to 

V9 

Aynho  in  NortfTamptonilwe  rur   i  18  V 

I    to 

0 

Leeds  in  lork;l;:re  for   lil  Vcars. 

I    to 

3'7 

I'OltO        l| 

Hariuood  \n  lorkjhire  ^1   Y'ears. 

I    to 
r  to 

3 '4 
■4<6' 

i'z3  to 

— 

Upminfler  in  /^//fx  TOO  Year?. 

f'o8  to 
I'l    to 

t'rankjurt  on  the  iW^/w  m  1095. 

I    to 

3'7 

Old  middle  and  lower  March  in  i6qS. 

I    to 

3'7 

I '9   to 

Domin.  ot  rhe  K.  of  PrMlfii^  m   i^oS 

r   to 

3'7 

['5    to 

orejlaiv  in  ;,i[ejia  tioin    i.'<&7   to    l-.(;i. 

t'6    to 

/^ijr/f  Ml   1070,    1671,    167Z. 

I    to 

4' 7 

I'        tu  I 

'6 

Which  Table  I  made  from  Major  Graunt's  Obfervations 
on  the  Bills  of  Mortality;  Mr.  King'i  Obfervations  in  the  firft 
of  Dr.  Davenant's  EJJ'ays ;  and  what  I  find  put  together  by 
my  ingenious  Friend  Mr.  Lozvthorp,  in  his  Abridgment,  Vol. 
3.  p.  668.  and  my  own  Regider  of  Upminjler.  That  from 
Aynho  Regifter  in  Northamptonjhire,  1  had  from  the  prefent 
Redor,  the  learned  and  ingenious  Mr.  Wajj'e :  And  I  was  pro- 
mifed  fome  Accounts  from  the  North,  and  divers  others  Parts 
of  this  Kingdom  ;  but  have  not  yet  received  them  :  Only 
thofe  of  Leeds  and  Harzvood  in  TorkJJiire,  from  my  curious  and 
ingenious  Friend  Mr.  Thorejby. 

{g)  The  preceding  Table  fliews,  that  Marriages,  one  with 
another,  do  each  of  them  produce  about  four  Births;  not 
only  in  England,  but  in  other  Parts  of  Europe  alfo. 

And  by  Mr.  King's  Ei^imate,  (the  beft  Computations  I  ima- 
gine of  any,  being  derived  from  the  belt  Accounts;  fuch  as 

the 


Chap.  X.  of  Animals.  17^ 

fo  many  are  born,  fuch  a  Number  diej  in  Propor- 
tion to  the  Number  of  Perfons  in  every  Nation, 
County,  or  Parifh.  And  as  to  Births,  two  Things 
are  very  confidcrable:  One  is  the  Proportion  ot 
Males  and  Females  (^),  not  in  a  wide  Proportion, 
not  an  uncertain,  accidental  Number  at  all  Adven- 
tures;  but  nearly  equal.  Another  Thing  is,  that  a 
few  more  arc  born  than  appear  to  die,  in  any  cer- 
tain 


the  Marriage.  Birtli,  Burial-Adl,  the  Poll  Books,  a-c.  by  his 
Ellimate,  I  r<»y,)  about  i  in  104  marry.  For  he  juJgeth  the 
Number  of  the  People  in  England,  to  be  about  five  Miihons 
and  a  half;  of  which  about  41000  annually  marry.  As  to 
what  might  be  farther  remarked  concerning  Marriages,  in  re- 
gard of  the  Rights  and  CuHoms  of  feverai  Nations,  the  A^c 
to  which  divers  Nations  limited  Marriage,  crc.  it  would  be 
End'.els,  and  too  much  out  of  the  Way  to  rricntion  them: 
1  fliall  only  therefore,  for  the  Reader's  Diver-Hon,  take  No- 
tice of  the  Jeer  of  Ladantius,  (Shjare  apud  Poet  as  falacijfimns 
Jupiter  ^f///V  liberos  toUere  ?  Vtruw  fexaienarius  jacius,  c/  et  Lex 
Papia  fibulam  impo/Mit  ?  Ladant.  Inllit.  1.  i.  c.  16.  By  which 
Lex  Papia,  Men  were  prohibited  to  marry  after  60,  and  \Vc^ 
men  after  50  Years  of  Age. 

(Ij)  Major  Graunr,  (whofe  Conclufions  feem  to  be  well- 
grounded,)  and  Mr.  Kw^,  dilagree  in  the  Proportions  thty 
aflign  to  Males  and  Females.  This  latter  rsL-vl^  in  London, 
10  Males  to  be  to  13  Females;  in  other  Cnies  and  Market- 
Towns,  8  to  9 ;  and  in  the  Vill;iges  and  Hamlets,  ico  Males 
to  99  Females.  But  Major  Graunt,  both  from  the  Lordon, 
and  Country  Bills,  faith,  there  are  14  Males  to  13  Females: 
From  whence  he  juftly  infers,  That  Chnjiian  Religion,  prohi- 
biting Polygamy,  is  more  agreeable  to  the  Law  of  Katttre  than 
Mahumetllm,  and  others  that  altozv  it,  Ch<ip.  8. 

This  Proportion  of  14  to  13,  I  imagine  is  nearly  juft,  it 
being  agreeable  to  the  Bills  I  have  met  with,  as  well  as  ihofe- 
in  Mr.  Graunt.  In  the  100  Years,  for  Example,  of  my  own 
Parilli-Regiller,  although  the  Burials  of  M.ilcs  and  Females 
were  nearly  equal,  being  636  Males,  and  613  Females  in  all 
that  Time;  yet  there  were  baptized  709  Males,  and  but  675 
Females,  which  is  13  Females  to  13*7  Males.  Which  Ine- 
quality Ihews,  not  only,  that  one  Man  ought  to  have  but 
one  Wife;  but  alfo  that  every  Woman  may,  without  Poly- 
gamy, have  an  Hufband,  if  (he  doih  not  bar  her  lelf  by  the 
want  of  Virtue,  by  Denial,  o'c.  Alio  this  iiurplufage  of 
"^    *■  -     -   -  Males 


1 76  Of  the  Numbers  Book  IV". 

tain  Place  (i).  Which  is  an  admirable  Proviiion 
for  the  extraordinary  Emergencies  and  Occafions 
of  the  World  j  to  fupply  iinheathful  Places,  where 
Death  out-runs  Lifej  to  make  up  the  Ravages  of 
great  Plagues,  and  Difeafes,  and  the  Depredations 
of  War,  and  the  Seasj  and  to  afford  a  fufficient 
Number  for  Colonies  in  the  unpeopled  Parts  of 
the  Earth.  Or  on  the  other  Hand,  We  may  fay, 
that  fometimes  thofe  extraordinary  Expcnces  of 
Mankind,  may  be  not  only  a  jufl:  Puniihment  of 
the  Sins  of  Men  >  but  alfo  a  wife  Means  to  keep 
the  Balance  of  Mankind  evenj  as  one  would  be 
ready  to  conclude,  by  confidcring  the  Afiatick^  and 
other  the  more  fertile  Countries,  where  prodigious 
Multitudes  are  yearly  fwept  away  with  great  Plagues, 
and  fometimes  Warj  and  yet  thofe  Countries  are 
fo  far  from  being  wafted,  that  they  remain  full  of  ,*^ 
People. 

And 


Males  is  very  ufeful  for  the  Supplies  of  W.ir,  the  Seas,  and 
other  fiich  hxpences  of  the  Men  above  the  Women. 

That  this  is  a  Work  of  the  Divine  Providence,  and  not 
a  Matter  of  Chance,  is  well  made  out  by  the  very  Laws  of 
Chance,  by  a  Perfon  able  to  do  it,  the  ingenious  and  learn- 
ed Dr.  Arhuthnot.  He  fuppofeth  Thomas  to  lay  againd  ^o^w, 
that  for  eighty  two  Years  running,  more  Males  fliall  be  born 
than  Females;  and  giving  all  Allowances  in  the  Computation 
to  Thomas's  (ide,  he  makes  the  Odds  again  ft  Thomas,  that  it 
doth  not  happen  {o,  to  be  near  five  Millions  of  Millions,  of 
Millions,  of  Millions  to  one  ;  but  for  Ages  of  Ages  (accord- 
in"-  to  the  World's  Age)  to  be  near  an  infinite  Number  to 
one  rgainlt  Thomas.     V'id.  Phil.  Tranf.  N^.  318. 

(;)  The  foregoing  Table  lliews,  that  in  England  in  gene- 
ral, fewer  die  than  are  born,  there  being  but  i  Death  to 
1  _i.2.  Births.  But  in  London  more  die  than  are  born.  So  by 
Dr.havenant'sTMs,  the  Cities  likewife  and  Market-Towns 
j,nry  I  ~^l  to  one  Birth.  But  in  Pans  they  out-do  London, 
their  Dea'ths  being  i  '-  to  O"^  Birth  :  The  Reafon  of  which  I 
conceive  is,  becaule  their  Houfes  are  more  crowded  than  in 
London.  But  in  the  Villages  of  England,  there  are  fewer  die 
than  are  born,  there  being  but  i  Death  to  i  r^  Births.  And 
^et  Major  Graimt^  and  Dr.  Davgr?antt  both  obferve,  that 
"*-■  there 


^ 


Ghap.  X.  of  Animals.  lyy 

And  now  upon  the  whole  Matter,  What  is  all 
this  but  admirable  and  plain  Management?  What 
can  the  maintaining  throughout  all  Ages,  and  Pla- 
ces, thefe  Proportions  of  Mankind,  and  all  other 
Creatures;  this  Harmony  in  the  Generations  of 
Men  be,  but  the  Work  of  one  that  rulcth  the 
World?  Is  it  pofllble  that  ^vtx^^  Species  of  Ani- 
mals iTiould  fo  evenly  be  prefervcd,  proportionate 
to  the  Occafions  of  the  World?  That  they  lliould 
be  fo  well  balanced  in  all  Ages  and  Places,  without 
the  Help  of  almighty  Wifdom  and  Power?  How 
is  it  pollible  by  the  bare  Rules,  and  blind  A^Sts  of 
Nature,  that  there  Ihould  be  any  tolerable  Pro- 
portion ;  for  Inllance,  between  Males  and  Females, 
either  of  Mankind,  or  of  any  other  Creature  {k)  > 
efpecially  fuch  as  are  of  a  ferine,  not  of  a  dome- 
ick  Nature,  and  confcquently  out  of  the  Com- 
tnand  and  Management  of  Man?  How  could  Life 
and  Death  keep  Ibch  an  even  Pace  through  all  the 
animal  World?  If  we  ihould  take  it  for  granted^ 
that,  according  to  the  Scripture  Hiftory,  the 
World  had  a  Beginning,   (us  who  can  deny  it  (/)  j 

or 


there  are  more  Breeders  in  London^  and  the  Cities  and  Mar- 
ket-Towns, than  are  in  the  Country,  notwithtlandnig  the 
London-?i\xx\i%  are  fewer  than  tlie  Country  ;  the  Realbn  of 
which  fee  in  Graunt,  Chap.  7.  and  Davenant  tibl  [I'pr.  pzi. 

The  lalt  Remark  I  Hnal]  make  from  the  foregoing  Tables 
fliall  be,  that  we  may  from  thence  judge  of  the  Healthful- 
nefs  of  the  Places  tliere  mentioned.  If  the  Year  169S  was 
the  mean  Account  of  the  three  Murcks,  thofe  Places  bid  the 
fairelt  for  being  moil  healthful  ;  and  next  to  them  A^nho  and 
Cranhooh  for  Hfigl'jh  Towns. 

(k)  ohiid  loquar,  quanta  ratio  in  befliis  ad  psrpetujim  coil- 
ftrvAtiomm  carum  generis  appareat  ?  Nam  primum  alu  Martsi 
ali*  Famtna  funt,  quod  perpetuitatis  cauf^  tnachinata  natard 
eji.     Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  1.  z.  c.  51. 

(/)  Altho'  Anfiotle  held  the  Eternity  of  the  Woild,  yet  he 
feems  to  have  retraced  that  Opinion,  or  to  have  had  a  dif- 
f«rcnt  Opiiiioa  when  h§  wrote  his  M*ti^hy[Kkt;  for  in  his 
■■^ ^         "         N  firft 


178  Of  the  Numbers  Book  IV. 

or  if  we  (hould  fuppofe  the  Deftruftion  thereof  by 
Noah's  Flood :  How  is  it  poffible,  after  the  World 
was  replenifhed,)  that  in  a  certain  Number  of  Years, 
by  the  greater  Increafes  and  Doublings  of  each 
Species  of  Animals  >  that,  I  fay,  this  Rate  of  Doub- 
ling {pi)  ihould  ceafej  or  that  it  fhould  be  com- 
penfated  by  fome  other  Means?  That  the  World 
ihould  be  as  well,  or  better  Hocked  than  now  it  is, 
in  i6f6  Years  (the  Time  between  the  Creation 
and  the  Flood  j  this)  we  will  fuppofe  may  be  done 
by  the  natural  Methods  of  each  Species  Doubling 
or  Increaie:  But  in  double  that  Number  of  Years, 
or  at  this  Dirtance  from  the  Flood,  of  4000  Years, 
that  the  World  fhould  not  be  over  ftock'd,  can 
never  be  made  out,  without  allowing  an  infinite 
Providence. 

I  con- 


firft  Book  he  affirms,  that  God.  is  the  Caufe  and  Beginning  ef 
all  Things;  and  in  his  Book  de  Mundo  he  faith,  There  is  no 
doubt,  but  God  is  the  Maker  and  Confervatcr  of  all  Things  in 
the  World.  And  the  Stoicks  Opinion  is  well  known,  who 
ftrenuoufly  contended  that  the  Contrivance  and  Beauty  of  the 
Heavens  and  Earth,  and  all  Creatures  was  owing  to  a  wife, 
intelligent  Agent.  Of  which  Tully  gives  a  large  Account  in 
his  fecond  Book  de   Nat.  Dear,  in  the  Perfon  of  Balbus. 

(m)  I  have  before  in  Note  (g),  obferved,  that  the  ordinary 
rate  of  the  Doubling  or  Increafe  of  Mankind  is,  that  every 
Marriage,  one  with  another,  produces  about  four  Births ;  but 
fome  have  much  exceeded  that.  Baho,  Earl  of  Alenjperg, 
had  thirty  two  Sons  and  eight  Daughters,  and  being  invited 
to  hunt  with  the  Emperor  Henr'^  II.  and  bring  but  few  Ser- 
vants, brought  only  one  Servant,  and  his  thirty  two  Sons. 
To  thefe  many  others  might  be  added;  but  one  of  the  moil 
remarkable  Inftances  I  have  any  where  met  with,  is  that 
of  Mrs.  Honyvjood  y  mentioned  by  HakewiU  ,  Camden,  and 
other  Authors ;  but  having  now  before  me  the  Names,  with 
fome  Remarks  (which  I  received  from  a  pious  neighbouring 
Defcendantof  the  fame  Mrs.  Honyxvood)  I  ihallgive  a  more  par- 
ticular Account  than  they.  Mrs.  Mary  Honywood  wzs  Daugh- 
ter, and  one  of  the  Co-HeirelTes  of  Robert  Atwatersy  Efq; 
of  Lenham  in  Kent.  She  was  born  in  1517,  married  in 
February  1543.  at  fixteen  Years  of  Age,  to  her  onlyHufband 

Robers 


Chap.  XI.  of  Animals.  .     179 

I  conclude  then  this  Obfervation  with  the  Pfal- 
miil's  Words,  Pfal.  civ.  29,  50.  Thou  hideji  thy  Faccy 
all  Creatures  are  troubled  y  thou  takefl  aivay  their 
Breath,  they  die,  and  return  to  their  Du(l.  Thot^ 
fe?idefl  forth  thy  Spirit,  they  are  created-,  and  thou 
tcneweji  the  Face  of  the  Earth, 


CHAP.    XL 

Of  the  Food  of  Animals. 

THE  preceding  Reflcdion  of  the  Pfalmift^ 
mindeth  me  oF  anotlier  Thing  in  common  to 
Animals,  chit  pertinently  fuUeth  next  under  Con- 
fideration,   which  is  the  Jppointment  of  Food^  men- 


Rohert  Honytuoed^  of  Charing  in  Kent,  Efq;  She  died  in  the 
ninety  third  Year  of  her  Age,  in  May  1610.  She  had  fix- 
teen  Children  of  her  own  Body,  feven  Sons  and  nine  Daugh- 
ters; of  which  one  had  no  IfTue,  three  died  young,  and  the 
youngeft  was  fl..in  at  Nezi-port  Battle,  June  20.  1600.  Her 
Grand-Children  in  the  foconJ  Generation,  were  one  hundred 
and  fourteen  ;  in  the  third  two  hundred  and  twenty  eight; 
and  nine  in  the  fourth  G'.neration.  So  that  flu-  could  fay 
the  fame  that  the  Dillick  dcih,  made  of  one  of  the  Dal- 
iurg's  Family  of  Ba/il : 

1234 
Mater  ait  Kat&y  die  iiat£,  fiha  Katam 
5  6 

Ut  moneatt  Nat£,  plangere  Filiolam. 

it  34 

Rife  up  Daughter,  and  go  to  thy  Daughter,  for  her  Daughtei-t 
5  6 

Daughter  hath  a  Daughter.  Mrs.  Honyiuood  Was  a  very  pious 
Woman,  atTlidted,  in  her  declining  Age,  with  Delpair,  io 
fome  meafure  ;  concernmg  which,  fome  Divines  once  dif- 
courfing  with  her,  (lie  in  a  Paflion  faid.  She  -Juat  as  certainly 
damned  as  this  Glafs  it  broken,  throwing  a  r^o/re-Glafs  agamfl 
the  Ground,  whuu  (he  had  then  in  her  Hand.  But  the  GlafS 
cfcjiped  breaking,  as  aedible  WitneiTes  Actcftc<j. 

N  4  tiOOCd 


x8o  Of  the  Food  Book  IV. 

tioncd  in  Verfe  27,  28,  of  the  lafl  cited  Pfalm  civ. 
Thefe  [Creatures]  nnjait  all  upon  thee^  that  thou  mafjl 
give  them  their  Meat  in  due  Seafon.  'that  thou  givefi 
them^  they  gather  j  thou  openefl  thy  Hand^  they  are 
filled  -with  Good.  The  fame  is  again  aflerted  in  PfaL 
cxlv.  If,  1(5.  the  Eyes  of  all isoait  upon  thee .^  andthoit 
givefi  them  their  Meat  in  due  Seafon.  thou  openefl  thy 
Hand.,  and  fatisfiefi  the  Defire  of  every  living  thing. 

What  the  Pfalmifi  here  aflerts,  affords  us  a  glorious 
Scene  of  the  divine  Providence  and  Management. 
Which,  (as  I  have  fhew'd  it  to  concern  it  felf  in  o- 
ther  IciTcr  Things  -^Xo  we  may  prefume  doth  exert  it 
felf  particularly  in  fo  grand  an  Affair  as  that  of  Food, 
whereby  the  animal  World  fubfifts :  And  this  will  be 
nianifelled,  and  the  Pfaimifs  Obfervations  exempli- 
fied, from  thefe  fix  following  Particulars : 

I.  From  the  fubfifting  and  maintaining  fuch  a 
large  Number  of  Animals,  throughout  all  Parts  of 
the  World. 

II.  From  the  proportionate  Qtiantity  of  Food  to 
the  Eaters. 

III.  From  the  Variety  of  Food  fuited  to  the  Va- 
riety of  Animals:  Or  the  Delight  which  various 
Animals  have  in  different  Food. 

IV.  From  the  peculiar  Food  which  peculiar  PIa« 
ees  afford  to  the  Creatures  fuited  to  thofe  Places. 

V.  From  the  admirable  and  curious  Apparatus 
made  for  the  gathering,  preparing,  and  Digellion 
of  the  Food.     And, 

VI.  andlafily^  From  the  great  Sagacity  of  all  Ani- 
mals, in  finding  out  and  providing  their  Food. 

I.  It  is  a  great  A6t  of  the  divine  Power  and 
Wifdom,  as  well  as  Goodnefs,  to  provide  Food 
for  fuch  a  World  of  Animals  (^),  as  every  where 

[a)  Paflum  an'imantibus  large  o'  copiose  natura  eH7n,  qui 
cuicjHe  aptui  etat,  comparavh.    Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  1.2.  c. 47. 

lile  Deus  eft, qui  per  totum   orbem  armenta  dimifit,  qui 

gregibiu  ubique  paffim  "vagantibHs  pabulam  ^r&fiat.     Senec.  de 
Benef.  1. 4.  c»  6. 

poffefs 


Chap.  Xr,  of  Anhnah.  \Z\ 

pofTcls  the  terraqueous  Globe;  on  the  dry  Landj 
and  in  the  Sea  and  Waters ;  in  the  torrid  and  fro- 
zen Zones,  as  well  as  the  temperate.  That  the 
temperate  Climates,  or  at  Icall  the  fertile  X'ulleys, 
and  rich  and  plentiful  Regions  of  the  Earth,  Ihoiild 
afford  Subfillence  to  many  Animals,  may  appear  Icfs 
wonderful  perhaps:  But  that  in  all  other  the  molb 
likely  Places  for  Supplies  fuHicient  lood  fliould  be 
afforded  to  fuch  a  prodigious  Number,  and  fo  great 
Variety  of  Bcalls,  Birds,  F'ilhes  and  Infcftsi  is  ow- 
ing to  that  Being,  who  hath  as  wifely  adapted  their 
Bodies  to  their  Place  and  Food,  as  well  as  carefully 
provided  Food  for  their  Subfiltencc  there. 

But  I  iliall  leave  this  Confidcration,  becaufe  it 
will  be  illullrated  under  the  following  Points  >  and 
proceed, 

II.  To  confider  the  Adjuflment  of  the  Qiiantity 
of  Food,  in  Proportion  to  the  Eaters.  In  all  Pla- 
ces there  \^  generally  enough  ;  nay,  fuch  a  Suffici- 
ency, as  may  be  llyled  a  Plenty  j  but  not  fuch  a  Su- 
perfluity, as  to  walle  and  corrupt,  and  thereby  an- 
noy the  World.  But  that  which  is  paiticularly  re- 
markable here,  is,  that  among  the  great  Variety  of 
Foods,  the  moft  ufeful  is  the  moil  plentiful,  moll 
univerlal,  eai'ielt  propagated,  and  moll:  patient  of 
Weather,  and  other  Injuries.  As  the  herbaceous 
Eaters,  (for  Inllance)  are  many,  and  devour  much ; 
io  the  dryland  Surface  we  find  every  where  almolt 
naturally  carpeted  over  with  Grafs,  and  other  agree- 
able wholfome  Plants;  propagating  thcmfelves  in  a 
Manner  every  where,  and  fcarcely  deilroyable  by 
the  Weather,  the  Plough,  or  any  Art.  So  like  wile 
for  Grain,  cfpecially  fuch  as  is  moll  ufeful,  how  ea- 
fily  is  it  cultivated,  and  what  a  large  Increafe  doth 
it  produce  ?  Plinfi  Example  of  Whc^t  (^)i  is  a  fufHc  j  • 

ent 


(^)  Tritico  nihil  efi  ftrtiUus :  hoc  ei   natura   tribuit,  quoniarn 
^9  tnnxif^t  alat  bommita ;    uipote  cum  t  tnodioy   p  fit  a/tum 

N  3  Joluvi 


1 2%  Of  the  Food  Book  IV, 

cnt  Inftance  in  this  Matter  j  which  (as  that  curi- 
ous Heathen  obferves)  being  principally  ufeful  to 
the  Support  of  Man,  is  eafily  propagated,  and  in 
great  Plenty :  And  an  happy  Faculty  that  is  of  it, 
ihat  it  can  bear  either  extreams  of  Heat  or  Cold, 
fo  as  fcarce  to  refufe  any  Clime. 

III.  Another  wife  Provifion  the  Creator  hath  made 
relating  to  the  Food  of  Animals,  is,  that  various 
Animals  delight  in  various  Food  ic)-,  fome  in  Grafs 
and  Herbs }  fome  in  Grain  and  Seeds;  fome  in 
Flefh ;  fome  in  Infe61:s5  fome  in  this  (<^),  fome  in 
that;  fome  more  delicate  and  nice;  fome  voracious 
and  catching  at  any  Thing.  If  all  delighted  in,  or 
fubiifted  only  with  one  Sort  of  Food,  there  would 
nor  be  iufficient  for  allj  but  every  Variety  chufing 
various  Food,  and  perhaps  abhorring  that  which  o- 
thers  like,  is  a  great  and  wife  Means  that  every  Kind 
hath  enough,  and  oftentimes  fomewhat  to  fpare. 

It  deferves  to  be  reckoned  as  an  hOi  of  the  di- 
vine Appointment,   that  what  is  wholefome  Food 


folum ——-'  ji^o  modii  reddantur.  Mifit  D.  Auguflo  procura- 
tor —  ex  uno  grano  fvix  credibile  d'tilti)  400  paucis  minus  ger- 
mina.  Mifit  ^  Neroni  fimilher  340  ftipuloi  ex  uno  grano. 
Plin.  Nat.  Hift.  I.  t8.  c.  10. 

(c)  Sed  ilia  quanta  benignitas  Nature,  quod  tarn  mult  a  ad 
vefcendum,  tarn  varia,  tarn  jucunda  gignit :  neque  ea  uno 
tempore  anni,  at  femper  &  novitate  dele^emur  o"  copia.  Cic. 
de  Nat.  Deor.  1.  z.  c.  53. 

(d)  Szvammtrdam  obferves  of  the  Ephemeron  Worms,  that 
their  Food  is  Clay,  and  that  they  make  their  Cells  of  the 
fame.  Upon  which  occafion  he  faith  of  Moths,  that  eat 
Wool  and  Fur,  There  are  two  Things  very  confiderable,  I.  That 
the  Cells  they  make  to  themfelves,  wherein  they  live,  and  with 
VJhich  (as  their  Houfe,  Tortoife-like)  they  move  from  Place  to 
place,  they  make  of  the  Matter  next  at  hand,  2.  That  they 
feed  alfo  on  the  fame,  therefore  when  you  find  their  Cells,  or 
rather  Coats  or  Cafes  to  hs  made  of  yellow,,  green,  blue  ar 
black  Cloth,  you  will  alfo  find  their  Dung  of  the  fame  Colour. 
Iwammerd.  Ephem.  vita.    PublKhed  by  Pr.  Jji/om,  Chap.  3. 


Chap.  XI.  of  Animals.  183 

to  one,  is  naufeous,  and  as  a  Poyfon  to  another  j 
what  is  a  fvveet  and  delicate  Smell  and  Tarte  to 
one,  is  foetid  and  loathCome  to  another  :  Ry  which 
Means  all  the  Provifions  the  Globe  affords  are 
well  difpos'd  of.  Not  only  every  Creature  is  well 
provided  for,  but  a  due  Confumption  is  made  of 
thofe  Things  that  otherwifc  would  encumber  the 
World,  lie  in  the  Way,  corrupt,  rot,  (link  and  an- 
noy, inftead  of  cheriHiing  and  refrefhing  it.  For 
our  moil  ufeful  Plants,  Grain  and  Fruits,  would 
mould  and  rot  j  thofe  Beads,  Fowls  and  Fiflics, 
which  are  reckoned  among  the  greatcil  Dainties, 
would  turn  to  Carrion,  and  poyfon  us:  Nay,  thofe 
Animals  which  are  become  Carrion,  and  many  o- 
ther  Things  that  are  noyfome,  both  on  the  Dry- 
land, and  in  the  Waters,  would  be  great  Annoy- 
ances, and  breed  Difcafts,  was  it  not  for  the  Pro- 
vilion  which  the  infinite  Ordcrer  of  the  World 
hath  made,  by  caufing  thefe  Things  to  be  fwcet, 
pleafint,  and  wholfome  Food  to  fomc  Creature 
or  other,  in  the  Place  where  thofe  Things  fall;  To 
Dogs,  Ravens,  and  other  voracious  Animals,  for 
Inrtance,  on  the  Earth  •,  and  to  rapacious  FiHies, 
and  other  Creatures  inhabiting  the  Waters. 

Thus  is  the  World  in  fome  Meafure  kept  fweet 
and  clean,  and  at  the  fame  Time,  divers  Species  of 
Animals  fupply'd  with  convenient  Food.  Which 
Providence  of  God,  particularly  in  the  Supplies 
afforded  the  Ravens^  is  divers  Times  taken  Notice 
of  in  the  Scriptures  {e)  \  but  whether  for  the  Rea- 
fons  now  hinted,  or  any  other  fpecial  Rcafons,  I 
{hall  not  enquire.  Thus  our  Saviour,  Luke  xii.  24. 
Confider  the  Ravens;  for  they  neither  fow  nor  reap^ 
^hicb  neither  have  Storehoiifey  nor  Barn,  and  God 


(9)  Jch  xxxviii.  41.     pfal  cxlvii.  9. 

N  4  Udcth 


184  Of  the  Food  Book  IV. 

feedeth  them.  It  is  a  manifcfl  Argument  of  the 
divine  Care  and  Providence,  in  fupplying  the 
World  with  Food  and  Neceflaries,  that  the  Ra- 
*vens^  accounted  as  unclean,  and  little  regarded  by 
Man,  deftitute  of  Stores,  and  that  live  by  Acci- 
dents, by  what  falleth  here  and  there  5  that  fuch  a 
Bud,  I  fay,  fhould  be  provided  with  fufficient 
Foodj  efpecially  if  that  be  true,  which  Ariflo- 
tle  (/),  Pliny  (^),  and  JElian  (^),  report  of  their 
unnatural  Affe6i:ion  and  Cruelty  to  their  Young : 
*'  That  they  expel  them  their  Nefts  as  foon  as 
*'  they  can  fly,  and  then  drive  them  out  of  the 
.^'  Country". 

Thus  having  confidered  the  wife  Appointment 
of  the  Creator,  in  fuiting  the  Variety  of  Food,  to 
Variety  of  Animals :  Let  us  in  the 

IV.  Place,  Take  a  View  of  the  peculiar  Food, 
which  particular  Places  afford  to  the  Creatures  in- 
habiting therein. 

It  hath  been  already  obferved  (/),  that  every 
Place  on  the  Surface  of  the  terraqueous  Globe,  is; 
ilocked  with  proper  Animals,  whofe  Organs  of 
Life  and  Aftion  are  curioufly  adapted  to  each  re- 
fpeclive  Place.  Now  it  is  an  admirable  A6t  of  the 
divine  Providence,  that  every  Place  affords  a 
proper  Food  to  all  the  living  Creatures  therein. 
All  the  various  Regions  of  the  World,  the  different 
Climates  {k)^    the   varioiis   Soils,    the  Seas,    the 

Watersjj 


(/)  Arifiot.  /.  9.  <:.  31.  Uijl.  Animal. 

(S)  Pi-jny  affirms  thjs  of  the  Crozv  as  well  as  Ravsn ;  C«- 
i'sr«  omnes  [i.  e.  Cornices]  ex  eodem  genere  pellunt  nidis  pullos, 
AC.  volare  cogunty  ficut  c  Corvi,  qui  — —  robufios  fuos  foetm 
fugant  longms.     Nat.  Hift.  1.  10.  C.  12,. 

(h)  Far.  Htji. 

(i)  Chap.c,. 

ik)  Admiranda  Nature  difpenfutio  «/?,  ut  aliter,  alioqu^  mo- 
SfO^  tempore^  cr  indujiria  colatur  terra  feptentrionalis,  alitet^ 
^Hihiop^i  &:c.    ^oaA  jf^uil<inargsy  hoc  certHm  efi,  in  fUrif- 


Chap.Xf.  Of  An'imah.  i8^ 

Waters,  nay  our  very  Putrcfa6lions,  and  mofl:  na- 
fty  Places  about  the  Globe,  as  they  arc  inhabited  by 
fome  or  other  Animal,  fo  they  produce  fonic  pro- 
per Food  or  other,  affording  a  coinlortablc  Subli- 
ilence  to  the  Creatures  living  there.  I  might  for 
Inftanccs  (/)  of  this,  bring  the  great  \'ancty  of 
Herbs,  Fruits  and  Grains  on  the  Farth,  the  large 
Swarms  of  Infcfts  in  the  Air,  with  every  other 
Food  of  the  Creatures  redding  in  the  Earth,  or 
flying  in  the  Air.  But  I  fliall  ilop  at  the  IVaters^ 
becaufc  the  Pfalmifl^  in  the  fore-cited  civ^'^  Pfalnty 
fpeaks  with  relation  to  the  efpccial  Provifion  for 
the  Inhabitants  of  the  Waters  j  and  alio  by  reafon 
that  nvany  Land  Animals  have  their  chief  Mainte- 
nance from  thence. 


que  agris  Vefirogothorinn,  parte  ohjecia  Alcridtoiialt  pla^x,  Hor- 
(leum  jfatio  36  Diet  urn  a  jemhie  projetto  tnattiruni  cotUgt,  hoc 
eft  a  Jine  'Junii  ufque  medium  Auguftiy  aliquando  celerius.  En 
ttamqm  maturitas  ex  foli  naturd,  a'er'ifque  clementtd,  ac  hu~ 
more  lapitlorum  fovtnte  radices,  Soleque  torrente,  necejjurib  pro- 
i/e?iit,  ut  ita  nafcatur,  ac  maturetnr,  talefque  fpicA  fex  ordi- 
Ties  in  numcro  arijld  habent.  OI.  Mag.  Hill.  1.  15.  c.  8.  Pra- 
ta  (jT  pajcua  tanta  luxuriant  gratninuvi  iic/ertate  ac  dizciji" 
tatty  ut  neceJJ'um  fit  inde  arcere  jumenta,  ne  nimio  hcriamtn 
eft*  crepent,  6cc.  Id.  ib,  1.  19.  c.  36. 

(/)  AiTiong  the  many  noble  C'onirivances  for  Food,  I  can- 
not but  attribute  that  univerl'al  Aliment,  Bread,  to  the  Reve- 
lation, or  at  lealt  the  Infpiration  of  the  Creator  and  ConTcr- 
vator  of  Mankind  ;  not  only  becaufe  it  is  a  Food  ulcd  in  al!, 
or  moll  Parts  of  the  World  ;  but  efpecialiy  becaule  it  is  of 
incomparable  life  in  the  great  Work  of  Digellion,  greatly 
aiTillmg  the  Ferment,  or  whatever  caufes  the  Digcftion  ot 
the  Stomach.  Of  which  take  this  Ex.\mplc  from  the  ni/ble 
Mr.  Boyle.  *•  He  extraded  a  MenftruHm  from  llread  alone, 
"  that  would  work  on  Bodies  more  Compa(5l  than  many 
«'  hard  Minerals,  nay   even   on  Glafs  it  fclf,  and  do   many 

"  Things  that  Aqua-foitii  could  not  do Yet  by  no 

*'  means  was  this  lb  corrufive  a  Liquor  as  Aq.  fort,  or  .is  the 
V  other  acid  Menflruum".  Vid.  the  mgenious  and  Fam.d 
Dr.  Harris's  Lex.  Tech.  verbo  Menjirunm,  where  the  w.iV  ui 
preparing  it  may  be  met  with. 

Now 


lU  Of  the  Food  Book  IV. 

Now  one  would  think,  that  the  "Waters  were  a 
very  unlikely  Element  to  produce  Food  for  fo  great 
a  Number  of  Creatures,  as  have  their  Subfiftence 
from  thence.  But  yet  how  rich  a  Promptuary  is 
it,  not  only  to  large  multitudes  of  FiHies,  but  alfo 
to  many  amphibious  Quadrupeds,  Infefts,  Reptiles, 
and  Birds !  From  the  largeft  Leviathan^  which  the 
Pfalmifi  faith  (m)  playeth  in  the  Seas^  to  the  fmal- 
left  Mite  in  the  Lakes  and  Ponds,  all  are  plentiful- 
ly provided  for  J  as  is  manifefl  from  the  Fatnefs  of 
their  Bodies,  and  the  Gaiety  of  their  Afpe6t  and 
A61:ions. 

And  the  Provifion  which  the  Creator  hath  made 
for  this  Service  in  the  Waters  is  very  obfervable ; 
not  only  by  the  Germination  of  divers  aquatick 
Plants  there,  but  particularly  by  appointing  the 
Waters  to  be  the  Matrix  of  many  Animals,  par- 
ticularly of  many  of  the  Tnfe6t-Kind,  not  only  of 
fuch  as  are  peculiar  to  the  Waters,  but  alfo  of  ma- 
ny appertaining  to  the  Air  and  the  Land,  who,  by 
their  near  Alliance  to  the  Waters,  delight  to  be 
about  them,  and  by  that  means  become  a  Prey, 
and  plentiful  Food  to  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Wa- 
ters. And  befides  thefe,  what  prodigious  Shoals 
do  we  find  of  minute  Animals,  even  fometimes  difco- 
louring  the  Waters  {n)\  Of  thefe  (not  only  in 
the  Water,  but  in  the  Air  and  on  Land)  I  have 
always  thought  there  was  feme  more  than  ordi- 
nary 


(m)  Pfal.  civ.  26. 

{n)  The  Infeds  that  for  the  moft  part  difcolour  the  Wa- 
ters, are  the  finall  Infedtsof  the  Shrimp-kind,  called  by  Swam^ 
merdatn,  Pulex  a^uaticus  arborefcens.  Thefe  I  have  often 
feen  fo  numerous  in  ftagnating  Waters  in  the  Summer- 
Months,  that  they  have  changed  the  Colour  of  the  Waters 
to  a  pale  or  deep  Red,  fometimes  a  Yellow,  according  to 
the  Colour  they  vi'ere  of.  Of  this  Swammerdatn  hath  a  pret- 
ty Story  told  him  by  Dr.  Florence  Schuyl,  viz.  Se  aliquand» 
StMd'iis  intentumt  ntagm  quodam  &  ho^rifico  ftmore  fuijj'e  tur- 


Chap.  XI.  of  Animals.  187 

nary  Ufe  intended  by  the  All-wife  Creator.  And 
having  bent  many  of  my  Obfervations  that  way,  I 
have  evidently  found  it  accordingly  to  be.  For  be 
they  never  fo  numberlefs  or  minute,  thofe  Animals 
ferve  for  Food  to  fome  Creatures  or  other.  Even 
thofe  Animalcules  in  the  Waters,  difcovcrablc  only 
with  good  Microfcopes,  are  a  Repall:  to  others 
there,  as  I  have  often  with  no  lefs  Admiration  than 
Pleafure  feen  io). 


hatutn,  CT*  ftmul  ad  cauj'am  ejus  inquirendam  excitatum  ;  "ve- 
ruin  Je  vix  eum  in  finem  jurrexifje,  (km  Anctlla.  ejus  p'xm  ex- 
anitnis  adcurreret,  c  tnitlto  cutn  jtngultu  refcrret,  cmnem  Lug~ 
dtin't  [Batavorum]  aquam  ejj'e  mutatam  in  fatiguinem.  Tlic 
Caufe  of  which,  upon  Examination  he  found  to  be  only 
from  the  numerous  Swarms  of  thofe  Pulices.  V.  Swamm. 
Hift.  Infed.  p.  70. 

The  Caufe  of  this  great  Concourfe,  and  Appearance  of 
thofe  little  Infecf^s,  1  have  frequently  obferved  to  he  to  per- 
form their  Coit ;  which  is  commonly  about  the  latter  end  of 
May,  and  in  "June.  At  that  Time  they  are  very  venereous, 
frillcing  and  catching  at  one  another ;  and  many  of  the:n 
conjomed  TaiJ  to  Tail,  with  their  Bellies  inclined  one  to- 
wards another. 

At  this  Time  alfo  they  change  their  Skin  or  Slough;  which 
I  conceive  their  rubbing  againft  one  another  mightily  pro- 
moteth.  And  what  if  at  this  Time  they  change  their  Quar- 
ters.^   V'id.  Book  Vlll.  Chap.  4.  Note  (/). 

Thefe  fmall  Infedls,  as  they  are  very  numerous,  fo  are 
Food  to  many  Water-Animals.  I  have  fcen  not  only  Ducks 
(hovel  them  up  as  they  fwim  along  the  Waters,  but  divers  In- 
fe(fts  alfo  devour  them,  particularly  fome  of  the  middle- iizcd 
SqudU  aquaticA,  which  arc  very  voracious  Infers. 

(0)  Befides  the  Puiues\z?i.  mentioned,  there  are  in  the  Wa- 
ters other  Animalcules  very  numerous,  which  are  Laice  vi- 
fible  without  a  Microfcope.  In  xMay ,  and  the  Summer 
Months,  the  green  Scum  on  the  top  of  itagnating  Waters,  is 
nothing  elfe  but  prodigious  Numbers  of  thefe  Animalcules: 
So  is  likewife  the  green  Colour  in  them,  when  all  the  Water 
feems  green.  Which  Animalcules,  in  all  Probability,  fervc 
for  Food  to  the  PuUces  Aquatici,  and  other  the  minuter  Ani- 
mals of  the  Waters.  Of  which  I  gave  a  pregnant  Inflancc 
in  one  of  the  K^mphi  of  Gnats,  to  my  Friend  the  late  ad- 
piirable  Mr.  Ray,  which  he  was  pleafed  to  publifli  in  the  laft 
jp^'Jition  of  his  Wifdorr  of  God  m  tht  Creation,  p.  430. 

■  Put 


j88  Of  the  Food  BooklV, 

But  now  the  ufual  Objedion  is,  that  Neceflity 
maketh  Ufe  {p).  Animals  mud  be  fed,  and  they 
make  ufe  of  what  they  find :  In  the  defolate  Regi- 
ons, and  in  the  Waters,  for  Inftance,  they  feed 
upon  what  they  can  come  at  j  but,  when  in  greater 
Plenty,  they  pick  and  chufe. 

But  this  Objedion  hath  been  already  in  fome 
meafure  anfwered  by  what  hath  been  faidj  which 

plainly 


(^)  Nil  ade))  quoniam  natum'ft  In  Corpore,  ut  uti 
PoJJ'emus,  fed  quod  natumjiy  id  procreat  ufum. 

And  aftc'wards, 
Propterea  captiur  Cihus,  ut  fuffidciat  artus, 
Et  recreet  vtre'ts  interdatus,  atque  patentem 
Per  membra  ac  'uenas  ut  atnorem  obturet  edend'i. 

And  after  the  fame  manner  he  difcourfeth  of  Thirft,  and 
divers  other  Things.     Vid.  Lucret.  /.  4.  jJ'.  831,  e/f. 

Againft  this  Opinion  of  the  Epicureans,  Galen  ingenioufly 
argues  in  his  Difcourfe  about  the  Hand,  Non  enim  Manus 
ipfi  (faith  he)  homlnem   art?s    docuerunt,  fed   Ratio.     Mantis 

autein  ipf&  funt  artium  or^ana  ;  ficut  L'^ra  mufici Lyra 

tnufcam  non  docuit,  fed  efi  ipfius  artifex  per  earn,  qua  pr&di- 
tus  efi,  Rationem  :  agere  autem  non  potefi  ex  arte  abfque  or^ 
gams,  ita  c?'  una  qudibet  antma  facultates  qua/dam  ^.  fua  ip- 
Jius  fubfiantid  obtinet,  ———  Glnod  autem  corporis  particuU  ani- 
mam  non  impellunt,  ——  mamfefte  videre  licet,  ft  animalia  re- 
cl'ns  nata  confideres,  qu£  quidem  prius  agere  conantur,  quam 
perfeclas  habeant  particulas.  Ego  namquc  Bovis  "vitulum  cor- 
nibus  petere  conantem  f&penumero  vrdi,  antequam  ei  nata  ef- 
fent  cornua  ;  Et  pullum  Equi  caleitrantemj  6cc.  Omne  enim 
animal  fuA  ipftus  Anim&  facultates,  ac  in  quos  tifu-s  partes  fu& 
polleant  maxim^e,  nullo  doiiore,  pr<efentit.  — —  Qud  igitur  ra- 
tione  did  potefi,  animalia  partium  ufus  a  partibus  doceri,  cum 
cr  antequa??^  illas  habeant,  hoc  cognofcere  -videantttr  ?  Si  igi- 
tur Ova  tria  acccpcris,  unum  AquiU,  alierum  Anatis,  reli- 
quum  Serpentis,  c"  calore  modico  foveris,  animaltaque  exclufe- 
ris ;  ilia  quidem  alts  'volare  conantia,  antequam  volare  pofiint ; 
hoc  autem  revolvi  videbis,  c^  ferpere  affe^ans,  quamvis  molle 
adhuc  cj*  invalidum  fuerit.  Et  ft,  dum  perfeCia  erunt,  in 
und  cddemque  domo  nutriveris,  deinde  ad  locum  fubdialem 
dufia  emiferis,  Aquila  quidem  ad  fublime  ;  Anas  autem  in 
paludem  ;  —  Serpens  'vero  fub  terra  irrepet  —  Animalia  quidem 
rnihi  videntur  Naturd  magis  quam  Ratione  artem  aliquam  [^ejcf 
*/>;*  artificiofa]  exercere:  Apes  fingers  alveohs,  &c.  Galen  de 
iifuPart  1.  c,  3. 


Chap.  XL  of  Animals.  t  ^ 

plainly  argues  Defign,  and  a  fupcr-intending  WiP- 
dom.  Power  and  Providence  in  this  fpecial  Bufincls 
of  Food.  Particularly  the  different  Delight  of  di- 
vers Animals  in  different  Food,  fo  that  wiiat  is 
naufeous  to  one,  fliould  be  Dainties  to  another, 
is  a  manifell:  Argument,  that  the  Allotment  of 
Food  is  not  a  Matter  of  mere  Chance,  but  en- 
tailed to  the  very  Conftitution  and  Nature  of  A- 
nimals  j  that  they  chufc  this,  and  rcfufe  that,  not 
by  Accident,  or  Neceility,  but  bccaufc  the  one  is 
a  proper  Food,  agreeable  to  their  Conllitution,  and 
fo  appointed  by  the  infinite  Contriver  of  their  Bo- 
dies i  and  the  other  is  difagreeablc  and  injurious  to 
them. 

But  all  this  Objection  will  be  found  frivolous, 
and  the  Wifdom  and  Defign  of  the  great  Creator 
will  demonibatively  appear,  if  we  take  a  Survey, 

V.  Of  the  admirable  and  curious  Apparatus  in 
all  Animals,  made  for  the  Gathering,  Preparing  and 
Digellion  of  their  Food.  From  the  very  firlt  En- 
trance, to  the  utmolt  Exit  of  the  Food,  we  find 
every  Thing  contrived,  made  and  difpofcd  with 
the  utmofl  Dexterity  and  Art,  and  curioufly  adapt- 
ed to  the  Place  the  Animal  liveth  in,  and  the  Food 
ic  is  to  be  nounflicd  with. 

Let  us  begin  with  the  Mouth.  And  this  we  find, 
in  every  Species  of  Animals,  nicely  conformable 
to  the  V>{i:  of  fuch  a  Part  >  neatly  fized  and  Ihapcd 
for  the  catching  of  Prey,  for  the  gathering  or  re- 
ceiving Food  (^),    for  the  Formation  of  Speech, 

(^)  Alia  dent'ibui  prs.da.ntur,  alia  unguibits,  alia  rojlri  ad- 
uncuate  carpunt,  alia  latitudine  [ejuldcm]  ruunty  alia  acu- 
t/iine  excavant,  alia  jugunt,  alia  lambunt,  forhint,  munduntf 
vorant.  Kec  nunor  varietas  in  Pedum  vjimjhrioy  ut  rapiant, 
dijlrahant,  teneant,  premant,  pendeant,  tcllurern  [cahtrt  »oi% 
cep/tiT  i'lm.  Nat.  Hilt.  I  lo.  c.  71, 

and 

i. 


19^  Of  Animals  Mouths.        Book  IV: 

and  every  other  fuch  like  Ufe  {r).  In  Tome  Crea- 
tures it  is  wide  and  large,  in  fome  little  and  nar- 
row: in  fome  with  a  deep  Incifure  up  into  the 
Head  (/"),  for  the  better  catching  and  holding  of 
Prey,  and  more  eafy  Comminution  of  hard,  large 
and  troubleiome  Food  3  in  others  with  a  much 
Ihorter  Incifure,  for  the  gathering  and  holding  of 
herbaceous  Food. 

In   InfeEis  it  is  very  notable.     In  fome  forcipat- 
ed  J  to  catch  hold  and  tear  their  Prey  (?).     In  fome 

acu- 


(r)  Becaufe  it  would  be  tedious  to  reckon  up  the  Bones, 
Ghnds,  Mufcles,  and  other  Parts  belonging  to  the  Mouth, 
it  (hall  fuffice  to  obferve,  that,  for  the  various  Services  of 
Man's  Mouth,  befidss  the  Mufcles  in  common  with  other 
Parts,  there  are. five  Pair,  and  one  fingle  one  proper  to  the 
Lips  only,  as  Dr.  Gibfon  reckons  them  :  But  my  mofi:  dih- 
gent  and  curious  Friend  the  late  Mr.  Covjper,  difcovered  a 
iixth  Fair.  And  accordingly  Dr.  Drake  reckons  fix  Pair,  and 
one  Tingle  one  proper  to  the  Lips,  /.  3.  c.  13. 

(/_)  Galen  deferves  to  be  here  confulted,  who  excellently 
argues  againit  the  cafual  Concourfe  of  the  Atoms  of  Epicu^ 
rus  and  Afdefiades,  from  the  provident  and  wife  Formation 
of  the  Mouths  of  Animals,  and  their  Teeth  anfwerable 
therero.  In  Man,  his  Mouth  without  a  deep  Incifure,  with 
only  one  canine  Tooth  on  a  fide,  and  flat  Nails,  becaufe, 
ftith  he,  Hic  Natura  certo  fciebat,  fe  animal  manfuetum  ac 
civile  ejfingere,  cm  robur  CT'  'vires  ejfent  ex  fapientid,  non  ex 
corporis  Jortitudine.  But  for  Lions,  Wolfs  and  Dogs,  and  all 
Inch  as  are  called  Ka^piosg^J'ovTcs,  (or  having  ftiarp,  ferrated 
Teeth)  their  Mouths  are  large,  and  deep  cut ;  Teeth  ftrong 
and  (harp,  and  their  Nails  Iharp,  large,  ftrong  and  round, 
accommodated  to  holding  and  tearing.  Vid.  Galen.  deUf.Part. 
I.  II.  c.  9. 

(t)  Among  Inre<fts  the  SqttilU  aquatica,  as  they  ar6  very 
rapacious,  fo  are  accordingly  provided  for  it:  Particularly 
the  Squilla  aquatica  maxima  recurva  (as  I  call  it)  who  hath 
fomevvhat  terrible  in  its  very  Afpeft,  and  in  its  Pofture  in 
the  Water,  efpecially  its  Mouth,  which  is  armed  with  long, 
fliup  Hooks,  with  which  it  boldly,  and  greedily  catcheth 
any  thing  in  the  Waters,  even  one's  Fingers,  When  they 
h.Ave  feized  their  Prey,  they  will  fo  tenacioufly  hold  it  with 
their  forcipated  Mouth,  that  they   will  not  part  therewith, 

even 


Chap.TX.         Of  Animals  Mouths.  191 

aculeatcd,  to  pierce  and  wound  Animals  («),  and 
fuck  their  Blood.  And  in  others  fbongly  riggtj 
with  Jaws  and  Teeth,  to  gnaw  and  fcrapc  out  their 
Food,  to  carry  Burdens  {^m)  to  perforate  the  Earth, 
yea  the  hardelt  Wood,  yea  even  Stones  themfelvcs, 


even  when  they  are  taken  out  of  the  Waters,  and  jumbled 
about  in  one's  Hand.  I  have  admired  at  their  peculiar  way 
of  taking  in  their  Food;  which  is  done  by  piercing  their 
Prey  with  their  Forcifes  (which  are  hollow)  and  lucking  the 
Juice  thereof  through  them. 

The  Squilla  here  mentioned,  is  the  iiift  and  fecond  in 
Moufet's  Thcat.  Infe6l.  I.  i.  f.  37. 

(mj  For  an  Inihnce  of  Infcds  endued  with  a  Spear,  I 
fliall,  for  its  Peculiarity,  pitch  upon  one  of  the  fmaileft,  if 
not  the  very  fmalleft  of  all  the  Gnat-kind,  which  1  call,  Cu- 
lex  minimus  nigricans  maculatus  fanguifuga.  Among  us  in 
Ejfex,  they  are  called  Nidiots,  by  MouJJet  Midges.  It  is  a- 
bout  Y-r  of  an  Inch,  or  fomevvhat  more  long,  with  fliorc 
jintenn£y  plain  in  the  Female,  in  the  Male  tcather'd,  fome- 
what  like  a  Bottle-Brulh.  It  is  fpotted  with  blackiOi  Spots, 
efpecially  on  the  Wings,  which  extend  a  little  beyond  the 
Body.  It  comes  from  a  little  (lender  Eel-like  Worm,  of  a 
dirty  white  Colour,  Iwimming  in  ftagnating  Waters  by  a 
wrigling  Motion  ;  as  in  Tig.  s'. 

Its  Aurelia  is  fmall,  with  a  black  Head,  little  iVvort  Horns, 
a  fpotted,  flender,  rough  Belly,  Vi,l.  Tig.  6.  It  lies  quietly 
on  the  top  of  the  Water,  now  and  then  gently  wagging  it 
felt  this  way  and  that. 

Thefe  Gnats  are  greedy  Blood-Suckers,  ^nd  very  trouble- 
fome,  where  numerous,  as  they  are  in  fome  Places  near  the 
Thames,  particularly  in  the  Breach- Waters  th.U  have  lately 
befallen  near  us,  in  the  Parifti  of  Dagenham;  where  I  found 
them  fo  vexatious,  that  I  was  glad  to  get  out  of  thofe  MarOics. 
Yea,  I  have  feen  Horfes  fo  ftung  with  them,  that  they  have 
had  Drops  of  Blood  all  over  their  Bodies,  where  they  were 
wounded  by  them. 

I  have  given  a  Figure  (in  Tig.  7.)  and  more  particular 
Defcription  of  the  Gnats,  becaul'e,  although  it  be  common, 
it  is  no  where  taken  notice  of  by  any  Author  I  know,  ex- 
cept Mouffet,  who,  "I  fuppofe,  means  thele  Gnats,  which  he 
calls  Midges,  c.  13.  p.  8i. 

{w)  Hornets  and  iVaJfs  have  ftrong  Jaws,  toothed,  where- 
with they  can  dig  into  Fruits,  for  their  Food  ;  as  alfo  gnaw 
and  fcrape  Wood ,  whole  Mouthfuls  of  which  they  carry 
away  to  make  their  Ccnibs.     Vtd.  injr.  Chap,  13.  Nott  (f). 

for 


191  Of  Animals  Mouths.     Book  IV. 

for  Houfes  (x)  to  themfelves,  and  Nefts  for  their 
young. 

And  kftly,  ift  Birds  it  is  no  lefs  remarkable.  In 
the  firll  Place,  it  is  neatly  Ihaped  for  piercing  the 
Air,  and  making  Way  for  the  Body  thro'  the  airy 
Regions.  In  the  next  Place,  it  is  hard  and  horny, 
which  is  a  good  Supplement  for  the  want  of  Teeth, 
and  caufeth  the  Bill  to  have  the  Ufe  and  Service  of 
the  Hand.  It's  hooked  Form  is  of  great  Ufe  to 
the  rapacious  Kind  (jf),  in  catching  and  holding 
their  Prey,  and  in  the  Comminution  thereof  by 
tearing  3  to  others  it  is  no  lefs  ferviceable  to  their 
Climbing,  as  well  as  neat  and  nice  Comminution 
of  their  Food  {z).  Its  extraordinary  Length  and 
Slendernefs  is  very  ufeful  to  fome,  to  fearch  and 
grope  for  their  Food  in  moorifli  Places  iaa)-y  as 
its  Length  and  Breadth  is  to  others  to  hunt  and 


(x)  Monfietir  de  la  Voye  tells  of  an  ancient  Wall  of  Free- 
Stone  in  the  Benediilines-Abby  ztCaen  in  Normandy ^  fo  eaten 
with  Worms,  that  one  may  run  ones  Hand  into  moft  of  tha 
Cavities:  That  thefe  Worms  are  fmall  and  black,  lodging  in  a 
greyilli  Shell,  that  they  have  large  flatti(h  Heads,  a  large 
Mouth,  with  four  black  Jaws,  CT'f.  Phtl.  Tranf.  No.  18. 

(}')  Pro  lis  [_  Labris ]  cornea  (^'  acuta  Volncr'ihus  Roflra. 
Kadcm  rapto  -viventibus  adunca  :  colletlo,  re^a  :  herhas  ruenti- 
hus  innmnque  lata,  ut  Suum  gener't.  Jumentis  vice  manus  ad 
coUigcnda  pabula  :  ora  apertiora  laniatu  viventlbus.  Plin.  Nat* 
Hilt.  1.  II.  c.  37. 

(z.)  Parrots  liave  their  Bills  nicely  adapted  to  thefe  Ser- 
vices, being  hooked,  for  climbing  and  reaching  what  they 
have  occalion  for;  and  the  lower  Jaw  being  compeatly  fitted 
to  the  Hooks  of  the  upper,  they  can  as  minutely  break  their 
Food,  as  other  Animals  do  with  their  Teeth. 

{aa)  Thui  in  Woodcocks,  Snipes,  zsrc.  who  hunt  for  Worms 
in  moorifli  Ground,  and,  as  Mr.  Willnghby  faith,  live  alfo  on 
the  fatty  unctuous  Humour  they  Uick  out  of  the  Earth.  So  alfo 
the  Bills  of  Curlews,  and  many  other  Sea-Fowl,  are  very- 
long,  to  enable  them  to  hunt  for  the  Worms,  z^c.  in  this 
iiands  on  the  Sca-ft:o:e,  which  they  frequent. 


featch 


chap.  XI.     Of  Animals  Mouths.  193 

fcarch  in  muddy  Places  {bb) :  And  the  contrary 
Form,  namely,  a  thick,  fhort,  and  fliarp-cdg'd 
Bill,  is  as  ufcflil  to  other  Birds,  who  have  occalion 
to  husk  and  flay  the  Grains  they  fwallow.  But  it 
Would  be  endlels,  and  tedious,  to  reckon  up  all  the 
various  Shapes,  and  commodious  Mechanirm  oi 
all  i  the  Sharpnefs  and  Strength  of  thole  who  have 
Occafion  to  perforate  Wood  and  Shells  {cc)\  the 
Slendernefs  and  Neatnefsof  ("uch  aspick  up  Imall  In- 
fects i  the  Crofs-form  of  fuch  as  break  up  Fruits  {^dd)  j 
the  comprcfl'ed  Form  of  others  (^^),  with  many  o- 
ther  curious  and  artificial  Forms,  all  fuittd  to  the 
Way  of  Living,  and  peculiar  Occafions  of  the 
feveral  Species  of  Birds.  Thus  much  for  the 
Mouth. 
Let  us  next  take  a  fhort  View  of  the  T!eeth  {ff)^ 

In 


{bb)  Ducks,  Geefe,  and  divers  others,  have  fuch  long  broad 
Bills,  to  quaffer  and  hunt  in  Water  and  Mud;  to  which  we 
may  reckon  the  uncouth  Bill  of  the  Spoon-Bill:  but  that 
which  deferves  particular  Obfervation  in  the  Birds  named  in 
thefe  two  lalt  Notes  is,  the  Nerves  going  to  the  end  ot  their 
Bills,  enabling  them  to  difcover  their  Food  out  of  Sight; 
of  which  fee  Book.  VII.  Chap.  2.  Note  {e), 

(cc)  The  Picas  viridis,  or  Green-Woodfpite,  and  all  the 
Wood-Peckers  have  Bills,  curioufly  made  for  digging  Wood, 
ftrong,  hard,  and  fliarp.  A  neat  Ridge  runs  along  the  top 
of  the  green  Wood-  I'ccker's  Bill,  as  if  an  Artift  had  defigned 
it  for  Strength  and  Neatnefs. 

{dd)  The  LoxU,  ox  Crofi-Bill,  whofe  Bill  is  thick  and 
ftrong,  with  the  Tips  crofTing  one  another;  with  great  Rea- 
dinefs  breaks  open  Fir-cones,  Apples,  and  other  Fruit,  to 
come  at  their  Kernels,  which  arc  us  Food,  as  if  the  eroding 
of  the  Bill  was  defigned  for  this  Service. 

(ee)  The  Sea-Pie  hath  a  long,  fliarp,  narrow  Bill,  com- 
preded  fide-ways,  and  every  way  fo  well  adapted  to  the 
raifing  Limpets  from  the  Rocks  (which  are  its  chief,  if  not 
only  Foodj  that  Nature  (or  rather  the  Author  of  Nature^ 
feems  to  have  framed  it  purely  for  that  Ule. 

(//)  Thofe  Animali  which  have  Teeth  on  both  JaiVs,  bave 
tut  one  Stomach  ;  but  moftof  thofe  which  have  no  upper  Teethe 
•r  none  at  ail,  havtthrn  Stumachs;  ai  in  Btajlt,  the  paunchy 

O  tht 


394  ^f  -Animals  Mouths.      Book  IV. 

In  which  their  peculiar  Hardnefs  {g^  is  remark- 
able, their  Growth  (Joh)  alfo,  their  firm  Infertion 
and  Bandage  in  the  Gums  and  Jaws,  and  their  va- 
rious Shape  and  Strength,  fuited  to  their  various 
Occafion  and  Ufe  («)  >  the  foremoft  weak  and 
fartheil  from  the  Center,  as  being  only  Preparers 
to  the  refti  the  others  being  to  grind  and  mince, 
are  accordingly  made  ftronger,  and  placed  nearer 

the 


the.  Read,  and  the  Feck ;  and  in  all  granivorous  Birds,  the 
Crop,  the  Echinus  and  the  Gizard.  For  as  chewing  is  to  an 
eafie  Digejiion,  fo  is  fwallowing  -whole  to  that  which  is  more 
laborious.     Dr.  Grew'i  Cofmol.  Sacr.  C  5.  §.14. 

fe)  J-  Pe^er  faith,  the  Teeth  are  made  of  convolved 
Skins  hardened;  and  if  we  view  the  Grinders  of  Beer,  Hor- 
fes.  Sheep,  csrc.  We  ftjall  find  great  Reafon  to  be  of  his  Mind. 
His  Obfervations  arc,  Mirum  autem  eos  (i.  e.  Dentes)  cutn 
primum  ^  pelliculis  imbricatim  convolutis  CP*  tntico  vifcido  con- 
fiarent,  in  tantam  dirigefcere  foliditatem,  qu£  ojfa  cun£la  fupe- 

ret.     Idem  fit  etiam   in  OjficuUs  Ceraforum,  &c. Separa- 

tionefaild,  per  tnembrafias  conditur  Magma  locellis,  quos  fof- 
tnant  lamina  tcnues,  ac  duriufcuU  ad  Dentis  figttram  antea,  di" 
i/initus  compofit£.  J.  Peyer  Merycol.  1.  z.  c.  8. 

{hh)  §liti  amem  (i.  e.  Dentes)  renafcuntur,  minim'e  credendi 
funt  a  facultate  aliqud  plafticd  Brutorttm  denm  formari,  fed 
latentes  tantummodo  in  confpeclum  prodacuntur  augtnento  molis 
ex  efjiuente  fucco.     Id.  ibid, 

(ji)  From  thefe,  and  other  like  Confiderations  of  the 
Teeth,  Galen  infers,  that  they  muft  needs  be  the  Work  of 
feme  wife,  provident  Bting;  not  Chance,  nor  a  fortuitous 
Concourfe  of  Atoms.  For  the  Confirmation  of  which  he 
puts  the  Cafe,  That  fuppofe  the  order  of  the  Teeth  fhould 
have  been  inverted,  the  Grinders  fet  in  the  room  of  the  I«» 
eifors,  cT'c  (which  might  as  well  have  been,  had  not  the 
Teeth  been  placed  by  a  wife  Agent)  in  this  cafe,-  what  Ule 
would  the  Teeth  have  been  of  ?  What  Confufion  by  fuch 
a  flight  Error  in  their  Difpofal  only  ?  Upon  which  he  argues. 
At  fiquis  ehoream  hominum  32  (the  Number  of  the  Teeth) 
ordine  difpofmt,  eum  ut  hominem  induftrium  laudaremus :  curm 
"vero  Dentium  ehoream  Natura  tarn  belle  exorndrit,  nonne  ip- 
fam  quoque  laudabimtts  ?  And  then  he  goes  on  with  the  Ar- 
gument, from  the  Sockets  of  the  Teeth,  and  their  nice  fit- 
ting in  them*  which  being  no  lefs  accurately  done,  than 
what  is  done  by  a  Carpenter*  or  Stoue-Cwter,  in  fitting  a 

Tenon 


Chap.  XI.       Of  Animals  Mouths.  195- 

the  Center  of  Motion  and  Strength.  Likcwile 
their  various  Form  {kk)^  in  various  Animals  is  con- 
fiderable,  being  all  curioufly  adapted  to  the  pecu- 
liar Food  (Z/))  and  Occalions  of  the  fevcral  Species 
of  Animals  {fnm).  And  lallly,  the  temporary  De- 
fed  of  them  (««),  is  no  lefs  obfervablc  in  Children, 

and 


Tenon  into  a  Mortice,  doth  as  well  infer  the  Art  and  A£l  of 
the  wife  Maker  of  Animal  Bodies,  as  the  other  doth  the  A(fl 
and  Art  of  Man.  And  fo  he  goes  on  with  other  Arguments 
to  the  fame  Effc<fl.     Galen,  de  Uf.  Part.  I.  ir.  c.  8. 

{kk)  A  curious  Account  of  this  may  be  found  in  an  Ex- 
trafl  of  a  Letter  concerning  the  Teeth  of  divers  Animals. 
Printed  at  Paris,  in  Ai,  Vaugnion%  Compleat  Body  of  Chi- 
rurg.  Oper.  Chap,  53. 

(//)  As  it  hath  been  taken  notice  of,  that  various  Animals 
(jclight  in  various  Food  ;  fo  it  conftantly  falls  out,  that  their 
Teeth  are  accordingly  fitted  to  their  Food  ;  the  rapacious  to 
catching,  holding  and  tearing  their  Prey ;  the  herbaceous  to 
Gathering  and  Comminution  of  Vegetables :  And  fuch  as 
have  no  Teeth,  as  Birds,  their  Bill,  Craw  and  Gizard,  are 
aflTiIled  with  Stones,  to  fupply  the  defeft  of  Teeth.  But  the 
inoft  confiderable  Example  of  this  Kind  is  in  fome  Families 
of  the  Infecl-Tribes ,  as  the  Papilio-Kind,  crc.  who  have 
Teeth,  and  are  voracious,  and  live  on  tender  Vegetables  in 
their  Nytnpha,  or  Caterpillar-State,  when  they  can  only 
creep;  but  in  thei» mature  Pafdio-State,  they  have  noTeethj 
but  a  Probofcis,  or  Trunk  to  fuck  up  Honey,  (^-c.  their  Parts 
for  gathering  Food,  as  well  as  their  Food  being  changed,  as 
foon  as  they  have  Wings  to  enable  them  to  fly  to  \t. 

{mm)  It  is  remarkable  in  the  Teeth  of  Filhesj  that  in  fome 
they  are  fliarp,  as  alfo  jointed,  fo  as  to  fall  back,  the  bcttet 
to  catch  and  hold  their  Prey,  and  to  facilitate  its  Palfage  into 
the  Stomach:  So  in  others  they  are  broad  and  flat,  made  to 
break  the  Shells  of  Snails  and  Sheil-Fifli  devoured  by  them. 
Thefe  Teeth,  or  Breakers,  are  placed,  in  fome,  in  the 
Mouth;  in  fome,  in  the  Throat;  and  in  Lol>j}ers,&c.  inthtf 
Stomach  it  felf ;  in  the  bottom  of  whofe  Stomachs  are  thre« 
of  thofe  Grinders,  with  peculiar  Mufcles  to  move  them. 

(»»)  What  is  there  in  the  World  can  be  called  an  A<fl  of 
Providence  and  Defign,  if  this  temporary  Defed  of  Teeth 
be  not  fuch;  that  Children,  for  Inftancc,  (hould  have  non« 
whilft  they  are  not  able  to  ufe  them,  but  to  hurt  thcmfclvcsi 
or  the  Mother  J  and  that  at  the  very  Ae«  when  tb«Y  <^^n  tak« 

9*  H^ 


ipij  Of  Animals  Mouths.     Book  IV. 

and  fuch  young  Creatures,  where  there  is  no  Oc- 
cafion  for  them  j  but  they  would  be  rather  an  An- 
noyance to  the  tender  Nipples  and  Breads. 

E'Vom  the  Teeth,  the  grand  Inilruments  of  Ma- 
ilication  j   let  us  proceed  to  the  other  minifterial 
Parts.     And  here  the  Parotid.,  Sublingual^  and  ma:)^' 
illary  Glands  j    together  with  thofe  of  the  Cheeks 
and  Lips,  are  confiderable  j   all  lodged  in  the  moll 
convenient  Places  about  the  Mouth   and  Throat 
to  afford  that  noble  digeftive  falival  Liquor,  to  be 
mixed  with  the  Food  in  Maftication,   and  to  moi- 
Hen  and   lubricate  the  Paffages,   to  give  an  eafie 
defcent  to  the  Food.     The  commodious  Form  al- 
fo  of  the  Jaws,  deferves  our  Notice ;  together  with 
the  ftrong  Articulation  of  the  lowermofl,   and  its 
Motion.     And  lailly,  the  curious  Form,   the  great 
Strength,  the  convenient  Lodgment  and  Situation 
of  the  feveral  Mufcles  and  Tendons  (oo),   all  mi- 
niftring  to  this  fo   neceflary   an  A£t  of  Life,    as 
Maftication  is  j   they  are  fuch  Contrivances,   fuch 
Works,  as  plainly  fet  forth  the  infinite  Workman's 
Care  and  Skill. 

Next  to  the  Mouth,  the  Gullet  prefenteth  it  felf  j 
in  every  Creature  well-fiz'd  to  the  Food  it  hath 
occafion  to  fwallowj  in  fome  but  narrow,   in  o- 


in  more  fubftantial  Food,  and  live  without  the  Bread,  and 
begin  to  need  Teeth,  for  the  Hike  of  Speech;  that  then,  I 
fjy,  their  Teeth  fliould  begin  to  appear,  and  gradually  grow, 
as  they  more  and  more  ftand  in  need  of  'em. 

{oo)  It  would  be  endlefs  to  particularize  here,  and  there- 
fore I  (hall  refer  to  the  Anatomifts;  among  the  reft,  parti- 
cularly to  Galen,  for  the  fake  of  his  Defcant  upon  this  Sub- 
jedt.  For  having  defcribed  the  great  Accuracy  of  the  Con- 
trivance and  Make  of  thefe  Parts,  he  faith,  Haud  fclo  an  ho- 
rninum  fit  fobriorum  ad  Fortunam  opificem  id  revocare  :  alioqui 
quid  tandem  ertt,  quod  cum  Provident'ta  atque  Arte  effic'ttur  ? 
Omnino  enim  hoc  ei  contrarium  ef[e  debet,  quod  cafu  ac  fortuit9 
Jit.    Galen,  de  Uf.  Part.  1.  ii.  c.  7.  ubi  flara. 

chers 


Chap.  XI.     Of  Animals  Throats.  ic)j 

thers  as  large  find  extcnfive  (/>/>)  •,  in  all  exceed- 
ingly remarkable  for  the  curious  Mechanifm  of  its 
Mufclcs,  and  the  artificial  Decuflation  and  Polition 
of  their  Fibres  (^q). 

And  now  we  arc  arriv'd  to  the  grand  Recepta- 
cle of  the  Food,  the  Stomach  y  for  the  moll  Pare 
as  various  as  the  Food  to  be  convcy'd  therein. 
And  here  I  might  dcfcribe  the  admirable  Mecha- 
nifm of  its  Tunicks,  Mufcles,  Glands,  the  Nerves, 
Arteries  and  Veins  (rr)  j  all  manifclling  the  lu- 
per-eminent  Contrivance   and  Arc  of  the  infinite 


(pp)  The  Bore  of  the  Gullet  is  not  in  all  Creatures  alike  an- 
fiverable  to  the  Body  or  Stomach.  As  in  the  I'OX,  which  both 
feeds  on  Bones,  and  fwalloivs  zvhole,  or  with  little  chewing; 
add  next  in  a  Dog,  and  other  offivorous  <^iadruped$,  'tis  "very 
large,  viz.  to  prevent  a  Contufion  therein.  Next  in  a  Korfe, 
ivhtch  though  he  feeds  on  Grafs,  yet  fwallows  much  at  once, 
and  fo  requires  a  more  open  Pajfage.  But  in  a  Sheep,  Rabbit, 
or  Ox,  which  bite  jhort,  and  fw allow  lefs  at  once,  'tisfmaller. 
But  in  a  Squnrc],  /iill  lejfer,  both  becaiife  he  eats  fine,  and  to  keep 
him  from  difgorgtng  his  Meat  upon  his  defcending  Leaps.  And 
fo  in  Rats  and  Mice,  which  often  run  along  Walls  with  their 
Heads  doxvnwards.  Dr.  Grgw'z  Comp.  Anat.  of  Stom.  and 
Guts.  Chap.  5. 

(qq)  Of  this  fee  Dr.  Willis's  Pharm.  Rat.  Part  1.  Scd.  i. 
C.  2,.    Steno  alfo,   and  Peyer  Aiery,  1.  2. 

The  Defcription  theic  give  of  the  mufcular  Part  of  the 
Gullet,  the  late  ingenious  and  learned  Dr.  Drake  faith  is  very 
exad  in  Ruminants,  but  not  in  Men.  In  Men,  this  Coat 
(the  fecond  of  the  Gullet)  confifls  of  two  fiefJjy  Lamellx, 
like  two  diflinti  Mufcles.  The  outward  being  ompojed  of  ft  rait 
longitudinal  Fibres.  — —  The  inner  Order  of  Fibres  is  annular^ 
without  any  obfervalle  Angles.  •  •  IheUfeof  this  Coat,  and 
thefe  Orders  of  Fibres   is  to  promote  Deglutition  ;  of  which  the 

Longitudinal,  fjorten  the   Oelbphagus,    and  fo  make  its 

Capacity  larger,  to  admit  of  the  Matter  to  be  fwallowed.  Tho 
Annular,  on  the  contrary,  contratl  the  Capacity,  and  clofin^ 
behind  the  defcending  Aliment,  prcfs  it  downwards.  Drake"* 
Anat.   vol.  I.   1. 1,   c.  9. 

{rr)  See  y/illis,  ibid.  Cowftr'i  Anat.  Tab.  35.  and  nuny 
Other  Authors. 


O  I  WorIvni:\ni 


19^  Of  Anmals  Stomachs.     Book  IV, 

Workman  {ff)  •,  they  being  all  nicely  adjufted  to 
their  refpedive  Place,  Occafion  and  Service.  I 
might  alfo  infifl;  upon  that  moll  neceflary  Office 
o^  Digejiion'y  and  here  confider  that  wonderful  Fa- 
culty of  the  Stomachs  of  all  Creatures,  to  dif^ 
folve  {tt)  all  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Food  appropria- 
ted to  their  Species  j  even  fometimes  Things  of 
that  Confiftency  as  feem  infoluble  (««)}  efpecial- 
ly  by  fuch  feemingly  fimple  and  weak  Menfiruums 
as  we  find  in  their  Stomachs :  But  I  fhall  only 
give  thefe  Things  a  bare  mention,  and  take  more 
peculiar  Notice  of  the  fpecial  Provifion  made  in 
the  particular  Species  of  Animals,  for  the  Dige- 
llion  of  that  fpecial  Food  appointed  them. 


(//)  Promptuar'mm  autem  hoc,  alimentum  unlverfum  excl- 
p'tens,  ten  Dfvinum,  non  Humanum  fit  ofificium.  Galen,  de 
Uf.  Part.  1.  4-  c.  I. 

{tt)  How  great  A  Comprehenfion  of  the  Nature  of  Things, 
did  Jt  require,  to  make  a  Menftruum,  that  fliouid  corrode  all 
forts  of  iLejh  coming  into  the  Stomach,  and  yet  not  the  Stomach 
it  felf,  which  is  alfo  Flefh  ?  Dr,  Grew's  Cofmol.  Sacr.  c.  4. 

(««)  The  Food  of  the  Cajior  being  oftentimes,  if  not  al- 
ways, dry  Things,  and  hard  of  Digeftion,  fuch  as  the  Roots 
and  Bark  of  Trees,  'tis  a  wonderful  Provifion  made  in  that 
Creature's  Stomach,  by  the  digeftive  Juice  lodged  in  the  cu- 
rious little  Cells  there.  A  Delcription  of  whofe  admirable 
Strudure  and  Order  may  be  found  in  Blafius  from  Wepfer  i 
concerning  which  he  faith,  in  quibus  Mucus  reconditus,  non 
fecus  ac  Mel  in  Favis.  <  Nimirum  quia  Caftoris  alimen- 

tum exfuccum,  ZP"  co^u  diffcillimum  efl,  fapientiffimus  z:r  fum- 
tne  admirandus  in  fuis  operibus  rerum  Conditor,  D.  O.  M.  ipfi 
pulcherrima  ijla  CT"  affaire  fa^d  flru^lurd  benignijfime  profpex- 
it,  ut  nunquam  deeff'et  Fermentum,  quod  ad  folvendum,  er  com- 
fninuendum  alimenttttn  durum  ey  afperum  par  foret.  Vid. 
Blaf.  Anat.  Animal,  c.  lo.  Confer  etiam  ASl.  Erud.  Lipf  Ann, 
1684.  p.  360. 

Moft  of  our  modern  Anatomifts  and  Phyficians  attribute 
Digeftion  to  a  diffolving  Menflruum  ;  but  Dr.  Drake  takes  it 
to  be  rather  from  fermentative,  diffolving  Principles  in  the 
Aliment  it  felf,  with  the  Concurrence  of  the  Air  and  Heat 
of  the  Body  i  as  in  E^r,  Papin'i  Di^ejigr,   Vid.  Dr.  4W-  "vol.  i. 


Chap.  XL     Of  Animals  Stomachs.  199 

And  in  the  firft  Place  ic  is  obfci  vablc,  that,  in 
every  Species  of  Animals,  the  Strength  and  Size 
of  their  Stomach  {nnw)  is  conformable  to  their 
Food.  Such  whofe  Food  is  more  delicate,  tender, 
and  nutritive,  have  commonly  tliis  Part  thinner, 
weaker,  and  lefs  bulky  j  whereas  fuch  whole  Ali- 
ment is  Icfs  nutritive,  or  whofe  Bodies  require  larger 
Supplies  to  anfwer  their  Bulk,  their  Labours,  and 
walle  of  Strength  and  Spirits,  in  them  it  is  large 
and  ftrong. 

Another  very  remarkable  Thing  in  this  Part,  is, 
the  Number  of  Ventricles  in  divers  Creatures.  In 
many  but  one  5  in  fome  two  or  more  (a.v).  In 
fuch  as  make  a  fufficient  Comminution  of  the 
Food  in  the  Mouth,  one  fufficcs.  But  where  Teeth 
arc  wanting,  and  the  Food  dry  and  hard,  (as  in 
granivorous  Birds,)  there  the  Defc6l  is  abundant- 
ly fupply'd  by  one  thin  membranaceous  Ventri- 
cle, ta  receive  and  moillen  the  Food,  and  ano- 
ther thick,  llrong,  mufcular  one,  to  grind  and 
tear  ijy)  it.     But  ni  fuch  Birds,  and  other  Creatures, 

whofe 


^wvj)  All  carnivorous  (^adrupeds  have  the  fmallejl  Ventri- 
cles, Tle(h  going  fart  heft,  ihofc  that  feed  on  Fruits,  and  Roots, 
have  them  of  a  middle,  Size.  Jet  the  Mole,  bccaufe  it  feeds  un- 
clean, hath  a  xrry  great  one.  Sheep  and  Oxen,  vjhich  feedon 
Grafs,  have  the  great  eft.  Yet  the  Horfe  (and  for  the  fame 
Reafon  the  Coney  and  Hare)  though  Graminivorous,  yet  com- 
paratively hav2  but  little  ones.  For  that  a  Horfe  is  made  jor 
Labour,  and  both  this,  and  the  Hare,  for  quick  and  continued 
Motion  ;  for  which,  the  mo  ft  eafte  Refpiration,  and  fo  the  frecft 
Motion  of  the  Diaphragme  is  very  requtfite;  which  yet  could 
not  be,  ft)ould  the  Stomach  lie  bi^  and  c urn berfome  upon  it,  as  in. 
Sheep  4^3^  Oxen  it  doth.  Grew,  ib.  Chap.  6. 

(xx)  The  Dromedary  hath  four  Stomachs,  one  whereof  is 
peculiarly  endowed  with  about  twenty  Cavities,  like  Sacks, 
in  all  Probability  for  the  holding  of  Water.  Concerning 
which,   fee  Book  VI.   Chap  4.  Note  {a). 

(yy)  To  aflill  in  which  Office,  they  fwallow  rmall  angular 
^tQn?s,  which  are  to  be  met  with  in  the  Gizards  of  all  gra- 

P  4  nivorou; 


xoo  Of  Animals  Stomachs,       Book  IV, 

whofe  Food  is  not  Grain,  but  Flefli,  Fruits,  In- 
fers, or  partly  one,  partly  the  other,  there  their 
Stomachs  are  accordingly  conformable  to  their 
Food  (zz),  flronger  or  weaker,  membranaceous 
or  mufcular. 

But  as  remarkable  a  Thing,  as  any  in  this  Part  of 
Animals,  is,  the  curious  Contrivance  and  Fabrick 
of  the  feveral  Ventricles  of  ruminating  Creatures. 
The  very  Aft  it  felf  of  Rumination^  is  an  excellent 
Provifion  for  the  compleat  Maftication  of  the 
Food,  at  the  Refting,  leifure  Times  of  the  Ani- 
mal. But  the  Apparatus  for  this  Service,  of  di- 
vers Ventricles  for  its  various  Ufes  and  Purpofes, 
together  with  their  curious  Mechanifm,  deferves 
great  Admiration  {aaa). 

Having  thus  far  purfu'd  the  Food  to  the  Place, 
where  by  its  Redudion  into  Chyle,  it  becomes 
a  proper  Aliment  for  the  Body }  I  might  next  trace 
it  through  the  feveral  M^eanders  of  the  Guts^  the 
LaUeaU^  and  fo  into  the  Blood  {bbb)y  and  after- 
wards 


nivorous  Birds ;  but  in  the  Gizard  of  the  Ijnx,  or  Wrynech^ 
which  was  full  only  of  A?2ts,  1  found  not  one  Stone.  So  in 
that  of  the  Green  Wood-Pecker  (full  of  uints  and  Tree-mag- 
gots) there  were  but  few  Stones. 

(zz)  In  mojl  carnivorous  Birds,  the  third  Ventricle  is  Mem- 
branous ;  where  the  Meat  is  concaved,  as  in  a  M(in  :  Or  fome- 
what  Tendinous,  as  in  anOviX  ;  as  if  it  were  made  indi^erent- 
ly  for  Fle/h,  or  other  Meat,  as  he  could  meet  with  either.  Or 
mofi  thick  and  tendinous,  called  the  Gizard;  wherein  the 
Meat,  as  in  a  Mill,  is  ground  to  Pieces.  Grew,  ubi  fupra. 
Chap.  9. 

{aaa)  It  would  be  much  too  long  a  Tafk  to  infift  upon  it 
here  as  it  deferves,  and  therefore  concerning  the  whole  Bufi- 
nefs  of  Rumination,  I  fliall  refer  to  j?.  Conr.  Peyeri  Mery- 
eolog.  feu  de  B^uminantibus  e?  Ruminatione  Commentar.  where 
he  largely  treateth  of  the  feveral  Ruminating  Animals,  of 
the  Parts  miniftring  to  this  Ad,  and  the  great  Ufe  and  Bene- 
fit thereof  unto  them. 

{bbb)  There  are  too  many  Particulars  to  be  infifted  on,  ob- 
f^rvable  in  the  Paira|es  of  the  Chyltt  from  tlie  Quts  to  the 

■   ' '  Lefi 


Chap.  XI.    Of  Animals  Stomachs.  ir^i 

wards  into  the  very  Habit  of  the  Body  :  I  might 
alfo  take  Notice  of  the  Separation  made  in  the 
JnteJiineSy  of  what  is  nutritive,  (which  is  received,) 
and  what  is  feculent,  (being  ejedcd  j)  and  the  Im- 
pregnations there  from  the  Pancreas  and  the  Gall^ 
and  after  it  hath  been  Ibaincd  through  thofe  cu- 
rious Colanders,  the  laical  Feins ^  1  might  alfo 
obferve  its  Impregnations  from  the  Glands  and  Lym~ 
fhiedu^s\  and,  to  name  no  more,.  I  might  far- 
ther view  the  cxquifite  Stru6turc  of  the  l-*arts  mi- 


Lift  Subclavian  Vein,  where  it  enters  into  the  Blood  ;  and 
thereture  I  lli.^il  only,  for  a  Sample  of  this  adrnirahie  Oeco- 
nomy,  take  notice  of  fome  of  the  main  and  more  general 
Matters.     And, 

r.  After  the  Food  is  become  Chyle,  and  gotten  into  the 
Guts,  it  is  an  excellent  Provilion  made,  not  only  for  its  Paf- 
fage  through  the  Guts,  but  alfo  for  its  Protrufion  into  the 
Lac-leals,  by  the  Ptriflalttck  Motion  and  Valvult  conniven" 
tes  of  the  Guts.  i.  It  is  an  admirable  Proviiion,  that  the 
Mouths  of  the  Latleals,  and  indeed  the  LaCieah  primi  gene- 
ris themfelves  are  fmall  and  fine,  not  wider  than  the  Capil- 
lary Arteries  are,  left  by  admitting  Particles  of  the  Nourifti- 
ment  grolTer  than  the  Capillaries,  dan£;erous  Oblfrudions 
might  be  thereby  produced.  3.  After  the  Reception  of  the 
Ahment  into  the  Lacleals  primi  generis,  it  is  a  noble  Provi- 
lion for  the  Advancement  of  its  Motion,  that  in  the  Alej'es- 
terick  Glands,  it  meets  with  fome  of  the  Lymphi-Duih,  and 
receives  the  Impregnations  of  the  Lympha.  And  palFing  on 
from  thence,  it  is  no  lefs  Advantage.  4.  That  the  La^ieals, 
and  Lymphi-Dufls  meet  in  the  Receptaculum  Chyli,  where 
the  Aliment  meeting  with  more  of  the  Lympha,  is  made  ot 
a  due  Conliftence,  and  Temperament,  for  its  farther  Advance- 
ment through  the  Thoracick  D.xci,  a;id  fa  into  the  Left  Sub- 
clavian Vein  and  Blood.  Laltly,  This  Thoracick  Duil  it  felf 
is  a  Part  of  great  Conlideration.  For  (as  Mr.  Coy^fr  faith) 
If  we  confiderin  this  Dutl  its  feveral  Divtftons  and  Inofculati- 
ens,  its  numerous  Valves  looking  from  belazu  upivards,  its  ad- 
vantagious  Situation  between  the  great  Artery  and  Vertebrae 
of  the  Back,  together  with  the  DuSls  difcharging  their  refluent 
Lympha  from  the  Lungs,  and  other  neighbouring  Parts,  we 
fhall  find  all  conduce  to  demon/Irate  the  utmojl  Art  of  Nature 
ufed  in  furthering  the  Jleep  and  perpendicular  Afant  of  th$ 
^kyi^-    Ar.at.  lairodiidt 


pidring 


102,  Of  Animals  Sagacity     Book  IV. 

niftring  to  all  thefe  delicate  Offices  of  Nature  j 
particularly  the  artificial  Conformation  of  the  In- 
teftines  might  deferve  a  fpecial  Enquiry,  their  Tu- 
nicks.  Glands,  Fibres  traverfing  one  another  {ccc\ 
and  periftaltick  Motion  in  all  Creatures  5  and  their 
cochleous  Paflage  {ddd)  to  retard  the  Motion  of  the 
Chyle,  and  to  make  amends  for  the  Shortnefs  of 
the  Intellines,  in  fuch  Creatures  who  have  but  one 
Gut  5  together  with  many  other  Accommodations 
of  Nature  in  particular  Animals  that  might  be  men- 
tion'd.  But  it  ftiall  fuffice  to  have  given  only  a  ge- 
neral Hint  of  thofe  curious  and  admirable  Works 
of  God.  From  whence  it  is  abundantly  manifefl 
how  little  weight  there  is  in  the  former  atheiftical 
Objedion.  Which  v/ill  receive  a  further  Confu- 
tation from  the 

VI.  and  lad  Thing  relating  to  Food,  that  I  fh all 
fpeak  of,  namely,  The  great  Sagacity  of  all  jinimals^ 
in  finding  out  and  providing  their  Food.  In  Man 
perhaps  we  may  not  find  any  Thing  very  admira- 
ble, or  remarkable  in  this  Kind,  by  Means  of  his 
Reafon  and  Underllanding,  and  his  Supremacy  over 
the  inferior  Creatures ;  which  anfwcreth  all  his 
Occafions  relating  to  this  Bufinefs :  Bat  then  even 
here  the  Creator   hath  Hiewed  his  Skill,  in  noc 


{ccc)  Thefe,  although  noble  Contrivances  and  Works  of 
pod,  are  too  many  to  be  iiiiilled  on,  and  therefore  I  fliail 
lefer  to  the  Anatomilts,  particularly  Dr.  Willis  Pharmaceut. 
Dr.  Cole^  in  Phil  Tranf.  No.  115.  and  Mr.  Cowper's  elegant 
Cuts  in  Anat.  Tab.  34,  35.  and  Append.  Fig.  39,  40. 

{ddd)  In  \.\iQTkornback,  and  fome  other  Fiihes,  it  is  a  ve- 
ry curious  Provifion  that  is  made  to  fupply  the  Paucity  and 
IJrevity  of  the  Guts ;  by  the  Perforation  of  their  firigle  Gut,  going 
otftrait  al  ong,  but  round  Uke  a  Pair  of  Windmg  Stairs;  fo 
that  their  Gut,  v/hich  feems  to  be  but  a  few  Inches  long, 
hath  really  a  Bare  of  many  Inches.  But  of  thefe,  and  ma- 
ny other  noble  Curiofities  and  Difcoveries  in  Anatomy,  the 
Reader  will,  I  hope,  have  a  better  and  larger  Account  from 
the  curious  and  ingenious  Dr,  Dey^gl^St  who  is  iabouring  ii? 
thofe  Masters, 

mm 


Chap.  XT.  to  get  Food.  103 

over-doing  the  Matter  j  in  not  providing  Man  with 
an  unneceflary  Apparatus,  to  cff"c6l  over  and  over 
again  what  is  fcalible,  by  the  Reach  oF  his  Undci- 
Handing,  and  the  Power  of  his  Authority. 

But  for  the  inferior  Creatures,  who  want  Rca- 
fon,  the  Power  of  that  natural  In(lin(5b,  that  Sa- 
gacity {ece)  which  the  Creator  hath  imprinted  up- 
on them,  do  amply  compenfate  that  Dcfcd:.  And 
here  we  fhall  find  a  glorious  Scene  of  the  divine 
Wifdom,  Power,  Providence  and  Care,  ifwcvievr 
the  various  Inftinfts  of  Beaf^s,  great  and  fmall,  of 
Birds,  Infe6ls  and  Reptiles  (///).  For  among  eve- 
ry Species  of  them,  we  may  find  notable  Atls  of 
Sagacity,  or  Inflinft,  proportional  to  their  Occa- 
Cons  for  Food.  Even  among  thofe  whofe  Food  is 
near  at  Hand,  and  eafily  come  at  >  as  Grafs  and 
Herbs  \  and  confequently  have  no  great  need  of 
Art  to  difcover  it;  yet,  that  Faculty  of  their  ac- 
curate Smell  and  I'allc,  fo  ready  at  every  turn,  to 
diftinguilh  between  what  is  falutary,  and  what  per- 
nicious [g^^t   doth  juilly  deferve  Praife,     But  for 

fuch 


{tte)  %uibui  bef.iis  erat  is  cibus,  ut  alms  generis  leffiis  vef- 
cerentur,  ant  vnes  natura  dedit,  ant  ceUritatem  :  data  eft  qtii- 
bufdam  etiam  machmatio  quddjw,  atque  JoUrtia,  crc  Cic.  dc 
Nat.  Deor.  1.  i.  c.  48. 

(fff)  Among  Reptiles  that  have  a  ftrange  Faculty  to  fliif^; 
for  Food,  csrc.  may  be  reckoned  Eds,  wliich,  although  be- 
longing to  the  Waters,  can  creep  on  the  Land  from  Pond  to 
Pond,c7C.  Mr.  Mofely  of  Alo/ely,  faw  them  creep  over  the 
Meadows,  like  fo  many  Snakes  from  Ditch  to  Ditch;  which 
he  thought,  was  not  only  for  bettering  their  Habitation,  but 
alfo  to  catch  Sqails  m  the  Grafs.  Plot's  Hiji.  of  Stajfordfture^ 
C.7.  §.  3z. 

And  as  early  as  the  Year  iizj,  the  Frod  wa:  fo  very  in- 
Jenfe,  that  the  lids  were  forced  to  leave  the  Waters,  an(^ 
were  frozen  to  Death  in  the  Meadows.  I'iJ.  idakezvill's  ytpel. 
I.  7..    Chap.  7.    S.  z. 

(g^g)  Enumerate  poffHm,  ad  faflum  cap(jfcnd-4m  conficieit' 
dumque,  quA  fit  in  figures  animaniium  qj-  quam  jolen,  fubitUf-' 
^uf  defcripfio  pqrtiitm,  ^itamqut   admtrtibUis  jAbrna  membro- 

Tt^m, 


^04  Of  Animals  Sagacity     Book  IV. 

fuch  Animals,  whole  Food  is  not  fo  eafily  come  at, 
a  Variety  of  wonderful  Inftin6t  may  be  met  with, 
fufficient  to  entertain  the  mod  curious  Obferver. 
With  what  entertaining  Power,  and  Artifice  do 
fome  Creatures  hunt  {hhh)^  and  purfue  their  Game 
and  Prey !  And  others  watch  and  way-lay  theirs  {iii)  \ 
With  what  prodigious  Sagacity  do  others  grope 

for 


rum.  Omnia  enim  q»£  tntus  inclufa  funt,  ita  nata,  atque  ita 
heat  a  funt,  ttt  nihil  eorum  fupervacaneum  fit,  nihil  ad  vitam  re- 
tinendatn  nin  necejfarium.  Deiit  ant  cm  eadem  Nati*ra  bel- 
tuis  z^"  fenfu}7t,  (y  appetitum,  ut  altera  conatum  haherent  ai 
naturates  pajius  eapejjendos ;  altera  fecernerent  pejlifera  a.  fh- 
liitaribus.   Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor,  1.  ^.  c.  37.  See  £0^^  IV.  Chap.  4. 

{hhh)  It  would  be  cndlefs  to  give  Inlhnces  of  my  own  and 
orheis  Obf^rvations  of  the  prodigious  Sagacity  of  divers  Ani- 
mals in  Hunting,  particularly  Hounds,  Setting-Dogs,  cs'c.  one 
therefore   i\n\\  fuffice   of   Mr.  Boyl's,  viz.    A   Per/on  of  '^a- 

licj to  make  a  Trial,  whether  a  young  Blood-Hound  was 

zvell  inflnUied, caujed  one  of  his  Servants to  walk  to 

a  Town  four  Miles  off,  and  then  to  a  Market-Town  three  Miles 

from  thence. The  Dog,  without  feeing  the  Man  he  tvas  to 

purjlte,  followed  him  by  the  Scent  to  the  abovementioned  Places, 
notivit hfianding  the  Multitude  of  Market-People  that  went  along 
tn  the  fame  Way,  and  of  Travellers  that  had  occafion  to  crofs  it. 
And  when  the  Blood-Hound  came  to  the  chief  Market-Toivn,  he 
fajjed  through  the  Streets,  without  taking  notice  of  any  of  the. 
People  there,  and  left  not  till  he  had  gone  to  the  Houfe,  where 
the  Man  he  fought  refled  himfelf,  and  found  him  in  an  upper 
Room,  to  the  zvonder  of  thofe  that  followed  him.  Boyl.  de- 
term.  Nat.  of  Effluv.  Chap.  4. 

(iii)  There  are  many  Stories  told  of  the  Craft  of  the  Fox, 
to  compafs  his  Prey;  of  which  Ol.  Magnus  hath  many  fuch, 
as,  feigning  the  barking  of  a  Dog,  to  catch  Prey  near  Houfes ; 
feigning  himfelf  dead,  to  catch  fuch  Animals  as  come  to 
feed  upon  him;  laying  his  Tail  on  a  Wafp-Neit,  and  then 
robbing  it  hard  againft  a  Tree,  and  then  eating  the  Wafps 
fo  killed:  Ridding  himfelf  of  Tleas,  by  gradually  going  in- 
to Water,  with  a  Lock  of  Wool  in  his  Mouth,  and  fo  driv-r 
ing  the  Tleas  up  into  it,  and  then  leaving  it  in  the  Water  : 
By  catching  Crab-V\^  with  his  Tail,  which  he  faith  he  him-r 
felf  was  an  Eye-Witnefs  of;  Vidi  cr  ego  in  Scopulis  Norve- 
fiiVulpem,  inter  rupes  immijfd  Cauda  in  aqujis,  plures  educere 
Caneros,  ac  demrim  devorare.  01.  Mag,  Hift.  1.  18.  c.  39»  4o» 


Chap.  XT.  to  get  Food.  105- 

for  it  under  Ground,  out  of  Sight,  in  mooriili  Pla- 
ces, in  Mud  and  Dirt  {kkk)  j  and  others  dig  and 
delve  for  it,  both  above  (///),  and  under  the  Sur- 
face of  the  drier  Lands  {mmm) !  And  how  curious 
and  well  defigned  a  Provifion  is  it  of  particular 
large  Nerves  in  fuch  Creatures,  adapted  to  that  cf- 
pecial  Service! 

What  an  admirable  Faculty  is  that  of  many  A- 
nimals,  to  difcovcr  their  Prey  at  vail  Diilancesj 
fome  by  their  Smell  fome  Miles  off  («««)  j  and 
fome  by  their  fliarp  and  piercing  Sight,   aloft  in 


But  Pliny's  fabulous  Story  of  the  Hy&na  out-does  ihefc 
Relations  of  the;  Fox,  Sermonetn  humanum  inter  pa/iorum  Jia- 
bula  aJfimuUre,  notnenque  altcujus  addifctrre,  cjuem  evocatum 
foras  laceret.  Item  Vomitionem  ho?ninis  imitari  ad  foUtcitandos 
Canes  quos  invadat.     Plin.  Nat.  Hilt.  1.  8.  C.  30. 

{kkk)  This  do  Ducks,  Woodcocks,  and  many  other  Fowls, 
which  Ceek  their  Food  in  dirty,  moorifli  Places.  For  which 
Service  they  have  very  remarkable  Nerves  reaching  to  the 
end  of  their  Bills.   Of  which  fee  Book  VII,  Chap.  i.  Note  {e). 

{Ill)  Swme,  and  other  Animals  that  dig,  have  their  Nofes 
made  more  tendinous,  callous,  and  llrong  for  this  Service, 
than  others  that  do  not  dig.  They  are  alio  edged  with  a  pro- 
per, tough  Border,  for  penetrating  and  lifting  up  the  Earth; 
and  their  NoHnls  are  placed  v/ell,  and  their  Smell  is  very  ac- 
curate, to  difcover  M-hatlbever  they  purfue  by  digging. 

{mmm)  The  Mole,  as  its  Habitation  is  diiferent  from  that 
of  other  Animals,  fo  hath  its  Organs  in  every  rel"pe(5t  curioufly 
adapted  to  that  way  of  Life;  particularly  its  Nofe  made 
fliarp,  and  flender,  but  withal  tendinous  and  ftrongjC^f.  But 
what  is  very  remarkable,  it  hath  fuch  Nerves  reaching  to  the 
end  of  its  Nofe  and  Lips,  as  Ducks,  o^c.  have,  mentioned 
above  in  Note  {kkk).  VVliich  Pair  of  Nerves  I  obfcrved  to  be 
much  larger  in  this  Animal  than  any  other  Nerves  proceed- 
ing out  of  its  Brain. 

(»«»)  Predacious  Creatures,  as  Wolfs,  Foxes,  ov.  will  dif- 
cover Prey  at  great  Diftanccs;  fo  will  Dogs  and  Ravens  dif- 
covcr Carrion  a  great  way  off  by  their  Smell.  And  if  (as 
the  Superftitious  imagine)  the  latter  flying  over  and  haunt- 
ing Houfcs  be  a  fign  of  Death,  it  is  no  doubt  from  fome  ca- 
daverous Smell,  thofc  Ravens  diicovcr  in  the  Air  by  their 
accurate  Smell,  which  is  emitted  from  thofc  difeafcd  Bodies, 
wkich  have  in  them  the  Priuciplcs  of  a  fpccdy  Death. 

the 
I 


±o6  Of  A^ima/s  Sagacity       Book  IV. 

the  Air,  or  at  other  great  Diftances  (ooo)  I  An  In- 
fl'ance  of  the  latter  of  which  GOD  himfelf  giveth, 
(Jol'xxxix.zj^  2,8,  ZQ.)  in  thelnilinftof  the  Eagle: 
jDotb  the  Eagle  mount  up  at  thy  Command^  and  make 
her  Nefi  on  high  ?  She  dwelleth  and  ahideth  on  the 
Rocky  upon  the  Crag  of  the  Rock^  and  the  firong 
Place  {ppp) .  From  thence  Jhe  feeketh  her  Prey^  and 
her  Eyes  behold  afar  off.  What  a  commodious  Pro* 
vifion  hath  the  Contriver  of  Nature  made  for  Ani- 
mals, that  are  neceffitated  to  climb  for  their  Food  j 
not  only  in  the  Strudure  of  their  Legs  and  Feet, 
and  in  the  Strength  of  their  Tendons  and  Mufclesj 
acting  in  that  particular  Office  {qqq)  5  but  alfo  in 
the  peculiar  Stru6ture  of  the  prmcipal  Parts,  a6t- 
ing  in  the  Acqueft  of  their  Food  {rrr)  I  What  a 

Provi* 


{000)  Thus  HAivks^nA  Kites  on  Land,  zn^  Gulls  and  other 
Birds  that  prey  upon  the  Waters,  can  at  a  great  Height  in 
the  Air  fee  Micey  little  Birds  and  Infeds  on  the  Earth,  and 
fmall  Fifties,  shrimps^  vc  in  the  Waters,  which  they  will 
dart  down  upon,  and  take. 

{ppp)  Mr.  Ray  gives  a  good  Account  of  the  Nidification  of 
the  Chryfa'etos  cauda  annulo  albo  cinSta.  Hujus  Nidus  Ann. 
1668.  in  fylvojis  props  Deriventiam,  8cc.  inventus  efi  e  hacillis 
feu  virgis  ligneis  grandioribus  compofitus,  quorum  altera  extre- 
mitas  rupis  cujufdam  eminenttA,  altera  duabus  Betulis  innite- 
hatur, — Erat  Nidus  quadratus,  duas  ulnas  latus.  -—In  eo  fullus 
unicusy  adjacentibus  cadaveribus  unius  agni,  unius  leporis,  c?* 
trlumGrygallorum  pullorum.  Synopf.  Method.  Avium,  p.  6. 
And  not  only  Lambs,  Hares,  and  Grygalli,  but  Sk  Robert 
Sibhald  tells  us,  they  will  feize  Kids  and  Fawns,  yea,  and 
Children  too :  Of  which  he  hath  this  Story  of  an  Eagle  in 
one  of  the  Orcades  Iflands,  §lU£  Infantulum  unius  anni  paii" 
tits  involutum  arripuit  (quern  Mater  tejfellas  ufitbiles  pro  igne 
allatura  momenta  tempotis  depofuerat  in  loco  HoMlon-H-t^diSlo ) 
eumque  deport a(fe  per  4  milliaria  pajfuum  ad  Hoiam  ;  qua  re  ex 
tnatris  ejulatibus  cognitd,  quatuor  viri  illuc  in  navicula  pro" 
feSli  funt,  o"  fcientes  ubi  Nidus  ejfet,  infantulum  ilUfum  iy  in- 
tattum  deprehenderunt.     Prod.  Nat.  Hilt.  Scot.  1.  3.  p,.  2.  p.  14. 

{qqq)  See  in  Book  VII.  Chap.  i.  Note  (/).  the  Charaderi- 
flicks  of  the  Wood- Pecker-kind. 

(rrr)  The  Contrivance  of  the  Legs,  Teet  and  Nails  [of  the 
Opoffum]  fetms  very  advantagions  to  this  Animal  in  climbing 

Trtr 


Chap.  XI.  to  get  Food,  .  107 

Provifion  alfo  is  that  in  noiflurnal  Birds  and  Beads, 
in  the  peculiar  Stru(frurc  of  their  Eye  {fff)^  (and  wc 
may  perhaps  add  the  Accuracy  of  their  Smell  too) 
vhereby  they  arc  enabled  to  difcover  their  Food  in 
the  Dark?  But  among  all  the  Inllanccs  we  have  of 
natural  In(lin6V,  thofc  Inilin£ts,  and  efpecial  Pro- 
vifions  made  to  fupply  the  Necellities  of  Hclplefs 
Animals,  do  in  a  particular  Manner  demonllratc 
the  great  Creator's  Care.  Of  which  1  lliall  give 
two  Inllanccs. 

I.    The   Provifion   made   for  young  Creatures. 
That  iTOf^):,  that  natural  Affcdlion,  fo  connatural 
to  all,  or  moil  Creatures  towards  their  Young  (///), 
what  an  admirable  noble  Principle  is  it,  implant- 
ed 


Tre%  ( ivh'tch  it  doth  very  n'tmlly )  for  preying  upon  Birds.  But 
that  which  is  moft  lingular  in  this  Animal,  is  the  Structure  of 
its  Tail,  to  enable   it   to  hang   on  Boughs.     The   spines,  or 

Udoks  in  the   middle  of  the  under  fide  of  the  Vertebrae  cf 

the  Tail  ;  are  a  roondtrful  Piece  of  Nature's  MechMnifm.  The 
firjl  three  Vertebrae  had  none  of  thefe  Spines,  but  in  all  the  refi 
they  were  to  be  obfcrved.  -      They  ivere  placed  juji  at   tlj0 

Articulation  of  each  Joynt,  and  in  the  middle  from  the  Sides. -^ 
for  the  perforryiing  this  Office  [of  hanging  by  the  Tail]  nothing, 
1  think,  could  be  more  advantagioufly  contrived.  For  -ujhen  tht 
Tail  is  t7virled  or  wound  about  a  Stick,  this  Hook  of  the  Spinae 
tafily  fufiains  the  Wtight,  and  there  is  but  little  labour  cf  tht 
Mufcles  required,  only  enough  for  bowing  or  crooking  the  Tail. 
This,  and  more  to  the  fame  purpofe,  Jec  in  Dr.  Tyfoa's  A- 
nat.  of  the  Opoj}'.  in  Phil.  Tranf  No.  139. 

(///)  See  before  Chap.  2.   Note  {z),  {aa),  {lb). 

(ttt)  ^id  dicam  quantus  amor  he/iiarum  fit  in  educandis 
cufiodiendifque  its,  quA  procreaverint,  ufqut  ad  cum  finem,  dum 
fojftnt  feipfa  difendere  ?  And  having  inlUnced  in  fome  Ani- 
mals, where  this  Care  is  not  neceflary,  and  accordingly  is 
not  employed,  he  goes  on,  Jam  Gallim,  avcfque  reliqut, 
cr  quietum  requirunt  ad  paritndum  locum,  cr  cubilia  fibi,  ni- 
dofque  conftruunt,  eofque  quam  poffunt  mollijfime  fubjiernuntg 
ut  quam  faciliime  ova  ferventur.  Ex  quibus  pullos  cum  exclu- 
ferint,  it  a  tuentur,  ut  cf  pennii  fove*nt,  ne  frigore  Udantur, 
c  fi  eji  calcr,  a  fcU  ft  opponam,  Cic.  de  Nar.  Deor,  1.  z. 
fSi.  SI. 

To 
ft 


io8  Of  Animals  Care        Book  IV. 

ed  in  them  by  the  wife  Creator?  By  Means  of 
which,  with  what  Alacrity  do  they  tranra6t  their 
parental  Miniftry  ?  With  what  Care  do  they  nurfe 
up  their  Young  j  think  no  Pains  too  great  to  be 
taken  for  them ,  no  Dangers  {iiuu)  too  great  to 
be  ventured  upon  for  their  Guard  and  Securi- 
ty ?  How  carefully  will  they  lead  them  about  in 
Places  of  Safety,  carry  them  into  Places  of  Retreat 
and  Security  5  yea,  fome  of  them  admit  them  in- 
to their  own  Bowels  {www)  ?   How  will  they  ca- 

refs 


To  this  natural  Care  of  Parent-Animals  to  their  young, 
Tve  may  add  the  Returns  made  by  the  young  of  fome  towards 
the  old  ones.  Plmy  faith  of  Rats,  Genitores  fuos  fejfas  fe^ 
neSlA,  alunt  infign't  fietate.  Nat.  Hift.  ).  8.  c.  57-  So  Cranes^ 
he  faith,  Genitricum  fene^am  tnvicem  educant.    L.  lo.  c.  23. 

This  St.  Amhrofe  takes  Notice  of  in  his  Hexameron  ,  and 
Cl.  Magnus  after  him,  Depofni  patris  artus,  per  long&vum  fe»e- 
^ut'ts  plumis  nudatos  circumjlans  foboles  penrAs  propr'tts  jovet^ 
.  collaiitio  cibo  pafcit,  quando  etiam  ipfa  naiur&  reparat 

difpendia,  ut  hinc  inde  fenem  fuhlevantes,  fulcro  alarum  fu- 
arum  ad  volandum  exerceant,  c?*  in  priftinos  ufus  defueta  membrA 
reducant.  For  which  Reafon  this  Bird  is  denominated  Pia. 
Vid.  Ol.  Mag.  H'tfi.  I.  ig.   C.14. 

Hereto  may  be  added  alfo  the  conjugal  Sro^y^  of  the  lit- 
tle green  Ethiopian  Parrot,  which  Mr.  Ray  defcribes  from 
Cltifius.  FcemeUe£  fenejcenies  (quod  I'alde  notabile )  vix  edert 
'valebant,  niji  cibum  jam  a  mare  carptum,  ZD"  aliquandiu  in  pro- 
lobo  retentum,  'O'  ^^t^fi  co^um  roftro  fuo  exciperent,  ut  Colum- 
barum  pulli  a  matre  ali  folent,  Synopf.  Meth.  Av.  p.  32. 

{uuu)  The  moll  timid  Animals,  that  at  other  Times  ab- 
fcond,  or  haltily  fly  from  the  Face  of  Man,  Dogs,  erf.  will, 
for  the  fake  of  their  young,  expofe  themfelves.  Thus  a- 
mong  Fowls,  Hens  will  affault,  inftead  of  fly  from  fuch  as  med- 
dle with  their  Brood.  So  Partridges,  before  their  young 
can  fly,  will  drop  frequently  down,  firft  at  lefler,  and  then 
at  greater  Difl:ances,  to  dodge  and  draw  off  Dogs  from  pur- 
fuing  their  young. 

{wzvw)  The  opojfum  hath  a  curious  Bag  on  purpofc  for  the 
fecuring  and  carrying  about  her  young.  There  are  belong- 
ing to  this  Bag  two  Bones  (not  to  be  met  with  in  any  other 
Skeleton)  and  four  Pair  of  Mufcles;  and  fomefay  the  Teats 
lie  therein  alfo.    Dr.  Ty/ow,   Anat,  of  the   O/o/.  in  Phil. 

Tranf, 


chap.  XI.         of  their  Tomig.  209 

rcfs  them  with  their  alftftionate  Notes,  lull  and 
quiet  them  with  their  tender  parental  Voice,  put 
Food  into  their  Mouths,  fuckle  them,  cherifh  and 
keep  them  warm,  teach  them  to  pick,  and  ear, 
and  gather  Food  for  themrdvciii  and,  in  a  word, 
perform  the  whole  Part  of  lb  many  Nurfcs,  de- 
puted by  the  Sovereign  Lord  and  Prefervcr  of  the 
World,  to  help  fuch  young  and  Ihiklels  Creatdrcs, 
till  they  are  come  to  that  Maturity,  as  to  be  able  to 
fhift  for  themfelves  ? 

And  as  for  other  Animals  (particularly  Infeds, 
whofe  Sire  is  partly  the  Sun,  and  whofe  numerous 
Off-fpring  would  be  too  great  for  their  Parent-Ani- 
mal's Care  and  Provifion)  thefe  are  fo  generated,  as 
to  need  none  of  their  Care,  by  Realon  they  arrive 
immediately  to  their  'HAiy^ia,  their  perfect,  adult 
State,  and  are  able  to  fhifc  for  themfelves.  Bun 
yet,  thus  far  their  parental  Inltinft  (equivalent  to 
the  moll  rational  Care  and  Fore-(ight)  doth  ex- 
tend, that  the  old  ones  do  not  wildly  drop  their 
Eggs  and  Sperm  any  where,  at  all  Adventures,  buc 
fo  cautioufly  repofit  it  in  fuch  commodious  Places 
(fome  in  the  Waters,  fome  on  Flefli,  lome  on  Plants 
proper  and  agreeable  to  their  Species  {xxx)\  and 
fome  fhut  up  agreeable  Food  in  their  Nells,  partly 
for  Incubation,  partly  for  Food  ijyy)-^  that  their 
young  in  their  Amelia^  or  Nympba  State,  may  find 
fufficient  and  agreeable  Food  to  bring  them  up,  till 
they  arrive  to  their  Maturity. 

Thus  far  the  Parental  lnllin6t  and  Care. 


Tranf.  N^.  239.  where  he  alfo,  from  Oppian,  mentions  the 
Bog-Fiji) ,  tnac  upon  any  Storm  or  Danger,  receives  ihc 
young  Ones  into  her  Belly,  which  cumc  out  again  when  the 
Fright  is  over.  So  ahb  the  Squatma  and  Glaucus,  the  lame 
Author  faith,  have  the  fame  Care  for  their  young,  buc  re- 
ceive them  into  diilcrent  Receptacles. 
(xxx)  Sec  BookVlll.  chap. 6. 

{y^y)  See  c/jd/".  13.  n^u  (c). 

P  Ncxc 


zio  Of  Animals  Care        Book  IV. 

•  Next  we  may  obferve  no  lefs  in  the  young 
themfelvcs,  efpecially  in  thofe  of  the  irrational  A- 
nimals.  Forafmuch  as  the  Parent- Animal  is  not 
able  to  bear  them  about,  to  cloath  them,  and  to 
dandle  them,  as  Man  doth  j  how  admirably  hath 
the  Creator  contrived  their  State,  thac  thofe  poor 
young  Creatures  can  foon  walk  about,  and  with 
the  little  Helps  of  their  Dam,  fhift  for,  and  help 
t.hemfelves  ?  How  naturally  do  they  hunt  for  their 
Teat,  fuck,  pick  (zzz)^  and  take  in  their  proper 
Food  ? 

But  for  the  young  of  Man,  their  Parents  Rea- 
fon,  joined  with  natural  Affe6tion,  being  fufficient 
to  help,  to  nurfe,  to  feed,  and  to  cloath  themj 
therefore  they  are  born  helplefs,  and  are  more  ab- 
folutely  than  other  Creatures,  call  upon  their  Pa- 
rents Care  (aaaa).  A  manifeit  Acband  Defignation 
of  the  Divine  Providence. 

2.  The  other  Inlfance  I  promifed,  is  the  Provi- 
fion  made  for  the  Prefervation  of  fuch  Animals  as 
are.fometimes  deftitute  of  Food,  or  in  Danger  of 
being  fo.  The  \Vinter  is  a  very  inconvenient,  im- 
proper Seafon,  to  afford  either  Food  or  Exercife 
i;o  Infects,  and  many  other  Animals.     When  the 


.  {zzz)  There  is  manifeftly  a  fiiperintending  Providence  in 
this  Gale,  that  fome  Animals  are  able  to  fuck  as  foon  as  ever 
the'y  are  born,  and  that  they  will  naturally  hunt  for  the 
Teat  before  they  are  quite  gotten  out  of  the  Secundines,  and 
parted  from  the  Navel-String,  as  I  havefeen.  But  iox  Chick- 
ens, and  other  young  Birds,  they  not  being  able  immediately 
to  pick  till  they  are'ftronger,  have  a  notable  Proviiion  made 
for  fuch  a  Time,  by  a  part  of  the  Yolk  of  the  Egg  being 
inclofed  in  their  Belly,  a  little  before  their  Exclufion  or 
Hatching,  which  ferves  for  their  Nouriftiment,  till  they  are 
grown  ftrong  enough  to  pick  up  Meat.  Vid.  Book  VII.  Chap.4. 
Note  {a). 

"•  {a-iCaa)  Gini  [Infantes]  de  ope  noftra  ac  de  divina  mifericor- 
d'tti  fins  mertntur,  qui  in  prima  Jlatifn  nativitatis  fu&  ortu  plo- 
rantes  ac  Jlentes,  niC  aliud  faciunt  ^u^m  deprecaatur.  Cypr. 
Ep.  ad  Fid. 

flowry 


Chap.  XI.        of  their  Toung.  in 

flowry  Fields  arc  diverted  of  their  Gaiety ;  when 
the  fertile  Trees  and  Plants  arc  (bipp'd  of  their 
Fruits,  and  the  Air,  inllcad  of  being  warmed  with 
the  chcrifhing  Beams  of  the  Sun,  is  chilled  with 
rigid  Froft  j  what  would  become  of  fuch  Animals 
as  are  impatient  of  Cold  ?  What  Food  could  be 
found  by  fuch  as  arc  fuhfillcd  by  the  Summer- Fruits? 
But  to  obviate  all  this  Evil,  to  (lave  off  the  Deftruc- 
tion  and  Extirpation  of  divers  Species  of  Animals, 
the  infinitely  wife  Prcfcrver  of  the  World  hath  as 
wifely  ordered  the  matter  \  that,  in  the  firll  Place, 
fuch  as  are  impatient  of  Cold,  fliould  have  fuch  a 
fpccial  Strufture  of  their  Body,  particularly  of  their 
Hearts,  and  Circulation  of  their  Blood  \bhbb)y  as 
durine  that  Seafon,  not  to  fuffcr  any  wafte  of  their 
Bod)^  and  confequently  not  to  need  any  Recruits; 
but  that  they  fhould  be  able  to  live  in  a  kind  of 
flcepy,  middle  State,  in  their  Places  of  fafe  Re- 
treat, until  the  warm  Sun  revives  both  them  and 
their  Food  together. 

The  next  Provifion  is  for  fuch  as  can  bear  the 
Cold,  but  would  want  Food  thenj  and  that  is  in 
fome  by  a  long  Patience  of  Hunger  {cccc)^  in  others 

by 


{libhl?)  I  might  n.ime  here  fome  of  the  Species  of  Birds, 
the  whole  Tribe  ahnolt  of  Infcds,  and  fome  among  other 
Tribes,  that  are  able  to  fubfift  for  many  Months  without 
Food,  and  fome  without  Refpiration  too ,  or  very  little  ; 
But  it  may  fuffice  to  inftance  only»in  the  LandTortoife,  of 
the  Strudure  of  whofe  Heart  and  Lungs :  See  Book  VI.  Chap.  5. 
Koie  {b). 

(cccc)  Inediam  diutifftmi  tolerat  Lupus,  ut  v  alia  omnia  car- 
nivora,  licet  voracilfima  ;  magna  uiiqut  natuf£  providcntia  ; 
quoniam  efca  non  fem^cr  lu  promptu  efi.     Ray'f  Synopf.  Quadr. 

P-  W4. 

To  the  long  Abflinence  mentioned  of  Brute-Animals,  1 
hope  the  Reader  will  excufe  me  if  I  add  one  or  two  InQanccs 
of  cxtraordmary  Ablhnence  among  Men.  One  MarthaTaj' 
lor,  born  in  Derby/Jure,  by  a  Blow  on  the  Back  fell  into  fuch 
a  Proftration  of  Appetite,  that  Hie  took   httlc  Sullcnance, 

F  %  buc 


2ii    ^refervattonof  AniinalsyScc.  Book IV 

by  their  notable  Inftind  in  laying  up  Food  before- 
hand againlt  the  approaching  Winter  {dddd).  O^ 
this  many  entertaining  Examples  may  be  given  5 
particularly  we  may,  at  the  proper  Seafon,  obferve 
not  only  the  little  Treaftfres  and  Holes  well-flock- 
ed with  timely  Proviiions,  but  large  Fields  (^^^^) 
here  and  there  throughout  befpread  with  confide- 

rable 


but  fome  Drops  with  a  Feather,  from  Chriflmas  1667.  for 
thirteen  Months,  and  flept  but  httle  too  all  the  Time.  See  Dr. 
Sampfcni  Account  thereof  in  Ephem.  Germ.  T.  3.  Obf.  173. 

To  this  we  may  add  the  Cafe  of  S.  Chilton,  of  Tinjhury, 
near  Bath,  who  in  the  Years  1693,  1696,  and  97,  flept  di- 
"vers  Weeks  together.  And  although  he  would  fometimes, 
in  a  very  odd  manner,  take  Sultenance,  yet  would  lie*a  long 
Time  without  any,  or  with  very  little,  and  all  without  any 
couliderable  Decay*     See  Phil.  Tranf.  N°.  304. 

(dddd)  They  are  admirable  Inftinds  which  the  Stent  de 
'Beanplan  relates  of  his  own  Knowledge,  of  the  Httle  Animals 
called  Bohaques  in  Ukraine.  They  make  Burroughs  like  Rab- 
bets, ai7d  in  Odober  flnu  themfelvei  up,  and  do  not  come  out 

Again  till  April. Theyfpend  all  the  Winter  under  Ground^ 

eating  what  they  laid  up  in  Stiwmer.  Thofe  that  are  laz.y 

among  them,  they  lay  on  their  Backs,  then  lay  a  great  handful 
of  dry  Herbage  upon  their  Bodies,  &C.  then  others  drag  thofe 
JDrones  to  the  Mouths  of  thc.r  Burroughs,  and  fo  thofe  Crea- 
tures ferve  injiead  of  Barrows,  &c.  /  have  often  feen  thstn 
fra£Iife  this,  and  have  had  the  Curiofity  to  obferve  them  whole 

Days  together. Their  Holes  are  parted  like  Chambers  ;  fome 

ferve  for  Store-Houfes,  others  for  Burying- Places,  &c.  Their 
Government  is  nothing  inferior  to  that  of  Bees,  &c  They  never 
go  abroad  without  pojiing  a  Centincl  upon  fome  high  Ground,  to 
give  notice  to  the  others  whilfl  they  are  feeding.  As  foon  as 
the  Centinel  fees  any  Body,  it  Jiands  upon  his  Hind- Legs  and 
Tvhijiles.  Beauplau'^f  Defcription  of  Ukraine,  in  Vol.1,  of  the 
Colledion  of  Voyages,  c/c 

A  hke  Inftance  of  the  Northern  Qalli^Sylveftres ,  fee  ia 
Chap.  13.   Note  {g). 

As  for  the  Scriptural  Inftance  of  the  Ant,  fee  hereafter 
BookVWl.Chap.'^.    Note^fd). 

(eeee)  I  have  in  Autumn,  not  without  Pleafure  obferved, 
not  only  the  great  Sagacity  and  Diligence  of  Swine,  in  hunt- 
ing out  the  Stores  of  the  Field-Mice ;  but  the  wonderful  Pre- 
caution alfo  of  thofe  little  Animals,  in  hiding  their  Food  be- 
forehand 


Chap.  XI.         The  Concltifioft.  113 

rablc  Numbers  of  the  Fruits  of  the  nciglibouiing 
Trees,  hiid  carefully  up  in  the  Earth,  and  covered 
fafc,  by  the  provident  little  Animals  inii.ibiting 
thereabouts.  And  not  without  Plcafurc  have  I  fccn 
and  admired  the  Sagacity  of  Ather  Animals,  hunt- 
ing out  thofe  fubterraneous  Fruits,  and  pillaging, 
the  Treafures  of  thole  little  provident  Creatures. 

And  now  from  this  bare  tranllcnc  View  of  this 
Branch  of  the  Great  Creator's  Providence  and  Go' 
vcrment,  relating  to  the  Food  of  his  Creatures,  wc 
can  conclude  no  lefs,  than  that  ilnce  this  grand 
Atfair  hath  fuch  manifell  Strokes  of  admirable  and 
wife  Management,  that  fince  this  is  dcmonllratcd 
throughout  all  Ages  and  Places,  that  therefore  ic 
is  God's  Handy-Work.  For  how  is  Jt  pofllblethat 
fo  vaft  a  World  of  Animals  ihould  be  fupported, 
fuch  a  great  Variety  equally  and  well  fupplicd  with 
proper  F'ood,  in  every  Place  fit  for  Habitation, 
without  an  efpccial  Supcrintendency  and  Manage- 
ment, equal  to,  at  Icait,  that  of  the  moll:  prudcnc 
Steward  and  Houlholder?  How  {liould  the  Crea- 
tures be  able  to  'hn^S  out  their  Food  when  laid  up 
in  fecret  Places?  And  how  iliould  ihcy  be  able  to 
gather  even  a  great  deal  of  the  common  Food,  and 
at  laft  to  macerate  and  digelt  it,  without  peculiar 
Organs  adapted  to  the  Service?  And  what  Icfsthan 
an  infinitely  Wife  God  could  form  fuch  a  Set  of 
curious  Organs,  as  wc  find  every  Species  endowed 
with,  for  this  very  Ufe?  Organs fb artificially  made, 
fo  exquifitely  fitted  up,  that  the  more  ihidly  wo 
furvey  thepi,    the  more  accurately  we  view  them 


forehand  againft  Winter.  In  the  Time  of  Acorns  falling,  1 
have,  by  means  of  the  Hogs,  difcovcrci,  that  ihc  Mu«  had, 
all  over  the  ncit^hbouring  Fields,  treal'ured  up  lingle  Acorn, 
in  little  Holes  they  had  fcratchcd,  and  in  whivh  ihcy  had 
carefully  covered  up  the  Acorn.  Thcle  tic  Hj^.  would, 
pay  aficr  D.^y,  \\\\n:  out  by  their  Smell. 


(^V^rt 


2-14  Of  Animals  Cloath'ing.    Book  IV. 

(even  the  meanefl  of  them  with  our  blell  GlafTes) 
the  lefs  Fault  we  find  in  them,  and  the  more  we 
admire  them:  Whereas  the  bed  polifhed,  and 
nio(t  exquiiite  Works,  made  by  human  Art,  appear 
through  our  Glafit-s, 'as  i*ude  and  bungling,  deform- 
ed and  rnonftrousj  and  yet  we  admn-e  them,  and 
call'them  Works  of  Art  and  Reafon.  And  lalily, 
What  lefs  than  Rational  and  Wife  could  endow  ir- 
rational Animals  with  various  Inftin6i:s,  equivalent, 
in  then-  fpccial  Vv^ay,  to  Reafon  it  felf?  Infomuch 
that  fomefiom  thence  have  abfolutely  concluded, 
that  thofe  Creatures  had  fome  Glimmerings  of  Rea- 
fon. Buiir  is  manifeltly  Inftinft,  not  Reafon  they 
a6t  by,  becaufe  we  find  no  varying,  but  that  every 
Species  doth  naturally  purfue  at  all  Times  the  fame 
Methods  and  Way,  without  any  Tutorage  or  Lear- 
ning: Whereas  A£?^/(?;^,  without  Inftrudion,  would 
often  vary,  and  do  that  by  many  Methods,  which 
InfiinH  doth  by  one  alone.  But  of  this  more  here- 
after. 


CHAP.    XII. 

Of  the  Cloathing  of  Animals. 

HAving  in  the  foregoing  Chapter  fomewhat 
largely  taken  a  view  of  the  Infinite  Crea- 
tor's Wifdom  and  Goodnefs  towards  his  Creatures, 
in  ordering  their  Food,  I  fhall  be  more  brief  in  this 
Chapter,  in  my  View  of  their  Cloathing  {a);  ano- 


{a')  Concerning  the  C/tf«/^/»^o/ Animals,  Arifiotle  oUervcs, 
That  fiich  A}7imals  have  Hair  as  go  on  Feet  and  are  vivipa- 
rous ;  and  that  fuch  are  covered  tvith  a  Shell,  as  go  on  Feet, 
and  are  oviparous,  Hift.  Anim.  1.  3.  c.  10. 


Chap.  XII.   Of  Animals  Cloathhig.  ne- 

ther ncceffiiry  Appendage  of  Life,  and  in  which 
wc  have  plain  Tokens  of  the  Creator's  Art,  mani- 
lelled  in  thefe  two  Pavticiilavs  j  the  SniLihlencJs  of 
uinimah  Cloathhig  to  their  Place  and  Occaftons  j  and 
the  Garniture  and  Beauty  thereof. 

I.  The  Cloathing  of  Animals  is  fiiitcd  to  tlicir 
Place  of  Abode,  and  Occalions  there  j  a  inanifcll 
Ad  of  Dciign  and  Skill.  For  if  there  was  a  Pof- 
llbility,  that  Animals  could  have  been  accoutred 
any  other  Way,  than  by  God  that  made  them,  it 
mull  needs  have  come  to  pafs,  that  their  Cloathmg 
would  have  been  at  all  Adventures,  or  all  made  the 
fame  Mode  and  Way,  or  Tome  of  it,  at  lealf,  in- 
convenient and  unfuitablc.  But  on  the  contrary , 
we  find  all  is  curious  and  complcar,  nothing  too 
jDUch,  nothing  too  little,  nothing  bungling,  no- 
, thing  but  what  will  bear  the  Scrutiny  of  the  moft 
txquifite  Artillj  yea,  and  fo  far  out-do  his  belt 
Skill,  rhat  his  moil  exquifitc  Imitations,  even  of 
the  meanell  Hair,  Feather,  Scale,  oi*  Shell,  will  be 
;iound  only  as  fo  many  ugly,  ill-made  Blunders  and 
Botches,  when  llriftly  brought  to  the  Tell  of  good 
Glalics.  But  we  fliall  find  an  Example  remarkable 
enough  in  the  prcfent  Cafe,  if  we  only  compare  the 
bell  of  Cloathing  which  Man  makes  for  hinifclf, 
with  that  given  by  the  Creator  for  the  Covering  of 
the  irrational  Creatures.  Of  which  it  may  be  laid, 
as  our  Sa'viour  doth  of  the  Flowers  of  the  Field, 
Alat.  vi.  ip.  That  even  Solomon^  .in  all  his  Glory,  ivas 
not  arrayed  like  one  of  theje. 

But  let  us  come  to  Particulars,  and  conliderthc 
Suitablenefs  of  the   difi'crent  Method  the  Creator 
hath  taken  in  the  Cloathing  of  Man,  and  of  the 
irrational  Animals.     This  Pliny  {b)  pathetically  la- 
ments, 


{h)  Cu]us  [Hominis]    causa  ii/htur  cttnfia  alia  genuijft  Na- 
tura,  ma^n.i  v  Jivd  vierccdt   luntra  tAtita  ft*  wnftfra  :    t$t 

P  4  .  »"» 


21 6  Of  Animals  Cloathing.     Book  IV. 

ments,  and  fays,  //  is  hard  to  judge^  whether  Na- 
ture hath  been  a  kinder  Parent^  or  more  cruel  Step- 
Mother  to  Man.  For,  fays  he,  Of  all  Creatures^  he 
alone  is  covered  with  other'' s  Riches^  whereas  Nature 
hath  given  various  Cloathing  to  other  Animals,  Shells^ 
Hides,  Prickles,  Shag,  Brtjlles,  Hair,  Down,  §uills. 
Scales,  Fleeces ;  and  Trees  Jhe  hath  fenced  with  a  Bark 
or  two  againji  the  Injuries  of  Cold  and  Heat.  Only 
poor  naked  Man,  fays  he,  is  in  the  Day  of  his  Birth 
caji  into  the  wide  fV^orld,  to  immediate  crying  and 
/(fualling  i  and  none  of  all  Creatures  befides,  fo  foon  to 
Tears  in  the  very  beginning  of  their  Life. 

But  here  we  have  a  manifell  Demonftration  of 
the  Care  and  Wifdom  of  God  towards  his  Crea- 
tures j  that  fuch  fhould  come  into  the  World  with 
their  Bodies  ready  furnifhed  and  accommodated , 
who  had  neither  Reafon  nor  Forecaft  to  contrive, 
nor  Parts  adapted  to  the  Artifices  and  Workman- 
Ihip  of  Cloathing  j  but  for  Man,  he  being  endow- 
ed with  the  tranfcending  Faculty  of  Reafon,  and 
thereby  made  able    to   help   himfelf,    by    having 


7ion  fit  fans  Jifiimare,  Parens  melior  homini,  an  trifiior  Ne- 
ver ca  fuer'tt.  Ante  omnia  unum  Animantium  cunSlorum  alie- 
nis  velar  opihits  :  ceteris  varie  tegumenta  tributt,  tefias,  corti- 
ces, coria,  fpinas,  villos,  fetas,  pilos,  plumam,  pennas,  [qua- 
}»as,  I'ellera.  Truncos  etiam  arborefqtie  cortice,  interdum  ge- 
fnino,  a  frigoribus,  c?*  calore  tutata  eji.  Hommem  tarniim  nu- 
dum, zsy  in  nuda.  humo,  natali  die  ahjicit  ad  vagitus  Jlatim  c?* 
floratum,  nuUumque  tot  animalium  aliud  ad  lacrymas,  O'  ht^s 
protin'M  vitA  principio.    Plin.  Nat.  Hift.  1/7.  Prooein. 

Let  Seneca  anfwcr  this  Complaint  of  Pliny,  although  per- 
haps what  he  faith  might  be  more  properly  noted  in  another 
Place :  Gjuifquis  es  iniquus  Aftimator  fortis  fjumam, ,  cogita 
Cfuanta  nobis  tribuerit  Parens  nofler,  quanta  yalentiora  anim^- 
lia  fub  jugum  miferimus,  quanta  velociora  ajfequamur,  quam 
nihil  fit  mortale  non  fub  j£Ih  nofiro  pofitum.  Tot  virtutes  atce- 
pimus,  tot  artes,  animum  denique  cui  nihil  non  eodem  quo  inten- 
dit  momenta  pervium  efi,  Sidertbus  velociorem,  &c.  Senec.  de 
Benef.  1.  2.  c.  29. 


Thougl^ts 


Chap.  XII.   Of  Animals  Cloathing.  117 

Thoughts  to  contrive*,  and  withnl  Hands  to  efFefr, 
and  fufficienc  Materials  (<r)  afforded  him  from  ihc 
Skins  and  Fleeces  of  Animals,  and  from  various 
Trees  and  Plants ;  Man,  I  fay,  having  all  this 
Provifion   made   for   him,    therefore    the   Creator 

hath 


(c)  Mirantur  pluritni  quomoiio  tute,  cr  /jnt  vivant  homines 
in  horrcndis  frigorilus  plagt  Septentrionalis  ;  hancque  levetn  qut" 
ftionem  ultra  30  annos  audieram  in  Italia,  prsfei  tim  ab  A^thi- 
cpihus,  CT"  Indis,  qmhus  onerofus  videtur  vijiitns  fub  Zona  tcr- 

rida. Gluibtu  refpcfidetur, Gaiidct  Indus  multiplici  pin- 

marum  gencrt,  magis  forfan  pro  teguwento,    quam  necejfttate : 

rurftti  Scytha  vtilofo  lejlttu Ita  Jub  pclo  ylr^ico  adversur 

flfperriwoi   hyemes opportnna   rttnedia  faciliter  adminijlrat 

[Natura],  Ligna  videlictt  in  maxima,  copia,  cr  levijfimo  ptetio, 
C/  demum  Pedes  diverforum  antmaliurfi,  tam  fylvejirium  quam 
dowejiicoriim.  Then  he  gives  a  Catalogue  ot  them,  and  I'aith, 
Sj^tarum  omnium  experti  peUifices  ita  tngeniose  noverunt  mixturas 
cumponere,  ut  ptilchcrrimum  decorem  oflendat  varietcK,  cj"  call- 
dtffunum [omentum  adjuni'ta  mollities.     Ol.  Mag.  Hifl.  1.  6.  c.  zo. 

To  this  Guard  ag.iinft  the  Cold,  namely,  of  fire  and 
Cloathing;  I  hope  the  Reader  will  excufe  me,  if  I  take  this 
Opportunity  of  addmg  fome  other  Dcfenl'atives  Nature,  (or 
rather  the  gre^t  Author  of  Nature,)  hath  aflbrded  thcfe  nor- 
thern Regions:  Such  are  their  high  Mountains,  abounding, 
as  Ol.  Magntii  faith,  through  all  Parts;  alfo  their  numerous 
Woods,  which  befides  their  Fire,  do,  with  the  Mountains, 
ferve  as  excellent  Screens  againft  the  Cold,  piercing  Air  and 
Winds.  Their  prodigious  Quantities  of  Minerals,  and  Me- 
tals, alfo  afford  Heat,  and  w.Trm  Vapours,  Mi)2er&  fcptentrio- 
naitum  regiontim  fatis  mult£,  vjagn^,  diverfd,  ar  opulenti  funt, 
faith  the  fame  curious,  and  (for  his  Time,)  learned  Archbi- 
(hop,  /.  6.  c.  I.  and  in  other  Places.  And  for  the  Warmth 
they  afford,  the  Volcano's  of  ihofe  Parts  are  an  Evidence;  as 
are  alfo  their  terrible  Thunder  and  Lightning,  which  are  ob- 
ferv'd  to  be  tlic  mofl  fevere  and  mifchievous  in  their  metal- 
line Mountains,  in  which  large  Herds  of  Cattle  are  fometimcs 
delhoy'd;  the  Rocks  fp  rent  and  fliatter"d,  that  new  Veins  of 
Silver  are  thereby  difcover'd  ;  and  a  troublefome  Kind  ot 
Quinfie  is  produc'd  in  their  Throats,  by  the  ftench,  and  poi- 
ibnous  Nature  of  the  fulphureous  Vapours,  which  they  dif- 
folve,  by  drinking  warm  Beer  and  Butter  together,  as  Qlatfs 
tells  us  in  the  fame  Book,  Cha^.  ii. 

To  all  which  Defenf.uives,    I  fliali,  in  the  laft  Place,  add, 

the  warm  Vapours  of  their  Lakes,  (^fomc  of  which  arc  prodi- 

■"  gioufly 


ai8  Of  Animals  Cloathtng.     Book  I\/'. 

hath  wifely  made  him  naked,  and  left  him  to  fhift 
for  himfelf,  being  fo  well  able  to  help  himfelf. 

And  a  notable  A6t  this  is  of  the  Wifdom  of  God, 
not  only  as  the  more  fetting  forth  his  Care  and 
Kindnefs  to  them  that  moft  needed  his  Help,  the 
helplefs  irrational  Animals,  and  in  his  not  over- 
doing his  Work  5  but  alfo  as  it  is  moil  agreeable  to 
the  Nature  and  State  of  Man  (^),  both  on  natural 
and  political  Accounts.  That  Man  fhould  cioath 
himfelf  is  moft  agreeable  to  his  Nature,  particularly 


gioufly  large,  of  130  Italian  Miles  in  Length,  and  not  much 
lefs  in  Breadth;)  alfo  of  their  Rivers,  efpecially  the  Vapours 
which  arife  from  the  Sea.  Of  which  Guard  againft  fevere 
Cold,  we  have  lately  had  a  convincing  Proof  in  the  great 
Trofi,  in  1708,  wherein,  when  England,  Germany,  France, 
Denmark;  yea,  the  more  foutherly  Regions  of  Italy,  Swit- 
zerland, and  other  Parts  fuffer'd  feverely,  Ireland  and  Scotland 
felt  very  little  of  it,  hardly  more  than  in  other  Winters ;  of 
the  Particulars  of  which,  having  given  an  Account  m  the 
Phil.  Tranf.  K°.  314.  I  ftiall  thither  refer  the  Reader.  But  it 
feems  this  is  what  doth  ordinarily  befal  thofe  northern  Parts; 
particularly  the  Ijlands  of  Orkney,  of  which  the  learned  Dr. 
Wallace  gives  this  Account  :  Here  the  Winters  are  generally 
more  fuhjeii  to  Rain  than  Snow ;  nor  doth  the  Froji  and  SnatV 
continue  fo  long  here,  as  in  other  Parts  of  Scotland ;  bitt  the 
Wind  in  the  mean  Time  will  often  blow  very  boijleroufy ;  and 
it  Rains  fometimes,  not  by  Drops,  but  by  Spouts  of  Water,  as  if 
whole  Clouds  fell  down  at  once.  In  the  Tear  1680,  in  the 
Month  of  June,  after  great  Thunder,  there  fell  Flakes  of  Ice 
mar  a  Foot  thick.  Wall.  Account  of  Ork.  Chap.  i.  p.  4.  From 
which  lail  PafTage  I  obferve;  That  although  in  thofe  Parts, 
the  Atmofphere  near  the  Earth  be  warm,  it  is  exceffively 
cold  above;  fo  as  to  freeze  fome  of  thofe  Spouts  of  Water 
in  their  Defcent,  into  fuch  great,  and  almoft  incredible  Mafias 
of  Hail.  And  whence  can  this  Warmth  proceed,  byt  from 
the  Earth,  or  Sea,  emitting  Heat  fufficient  to  ftave  off  the 
Cold  above?  Confult  Book  II.  Chap.  5.  Note  (c). 

{d)  Sictit  enim  ft  innata  fibi  [i.  e.  Homini]  aliqua  haberet 
arma,  ilia  ei  fola  femper  adejfent,  it  a  ^  Ji  art  em  aliquam  Na- 
tt*ra  fortitus  eJJ'et,,  reliquas  fan}  non  haberet.  ffjj^ia  vero  ei  me- 
liui  erat  omnibtn  armis,  omnibufque  artibus  uti,  neutrum  eo- 
rum  Or  naturfi  ipfi  propterea  datum  eft.  Galen,  de  Uf.  Part. 
L  I.  c.  4. 

(among 


Chap.  XH.   Of  Animals  Cloath'tng.  219 

(among  other  Things,)  as  being  moft  Hilutarv,  and 
mod  fuitable  to  his  Affairs.  I'or  by  this  Means, 
Man  can  adapt  hi*  Cloathing  to  all  Scalons,  to  all 
Climates,  to  this,  or  to  any  Biilineli.  He  can  here- 
by keep  himfelf  fwcct  and  clean,  fence  off  many 
Injuriesi  but  above  all,  by  tliis  Method  oF  Cloath- 
ing, with  the  natural  Texture  of  his  Skin  adapted 
to  it,  it  is  that  grand  Means  of  Hcaltli,  namely, 
infenjlble  Perfftration  [e)  is  pcrform'd,  at  lead  great- 
ly promoted,  without  which  an  human  Body  would 
be  foon  over- run  with  Difeafe. 

In  the  next  Place,  there  are  good  political  Rea- 
fons  for  Man's  cloathing  himfelf^  inafmuch  as  his 
Jndulby  is  hereby  cmploy'd  in  the  Exerciks  of  his 
Art  and  Ingenuity  j  Ins  Diligence  and  Care  arc 
exerted  in  keeping  himfelf  iweer,  cleanly,  and 
neat  J  many  Callings  and  Ways  of  JJfe  arifc  from 
thence,  and,  (to  name  no  more,)  the  Ranks  and 
Degrees  of  Men  are  hereby  in  fome  Mcallire  rcn- 
dcr'd  viiibic  to  others,  in  the  fevcral  Nations  of 
the  Earth. 

Thus  it  is  manifcilly  beft  for  Man  that  he  fliould 
cloath  himfelf. 


(c)  Concerning  infenftble  Perfpirat'ion,  Samper im  chferves. 
That  it  much  exceeds  all  the  Scnfible  put  together.  De  star. 
Med.  Aph.  4.  That  as  much  is  evacu.ited  by  infenjible  Per- 
fpirat'ion in  one  Day,  as  is  by  Stool  in  fourteen  Days.  Par- 
ticularly, thar,  in  a  Night's  Time,  about  fixiccn  Ounces  is 
"commonly  lent  out  by  Urine,  tour  Ounces  by  Stool;  but  ^- 
bovc  forty  Ounces  by  infevftble  Per/pimtion,  A;hor.  59,  60. 
That  if  a  Man  eats  and  drinks  8  /.  m  a  Day,  5  /.  of  ic  is  fpeni 
in  mfenftlle  Perfpiration,  §.  i.  Aph.  6.     And  as  lo  ilic  Time?, 

he  (aith,   Jb  afjUtupto  cibo  5  horis  I  /   circiter  pcrfpira'uilis 

exhalare  folet,  a  ja  iul  nam  3  /.  circiter  ;  u  iia  ad  16am  lix 
felibram,  Aph.  50. 

And  as  to  the  wonderful  Benefits  of  infoifibU  Pirfpimtion, 
they  are  abundantly  denionflrated  by  the  fame  learned  Tcrfon, 
ubi  fupra ;  as  alio  by  Borelli  in  his  fecund  Part,  De  Mot.  Ant- 
tnd.  Prop.  168.  who  laith,  NeceJJ'aria  ejl  in^enfiiilu  Trarfpf- 
ratiOf  u(  vitA  Animnlis  conftryctttr. 

Put 


l^o  Of  Animals  Cloathing.     Book  IV. 

But  for  the  poor  fhifdefs  Irrationals,  it  is  a 
prodigious  A^  of  the  great  Creator's  Indulgence, 
that  they  are  all  ready  jfurnifhed  with  fuch  Cloath- 
ing, as  IS  proper  to  their  Place  and  Bufinefs  (/)» 
Some  covered  with  Hair  (^),  fome  with  Fea- 
thers 


(/)  Animant'tHm  verb  quanta  varietas  eft?  ^anta  ad  earn 
rstn  v'fi,  ut  tn  fuo  qusque  genere  permaneant  ?  ffluarum  alia 
cori'ti  te^A  [^nt,  ali&  vill'ti  veftitA,  alU  [pints  h'trjut&  :  plumd 
aiietf,  altm  fquama.  videmui  obdndien,  altM  ejfe  cornibm  arma- 
tccff   aliiti  habere  ejfugta  pennarum.     Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  1.  2. 

c.  47-. 

ig)  From  Malpight%  curious  Obfervations  of  the  Hairy  I 
ihall  note  three  Things,  r.  Their  Strufture  is  fiHulous,  or 
mbular;  which  hath  long  been  a  Doubt  among  the  curious. 
lift-ilofnm  [effe  PilumJ  demonftrant  Itiftratio  fdorum  a  cauda 

f^  collo  Equorum,  &c. prAcipue  fetarum  Apri,    qu-t  patenti- 

trem  ex  fiftulis  compofitionem  exhibent.     Eft  autem  diftm  Apri 

phis  Cjlindrictitn   eorptts  quafi  diaphanum fifiularum  aggere 

conftatuntt  C?'  fpeciem  columns  ft.riat&  pr&  fc  fcrt.  Componente$ 
ftftuls.  in  gjrum  fituat&  in  apice  patentiora  redduntur ;  nam  hi- 
aas  pilus  in  gemincts  dividitur  partes,  o"  componentes  minima  fi- 

fiul£ liberiores  reddits.  mamifefiantur,    ita  ut  enumerari 

pojfunt;  kcti  autem  io,  zj"  ultra  numeravi.  •  Expofit&  fiftn- 
Ia  •  "  '  tubulof&  funt,  cj;'  frequent tbtis  tunicls  tranfverfaliter 
fitteatis,  velnti  valvulis  pollent.  F.t  qucniam  Spinx,  in  Erina- 
ceii  prdcipui,  &c.  nil  aiiud  funt,  quam  dun  ^^  rigidi  pili,  ideo^ 
&c.  And  then  he  defcribes  the  Hedgehogs  Spines,  in  which 
thofe  Tubes  manifeftly  appear ;  together,  with  medullary 
Valves  and  Cells ;  not  inelegant,  which  he  hath  figur'd  iii 
Tak  i6.  at  the  End  of  his  Works. 

That  which  this  fagacious,  and  not  enough  to  be  comr 
mended  Obferver,  took  notice  of  in  the  Structure  of  Hair, 
and  its  Parity  to  the  Spines;  I  have  my  felf  obferv'd  in  fome 
Meafure  to  be  true,  in  the  Hair  of  Cats,  Rats,  Mice,  and  di- 
vers other  Animals;  which  look  very  prettily  when  view'd 
with  a  good  Microfcope.  The  Hair  of  a  Moufe,  (the  moft 
tranfparent  of  any  1  have  view'd,)  feems  to  be  one  fuigle 
tranfparent  Tube,  with  a  Pith  made  up  of  a  fibrous  Subftance, 
running  in  dark  Lines;  in  fome  Hairs  tranverfly,  in  other? 
Ipirally,  as  in  Tig.  14,  ij.  16,  17.  Thefe  darker  medullary- 
Parts,  or  Lines,  I  have  obferv'd,  are  no  other  than  fmall  Fi- 
bres convolved  round,  and  lying  clofer  together  than  in  other- 
Farts  of  the  Hair.    They  run  from  the  Bottom,  to  the  Tor 


Chap.  XII.  Of  Animals  Qloathing.  iii 

thcrs  {h)^  fome  with  Scales,  fome  with  Shells  (/), 
fomc  only  Skin,  and  fome  with  firm  and  llout  Ar- 
mature;  all  nicely  accommodated  to  the  Element 
in  which  the  Creature  liveth,  and  its  occalions 
there  {k).  To  ^ladrupeds  Hair  is  a  commodious 
Cloathing4  which,  together  with  the  apt  Tex- 
ture of  their  Skin,  fitttth  them  for  all  Weathers, 
to  lie  on  the  Ground,  and  to  do  the  (3fhccs  of 
Manj  and  the  thick  and  warm  Furs  and  Fleeces  of 
others,  arc  not  only  a  good  Dcfenl'ative  againll  the 
Cold  and  Wetj  but  alfo  a  foit  Bed  to  rcpofe 
themfelvcs  in  •,  and  to  many  of  them,  a  comfortable 
covering,  to  nurfe  and  chcrifh  their  tender  Young. 

And  as  Hair  to  Quadrupeds  j  fo  Feathers  arc  as 
commodious  a  Drcls  to  fuch  as  fly  in  the  Air,  to 
Birds,  and  fome  Infeftsj  not  only  a  good  Guard 
againll  Wet  and  Cold,   and  a  comfortable  Covcr- 


of  the  Hair;  and  I  imagine,  fcrve  to  the  gentle  Evacuation 
oi:'  fome  Humour  out  ot  the  Body;  perhaps  the  Hair  fcrves 
as  well  for  the  infenfible  Perj'piration  of  hairy  Animals,  as  to 
fence  againll  Cold  and  Wet.  In  f/^.  14,  16,  is  reprefcnted 
the  Hair  of  a  Moufe,  as  it  appears  through  a  fmall  Magnifier; 
-and  in  Fig.  15,  17,  as  it  appears  when  vicw'd  wiih  a  larger 
Magnifier. 

Upon  another  Review,  I  imagine.  That  although  in  Tig. 
14,  15,  the  dark  Paits  of  ihc  Pith  leem  to  be  traiifveric  ;  that 
they,  as  well  as  in  the  two  other  Figures,  ruu  round  in  a  fciew- 
like  Fa(li:on. 

(^h)  See  Book  Vir.  Chap.  r.  Note  {d)  (e). 

(i)   See  Cf;aj>   XIV.  Note  (c). 

(t)  It  is  a  Sign  fome  wife  Artift  was  a  Contriver  of  the 
Cioathing  of  Animals ;  not  only  as  their  Cloathing  varies, 
as  their  Way  of  Living  doth  ;  but  alfo  bccaufe  every  Part 
of  their  Bodies  is  furnifli'd  with  proper  fuitable  Cloath- 
ing. Thus  divers  Animals,  that  have  their  Bodies  covcr'd 
for  the  moll  Part  with  fliort,  fmooth  Hair;  have  fomc  Parts 
left  naked,  where  Hair  would  be  an  Annoyance:  And  fomc 
Parts  befct  with  long  Hair;  as  the  Mane  and  Tail;  And 
fome  with  ftifF,  ftrong  Briftles ;  as  about  the  Nofe  :  And 
fometimes  within  the  Nblirils;  tx)  guard  off,  or  g'vc  warn- 
ing of  AuDoyances. 


izz  Of  Animals Cloath'mg.       Book  IV. 

injT  to  fuch  as  hatch  and  brood  their  Young;    but 
alio  moll  commodious  for  their  Flight.     To  which 
purpofc  they  are  nicely   and   neatly  placed    every 
where  on  the  Body,    to  give  them  an  eafie  PafTage 
through  the  Air  (/),    and  to  aflifl  in  the  wafting 
their  Body  through  that  thin  Medium.     For  which 
Service,  how  curious  is  their  Texture  for  Light- 
rscfs,   and  withal  for  Strength  ?    Hollow  and  thin 
for   Lightncfs,  but  withal,    context  and    firm   for 
Strength,     And  where   'tis   neceflary  they   fhould 
be  filled,    what  a  light   and  fbong  medullary  Sub- 
ftance  is  it  they  are  filled  with?  By  which  curious 
Contrivances,  even  the  very  heaviell  Parts  made  for 
Strength,  are  fofar  from  being  a  Load  to  the  Body, 
that  they  rather  afiill  in  making  it  light  and  buoy- 
ant, and  capacitate  it  for  Flight.     But  for  the  Vanes, 
the  lighteft  part  of  the  Feather,  how  curioufly  are 
they  wrought  v.'ith  capillary  Filaments,  neatly  in- 
terwoven together  (?;?),  whereby  they  are  not  only 
light,  but  alio  fufiiciently  clofe  and  flrong,  to  keep 
the  Body  warm,  and  guard  it  againil  the  Injuries  of 
Weather,  and  withal,  to  irapower  the  Wings,  like 
fo  many  Sails,    to  make  ftrong  Impulfes  upon  the 
Air  in  their  Flight  («).     Thus  curious,  thus  artifi- 


(/}  The  Feathers  being  placed  from  the  Head  towards  the 
Tail,  in  clofe  and  neat  Order,  and  withal  preened  and  dref- 
fed  by  the  Contents  of  the  Oil-Bag,  afford  as  eafie  a  PaflTage 
through  the  Air,  as  a  Boat  new  cleaned  and  drefTed  finds  in 
its  Paffage  through  the  Waters.  Whereas,  were  the  Feathers 
placed  the  contrary,  or  any  other  way  (as  they  would  have 
been,  had  they  been  placed  by  Chance,  or  without  Art)  they 
■would  then  have  gathered  Air,  and  been  a  great  Encumbrance 
to  the  PafTagc  of  the  Body  through  the  Air.  See  Book  VII. 
chap.  I.    Kote  {h). 

(w)  In  BookVW,  Chap. I.  Note  (e).  there  is  a  particular  Ac- 
count of  the  Mechanifm  of  their  Vanes,  from  ioiTie  nice  Mi- 
crofcopical  Obfcrvaticns,  and  therefore  I  (ball  take  no  farther 
Nonce  of  it  here. 

(k)  Vid.  Borell.de  Mot.  Animal,  Prop.  i8i.  Vol.  I. 

cial 


Chap.Xir.  Of  Animals  CJoathhig,  nj 

cial,  thus  commodious  is  the  Cloathing  of  Beads 
and  Birds:  Conccrninq  which,  more  in  proper  Place. 
And  no  Icfs  might  I  flicw  that  of  Reptiles  and 
Fiflics  {p)  to  be,  if  it  was  convenient  to  enlarge  up- 
on this  Branch  of  the  Creator's  Works.  How  well 
adapted  are  the  Annuli  of  fome  Reptiles,  and  the 
Contortions  o'i  the  Skin  of  others,  not  only  to  fence 
the  Body  fufHciently  againrt  outward  Injuries j  but 
to  enable  them  to  creep,  to  perforate  the  Earth  f/>), 
and  in  a  word,  to  perform  all  the  Oflices  of  their 
Reptile  State,  much  better  than  any  other  Tegu- 
ment of  the  Body  would  do  ?  And  the  fame  might 
he  faid  of  the  Covering  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the 
Waters,  particularly  the  Shells  of  fome,  which  arc 
a  ftrong  Guard  to  the  tender  Body  that  is  within, 
and  confiHent  enough  with  their  flower  Motion  j 
and  the  Scales  and  Skins  of  others,  affording  them 
an  eafie  and  fwift  Paflage  through  the  Waters.    But 


{o)  See  ^ook  IX. 

(p)  For  a  Sample  of  this  Branch  of  my  Survey  ,  let  us 
chule  the  Tegument  of  Earth-lVortns,,  which  we  (hall  find 
compleatiy  adapted  to  their  Way  of  Life  and  Motion,  being 
made  in  the  mod  compleat  Mann^ir  pollililc  for  tercbraiing 
the  Eaith,  and  creepmg  where  their  Occalions  lead  them. 
For  their  Body  is  made  throughout  of  fmall  Rings,  and  ihcle 
Kings  have  a  curious  yt^paratus  of  Mufcles,  enabling  thui'e 
Creatures  with  great  Strength  to  dilate,  extend,  or  contract 
their  Annuity  and  whole  Body  ;  thofe  jinnuit  alio  are  each 
of  them  armed  with  Imall,  flift',  fiiarp  heatds,  or  Prickles ^ 
which  they  can  open,  to  lay  hold  on,  or  fliut  up  clofe  to  their 
Body  :  And  lalUy,  Under  the  Skin  there  lies  a  Jliviy  J/uce, 
that  they  emit,  as  Occafion  is ,  at  certain  Pcrturations  be- 
tween the  jinnuit^  to  lubricate  the  Body,  and  facilitate  their 
Pallage  into  the  Earth.  By  all  which  Means  they  are  enabled 
with  great  Speed,  Hafe,  and  Safety,  to  iluuft  and  wedge 
ihemfelves  into  .the  Earth;  which  they  could  not  do,  had 
their  Bodies  been  covered  with  Hair,  Feathers,  Scales,  or 
fuch  like  Cloathing  of  the  other  Creatures.  Sec  more  con- 
cerning this  AiumaJ»  heok  iX.  Chap.  i.  Kutc  (<»). 


It 


X14  Of  Animals  Qloathing.     Book  IV. 

it  may  be  fufficient  to  give  only  a  Hint  of  thefc 
Things,  which  more  properly  belong  to  another 
Place. 

Thus  hath  the  indulgent  Creator  furnifh'd  the 
whole  animal  World  with  convenient,  fuitable 
Cloathing. 

II.  Let  us  in  the  next  Place  take  a  fhort  View 
of  the  Garniture  {q)^  and  Beauty  thereof.  And  here 
we  fhall  thus  far,  at  leaft,  defcry  it  to  be  beauti- 
ful; that  it  is  compleat  and  workman-like.  Even 
the  Cloathing  of  the  moft  fordid  Animals,  thofe 
that  are  the  lead:  beautified  with  Colours,  or  ra- 
ther whofe  Cloathing  may  regrate  the  Eye  (r)  j 
yet  when  we  come  llri»3:ly  to  view  them,  and  fe- 
rioufly  confider  the  nice  Mechanifm  of  one  Part, 
the  admirable  Texture  of  another,  and  the  exad 
Symmetry  of  the  Whole  ;  we  difcern  fuch  Strokes 
of  inimitable  Skill,  fuch  incomparable  Curiofity, 
that  we  may  fay  with  Solomon^  Eccl.  iii.  1 1.  [God] 
hath  made  every  'Thing  beautiful  in  his  Time. 

But  for  a  farther  Demonftration,  of  the  fuper- 
cminent  Dexterity  of  his  almighty  Hand,  he  hath 
been  pleas'd,  as  it  were  on  Purpofe,  to  give  fur- 
prizing  Beauties  to  divers  Kinds  of  Animals.  Wha& 
radiant  Colours  are  many  of  them,  particularly 
fome  Birds  and  Infc6ts  (/),  bedeck'd  with !  What 

a  prodi- 

(5)  Arijiotle,  in  his  Hift.  An'im.  I  3.  c.  iz.  names  feveral  Ri- 
vers, that  by  being  drank  of,  change  the  Colour  of  the  Hair. 

(r)  For  an  Example;  Let  us  taice  the  Cloathing  of  the 
Tortolfe  and  Viper;  becaufe,  by  an  incurious  View,  it  rather 
regrateth,  than  pleafeth  the  Eye :  But  yet,  by  an  accurate 
Survey,  we  fiad  the  Shells  of  the  Former,  and  the  Scales  of 
the  Latter,  to  be  a  curious  Piece  of  Mechanifm,  neatly 
made;  and  fo  compleatly,  and  well  put,  and  tack'd  together, 
as  to  exceed  any  human  Compofures:  Of  the  Latter  fee  more 
in  Book  IX.  Chap.  l.  Note  (c). 

(y")  It  would  be  cndlefs  to  enter  into  the  Particulars  of  the 
beautiful  Birds  and  Infers  of  our  European  Parts;  but  efpe- 
cially  thofe  inhabiting  the  Countries  between  the  Tropicks, 

which 


Chap.  XII.  Of  Animals  Cloatlj'ing.  iiC 

a  prodigious  Combinarion  is  Lhcrc  often  of  thcfc, 
yea,  how  nice  an  Air  frequently  of  meaner  Co- 
lours (/),  as  to  captivate  the  Eye  of  all  Beholders, 
and  exceed  the  Dexterity  of  the  moll  exquifitc  Pen- 
cil to  copy  ? 

And  now,  when  we  thus  find  a  whole  World  of 
Animals,  cloiithed  in  the  wilcll  Manner,  the  molt 
luitable  to  the  hllement  in  which  they  live  ,  the 
Place  in  which  they  relide,  and  their  State  and  Oc- 
cafions  there  j  when  thofe  that  are  able  to  fliift  for 
themfelves,  are  left  to  their  own  I^ifcrction  and  Di- 
ligence, but  the  Helplefs  well  accoutcr'd  and  provi- 
ded forj  when  fuch  incomparable  Strokes  of  Art 
and  Workmanfliip  appear  in  all,  and  fuch  inimitable 
Glories  and  Beauties  in  the  Cloathing  of  others  j 
who  can,  without  the  greatcll  Obltinacy  and  Pre- 
judice, deny  this  to  be  QO D\  Handy-work  ?  The 
gaudy,  or  even  the  meaneil;  Apparel  which  Man 
providcth  for  himfelf,  we  readily  enough  own  to  be 
the  Contrivance,  the  Work  of  Man:  And  fliall 
\vc  deny  the  Cloathing  of  all  the  Animal  World 
bcfides  (which  infinitely  furpafleth  all  the  Robes  of 
earthly  Majelly,  fhall  we,  dare  we,  deny  that)  to 
be  the  Work  of  any  Thing  Ids  than  of  an  infinite, 
intelligent  Being,  whofe  Art  and  Power  are  equal  to 
fuch  glorious  Work ! 


which  are  obferved  as  much  to  exceed  our  Birds  in  their  Co- 
lours, as  ours  do  theirs  in  their  Singing. 

{t)  The  Wr-jntck,  at  a  Diftance,  is  a  Bird  of  mean  Colour; 
neither  are  indeed  its  Colours  radiant,  or  beautiful,  iingly 
confidered:  But  when  it  is  in  the  Hand  we  fee  its  light  and 
darker  Colours  fo  curioully  mixed  together,  as  to  give  the 
Bird  a  furprt/.ing  Beauty.  The  lame  li  alio  obfcrvable  in  ma- 
ny Infeds,  pariiciilarly  of  the  PhaUna  klhd. 


CHAP. 


226  Book  IV. 

CHAP.    XIII. 

Of  the  Houfes  and  Habitation  of  Animals. 

HAving  in  the  laft  Chapter,  as  briefly  as  well  I 
could,  furvcyed  the  Cloathing  of  Animals,  I 
fhall  in  this  take  a  View  of  x.hc\x  Houfes  ^  Nefts , 
their  Cells  and  Habitations  \  another  Thing  no  lefs 
neceflary  to  their  Well-being  than  the  laft;  and  in 
which  the  Great  Creator  hath  likewife  fignalized 
his  Care  and  Skill,  by  giving  Animals  an  architec-: 
tonick  Faculty,  to  build  themfelves  convenient  Pla-r 
CCS  of  Retirement,  in  which  to  repofe  and  fecure 
themfelves,  and  to  nurfe  up  their  Young. 

And  here,  as  before,  we  may  confider  the  cafe  of 
Man,  and  that  of  the  irrational  Animals.  Man  hav- 
ing (as  I  faid)  the  Gift  of  Rcafon  and  Underftand- 
ing,  is  able  to  fhift  for  himfelf,  to  contrive  and 
build,  as  his  Pleafure  leads  him,  and  his  Abilities 
will  admit  of.  From  the  meaneft  Huts  and  Cot- 
tages, he  can  eredl  himfelf  ftately  Buildings,  bedeck 
them  with  exquifite  Arts  of  Archite6lure,  Painting, 
and  other  Garniture,  ennoble  them,  and  render  them 
delightful  with  pleafant  Gardens,  Fountains,  Ave- 
nues, and  what  not  ?  For  Man  therefore  the  Crea- 
tor hath  abundantly  provided  in  this  refpe6t,  by 
giving  him  an  Ability  to  help  himfelf.  And  a  wii'e 
Proviiion  this  is,  inalmuch  as  it  is  an  excellent  Ex- 
ercife  of  the  Wit,  the  Ingenuity,  the  Induftry  and 
Care  of  Man. 

But  fince  Ingenuity,  without  Materials,  would 
be  fruitlefs,  the  Materials  therefore  which  the  Cre- 
ator hath  provided  the  World  with,  for  this  very 
Service  of  Building,   deftrves  our  Notice.    The 

great 


Chap.  XIII.  Of  Animals  Habitations.        217 

great  Varieties  of  Trees  {a)^  Earth,  Stones  and 
Plants,  anfwcring  every  Occafion  and  Purpole  of 
Man  for  this  Ufc,  in  all  Ages  and  Places  all  the 
World  over,  is  a  great  A6t  ot  the  Crcatoi's  Good- 
ncfsj  as  manifcding,  that  fince  he  has  left  Man  to 
fliift  for  himfclf,  it  Ihould  not  be  without  fiifTicicnt 
Help  to  enable  him  to  do  fo,  if  he  would  but  make 
ufe  of  them,  and  the  Scnfe  and  Reafon  which  God 
hath  given  him. 

Thus  futlicient  Provifion  is  made  for  the  Habita- 
tion of  j^lan. 

hw'X  no  Icfs  iTiall  we  find  is  made  for  the  reft  of 
the  Creatures)  who  although  they  want  the  Pow- 
er of  Reafon  to  vary  their  Methods,  and  cannot 
add  to,  or  diminifli  from,  or  any  way  make  Im- 
provements upon  their  natural  Way  j  yet  we  find 
that  natural  Inftin<Sl,  which  the  Creator's  infinite 
Underitanding  hath  imprinted  in  them,  to  be  abun- 
dantly fufficicnt,  nay,  in  all  Probability,  the  very 
beft  or  only  Method  they  can  take,  or  that  can  be 
invented  for  the  refpeflivc  Ufc  and  Purpofe  of  each 
peculiar  Species  of  Animals  {h).  If  fome  Crea- 
tures make  their  Nells  in  Houfes,  fome  in  Trees, 


(4)  "Dant  utile  lignum 

Navi^iis  Pinos,  domihus  Cedrofqitc,  CiipreJJhfque  : 
time  radios  trivere  Rotis,  hinc  tympana  plaujiris 
AgricoU,  cr  pandas  ratiius  pofuere  carinas. 
Viminibus  Salices  fnecund.i,  frondil'us  Ulmi ; 
At  Myrtus  validis  hajliiibti/s,  (j-  bona  bello 
Cornus ;    Itynos  Taxi  tcrquentur  in  arcus. 
Nee  Tilu  leves,  ant  torno  rafile  Buxutn, 
Hon  formam  accibiunt,  /eiroque  cavantur  acuta  : 
Necnon  cr  torrentum  undam  levis  innatat  Alnus 
MtfJ'a  Pado :  necnon  cr  apes  examiyja'  condunt 
Corticibufque  eavis,  -vitioftque  llicis  alveo. 

Virg.  Georg.  1. 1.  carm.  441. 

(b)  See  Chap  15.  and  BMVIII.  Chap.  6. 


Q_  z  feme 


21 8  Of  Animals  Hah  it  at  ions .  Book  IV. 

fome  in  Shaubs,  fome  in  the  Earth  [c]  ^  fome  in 
Stone,  fome  in  the  Waters,  fome  here,  and  fome 
there,  or  have  none  at  all  j  yet  we  find,  that  that 
Place,  that  Method  of  Nidification  doth  abundant- 
ly anfvver  the  Creatures  Ufe  and  Occafions.  They 
can  there  fufficiently  and  well  repofe,  and  fecure 
thcmfclves,  lay,  and  breed  up  their  Young.  We 
are  lb  far  from  ditcovering  any  Inconvenience  in 
any  of  their  rcfpe^tive  Ways,  from  perceiving  any 
Lofs  befal  the  Species,  any  decay,  any  perifhing 
of  their  Young  j    that  in  all  Probability  ,    on  the 


(c)  Many  of  the  Vefp/t-Ichneumonss  are  remarkable  enough 
for  rheir  Nidification  and  Frovilion  tor  their  Young.  Thofe 
thac  build  in  harth  (who  commonly  have  golden  and  black 
Rings  round  their  Alvij  having  lined  the  little  Cells,  they 
have  perforated,  lay  therein  their  Eggs,  and  then  carry  into 
them  Maggots  troni  the  Leaves  of  Trees,  and  feal  them  up 
clofe  and  neatly.  And  another  Ichneumon,  more  of  the  Ve- 
fpa  than  Mujca- Ichneumon  Kind  (having  a  little  Sting  in  its 
Tail,  of  a  black  Colour)  gave  me  the  Pleafure,  one  Summer, 
of  feeing  it  build  its  Nelt  in  a  little  Hole  in  my  Study-Win- 
dow. This  Cell  was  coated  about  with  an  odoriferous,  refi- 
nous  Gum,  collected,  I  fuppofe,  from  fome  Fir-Trees  near; 
after  which  it  laid  two  Eggs  (1  think  the  Number  was)  and 
then  carried  in  divers  Maggots,  fome  bigger  than  it  felf. 
Thefe  it  very  fagacioufly  fealed  clofe  up  into  the  Nell,  leaving 
them  there  doubtlefs,  partly  toaffift  the  Incubation  ;  andefpe- 
cially  for  Food  to  the  future  Young  when  hatched. 

Of  this  Artifice  of  thefe  Ichneumons,  Arijiotle  himfelf  takes 
Notice,  (but  1  believe  he  was  fcarce  aware  of  the  Egg's  fealed 
up  with  the  Spiders).  'o<  5  £ip^«?  l;i;vcjC/Vov6;  xstXiifi^oi,  Sec. 
As  to  the  Vefpcie,  called  Ichneumones,  ( lefs  than  others)  the") 
kill  Spiders,  and  carry  them  into  their  Holes,  and  having  feal- 
ed them  ftp  with  Dirt,  they  therein  hatch,  and  produce  thofe  of 
the  fame  Kind.     Hift.  Anim.  1.  5.  c.  2.0. 

To  what  hath  been  faid  about  thefe  Ichneumon  Wafps.  I 
(hall  add  one  Obfervation  more,  concerning  the  providential 
Structure  of  their  Mouth  in  every  ot  their  Tribes,  viz..  their 
jaws  are  not  only  very  (Irong,  but  nicely  fized,  curved  and 
placed  for  gnawing  and  Icraping  thofe  compleat  little  Holes 
they  perforate  in  Earth,  Wood,  yea  in  Stone  it  felf. 

con- 


Chap.  XIII.  Of  Animals  Habitations.         129 

contrary,  in  that  particular  Way  they  better  thrive, 
arc  more  iecurc,  and  better  able  toVhif't  for,  and 
hcIpthemrcU'cs.  IT,  Tor  Inllancc,  Tome Hcalts  make 
to  thcmrclves  no  Habitation,  but  lie  abroad  in  the 
open  Air,  and  there  produce  their  ^'oung  j  in  this 
Ciife  we  find  there  is  no  need  it  ihould  be  mhcr- 
wifc,  by  Realbn  they  are  either  taken  care  of  by 
Man(</),  or  in  no  Danger,  as  other  Creatures, 
from  Abroad.  If  others  repolite  their  Young  in 
Holes  {e)  and  Dens,  and  iecqre  thcmlclvc^  alio 
therein,  it  is,  becaufc  fuch  Guard,  luch  Security  is 
wanting,  their  Lives  being  fought  either  by  the 
Hollility  of  Man,  or  to  fatisfie  the  Appetite  of  ra* 
pacious  Creatures  (/).  If  among  Birds,  fome  build 
their  Neits  clofe,  fonic  open,  fome  with  this,  fome 
wiih  another  Material,  fome  in  Houfes,  lome  in 
Trees,  fome  on  the  Ground  (^),  fome  on  Rocks 
gnd  Crags  on  high  (of  which   God  himlcl^  hath 

given 


\(i)  Tully  having  fpoken  of  the  Care  of  fome  Animals  to- 
wards their  Young,  by  wliich  tliey  are  nurfed  and  brought 
up,  faith,  Accedit  e(iam  ad  nonnulloruvi  anitnuniiutn,  o~  ca- 
rum  rtrum  qntis  terra  gi^nit,  conjtrvatlonetn,  CT"  Jaluiem,  hc-r 
minum  etiam  foUrtia  ijr  ddigentia.  S.im  rnults.  u-  pecttdes,  c^ 
Jiirfes  funt,  qui.  fnif  procarationt  homhium  JaLvi  ejje  non  pof- 
j'u»(.     t'ic.  de  Nat.  Dcor.  I.  i.  c.  51. 

(e)  Prov.  XXX.  26,  ihf  Coaies  ate  but  a  feeble  Folk,  yet  wak$ 
they  their  Houfci  in  the  Rocks. 

V/)  See  T^oie  [l\ 

(/)  It  IS  a  notable  Inftin(ft  which  Ol.  Migaui  toils  of  tlic 
C/flli  Sylve/frts  in  his  Noithem  Country  ,  to  lecurc  theni- 
felvcs  againll  ilie  Cold  and  btorms  of  the  Winter.  Cuvi  vi- 
irs  infiar  collinm  terr<c  fuptrficiem  uhique  cooferinnt,  ratuofnut 
arhorum  diutitti  deprtviunt  O"  condoijant,    certos  fru.Hm  Vein-' 

U  arhoris : — tn  forma  lonp  Piperis  vorant,  c  g-utiutit  i/t' 

digcftos;  idque  tantik  aviditate ,  ac  quantit/ite ,  ttt  rejdttum 
gmtur  t<fto  corpotf  majui  appareat.  Dnnde  partitts  aimmihui 
fefe  inter  mediot  uiviutv  coUes  immervjtnf,  p  <i'ertim  in  j-i*. 
Tebt.  Martio,  quando  nixes  ut  turbiries,  typhonts,  vei  tempef^ 
f<^t*s  iF^viJftmx    <  n.'ibibus   dtJcenJuni.     C*(*"'ju(  cvopntx  fimr^ 

O      1  -t-faUCKlf 


13  o  Of  Animals  Habit  at'tons.   Book  IV. 

given  an  Inftance  in  tlie  Eagle ^  Job  xxxix.  27,  28.) 
And  fo  among  the  Infeft  and  Reptile  Kinds,  if  fome 
repofite  their  Eggs  or  Young  in  the  Earth,  fome  in 
Wood,  fome  in  Stone,  fome  on  one  Kind  of  Plant, 
fome  on  another,  fome  in  warm  and  dry  Places,  fome 
in  the  Water  and  moill:  Places,  and  fome  in  their 
own  Bodies  only,  asfliall  be  fhewn  in  proper  Place  3 
in  all  thefe  Cafes  it  is  in  all  Probability,  the  beft  or 
only  Method  the  Animal  can  take  for  the  Hatching 
and  Pioduftion  of  its  Young,    for  their  Supplies, 
Safety,  or  fome  other   main   Pomt  of  their  Being 
or  Well-being.     This  is  manifeft  enough  in  ma- 
ny   Cafes,   and    therefore    probable   in    all.     It   is 
manifeiV  that  fuch  Animals,  for  Inftance,  as  breed 
in  the  Waters  (as  not  only  Fifh,  but  divers  In- 
fers, and  other  Land- Animals  do)  that  their  Young 
cannot  be  hatched,  fed,  or  nurfed  up  in  any  other 
Element.     It  is  manifeft  alfo,  that  lnfe6ls,  which 
lay   their  Eggs  on  this,  and  that,  and  the  other  a- 
greeable  Tree,  or  Plant,  or  in  Flefli,  l^c.  that  it  is 
by  that  Means  their  Young  are  fed  and  nurfed  up. 
And  it  is  little  to  be  doubted  alfo,  but  that  thefe 
Matrixes  may  much  conduce  to  the  Maturation  and 
Production  of  the  Young.     And  fo  in  all  other  the 
like  Cafes  of  Nidification,  of  Heat  or  Cold,  We: 
or  Dry,  Expofed  or  Open,  in  all  Probability  this  is 
the  beft  Method  for  the  Animal's  Good,  moft  falu- 
tary  and  agreeable  to  its  Nature,  moft  for  its  Fecun- 
dity, and  the  Continuance  and  Increafe  of  its  Spe- 
cies; to  which  every  Species  of  Animals  is  natural- 
ly prompt  and  inclined. 

Thus  admirable  is  the  natural  Sagacity  and  In- 


certis  hebdomad:;  ciho  in  gutture  colleSlo,  egejlo,  o"  refumpto  'vi- 
-vunt,  Venatornm  canibus  non  produjitur.  — ^— —  ^iod  ft  prd- 
fentiunt  nivem  tmmmere  majorem,  pr&di6to  fruflH,  iterum  de^ 
"jorato,  al'iud  doinictlium  captant,  in  eoque  jnanent  ufque  ad  fi- 
nsm  Alariii)  &c.     Ol.  Mag.  Hifl.  1. 19,  c.  33. 


^i'-ft 


Chap.  XIII.  Of  Anmals  Habitat lOits.       131 

flindt  (^)  of  the  irrational  Animals  in  the  Conve- 
nience and  Method  of  their  Habitations.  And  no 
lefs  is  it  in  the  Fabrick  of  them.  Their  architc6to- 
nick  Skill,  exerted  in  the  Curiofity  and  Dexteri- 
ty of  their  Works,  and  exceeding  the  Skill  of  Maa 
to  imitate i  this,  1  lay,  deleivcs  as  much  or  more 
Admiration  and  Praife,  than  that  of  the  moft:  cx- 
quilite  Artift  among  Men.  For  with  what  inimi- 
table Arc  (/)  do  chcfe  poor  untaught  Creatures  lay 
a  parcel  of  rude  and  ugly  Sticks  and  Straws,  Mo!s 
and  Dirt  together,  and  form  them  into  commo- 
dious Nells  ?  With  what  Curiolity  do  they  line 
them  within,,  wind  and  place  every  Hair,  Feather, 
or  Lock  of  Wool,  to  guard  the  tender* Bodies  of 
themfelves  and  their  Young ,  and  to  keep  them 
warm  .'*  And  with  what  Art  and  Craft  do  many 
of  them  thatch  over,  and  coat  their  Ncfls  with- 
out, to  dodge  and  deceive  the  Eye  of  Spectators, 
as  well  as  to  guard  and  fence  againlt  the  Injuries  of 
Weather  {k)  ?    With  what  prodigious  Subtiky  do 

fomc 


{h^  It  is  a  very  odd  Story  (which  I  rather  mention  for 
the  Reader's  Divcrfion,  than  for  its  Truth)  which  Dr.  LuA. 
lie  Beaufort  relates,  Vir  fide  digvus  nnrravit  mihi,  quod  chm 
Jemei,  antmi  gratia,  nidum  avicult  linno  obturafjet,  feque 
occultAfJ'ety  CHpidus  ziidendi,  quid  in  tali  occafinne  prxftaret  ;  il- 
ia chm  frti/lra  fipiits  tentajfet  rojlro  ilL-id  auferre,  ca/iis  admo- 
dum  tmpatiens,  abiit,  O'  pofi  ali]Uod  temporis  fpatium  rever- 
fa  eft,  roftro  gerens  planlulam,  qui  obiuranjcnto  applicata,  J>aU' 
lb  pofl,  iiiud  velttti  telum  eripuir  tan  fa  vi,  ut  difperfa  impetu 
herbula,  ac  occafionem  ipft,  ab  avicula,  ejus  virtutcm  difcendi^ 
pnripuerit.  Colmop.  divina,  Sedt.  5.  C'.  i.  Had  he  told  us 
what  the  Plant  was,  we  might  hav<;  given  better  Credit  to 
this  Story. 

it)  Of  the  Subtiity  of  Birds  in  Nidification,  fee  Pim.  .\'.tt. 
Hi  ft.  /.TO.   c.  33. 

(/.')  Among  many  Inftances  that  might  be  given  of  this 
Subtiity  of  birds,  and  other  Creatures,  that  of  the  b::^  fad- 
ed Titmonfe  deferves'Obfervation,  who  with  great  Art  build? 
her  Nell  with  MolTcs,  Hair,  and  the  Webs  of  Spiders,  call 

Q  4  om 


^32^  Of  Animals  Habitations.  Book  IV. 

fome  foreign  Birds  (/).  not  only  plat  and  weave  the 
fibrous  Parts  of  Vegetables  together,  and  cqrioufly 
tunnel  them,and  commodiouOy  form  them  intoNefts, 
butalfo  artificially  fufpend  them  on  the  tender  Twigs 
of  Trees,  to  keep  them  out  pf  the  reach  of  rapaci- 
ous Animals  ? 

And  fo  for  InfeUs^  thpfe  little,  weak,  thofe  ten- 
der Creatures  >  yet,  what  admirable  Artills  are  they 
in  this  Bufinefs  of  Nidification !  With  what  great 
Diligence  doth  the  little  Bee  gather  its  Combs 
from  various  Trees  {m)   and  Flowers,   the  Wafp^ 


out  from  them  when  they  take  their  Flight  fee  Book  VIII. 
chap.  4.  Uote  [t).  with  which  the  other  Materials  are  ftrongly 
tied  together.  Having  neatly  built,  and  covered  her  Nell 
wich  thefe  Materials  without;  (he  thatcheth  it  on  the  top  with 
the  Mufcus  arboreus  ramofm ,  or  fuch  like  broad ,  whitidi 
Mofs,  to  keep  out  Rain,  and  to  dodge  the  Speftator's  Eye; 
and  withiri  fine  lineth  it  with  a  great  Numbex  of  foft  Feathers ; 
fo  many,  that  I  cont'cfs  I  could  not  but  admire  how  fo  fmall 
a  Room  could  hold  them,  efpecially  that  they  could  be  laid 
fo  clofe  and  handfomely  together,  to  aftord  i'ufficient  Room 
for  a  Bird  with  fo  long  a  Tail,  and  fo  numerous  an  IfTue  as 
this  Bird  commonly  hath,  which  Mr.  Ray  faith  (Synopf.  Me- 
thod. Av'tum,  p.  74.  )  Ova  inter  omnes  aviculas  numerofijfi- 
ma  ponit.  See  more  of  the  Ncft  of  this  Bird,  from  Aldro- 
vdnd.  in  WtUugh.  Orn'tth.  p.  243. 

(/)  The  Ncft  of  the  G«/r<»  tangeima,  the  Uierus  minor  y 
and  the  Jupujuba,  or  whatever  other  Name  the  American 
Hang-Nefis  may  be  called  by,  are  of  this  Kind.  Of  which 
fee  Willughbys  Ornith.  Lib.  2.  Chap.  5,  Sect,  iz,  13.  Alfo 
Dr.  Grew's  Mufeum  Reg.  Soc.  Part  r.  SeCi.  4.  Cha^.  4."  Thcfc 
Nefts  I  have  divers  Times  feen,  particularly  in  great  Perfecfti- 
on  in  our  R.  S.  Repofitory,  and  in  the  noble  and  well-fur- 
niftied  Mufeum  of  my  often-commended  Friend  Sir  Hans 
Sloanei  and  at  the  fame  Time  I  could  not  but  admire  at  thq 
neat  Mechanifm  of  them,  and  the  Sagacity  of  the  Bird,  in 
Jianging  them  on  the  Twigs  of  Trees,  to  feci^re  their  Eggs 
and  Young  from  the  Apes. 

(m)  I  mention  Tree?,  becaufe  I  have  feen  Beej  gather  thq 
Gurn  of  Fir-Trees,  v/hich  at  the  fame  Time  gave  me  thcj 
pleafure  of  feeing  their  way  of  loading  their  Thighs  there- 
with ;'  performed  with  great  Art  and  Dexterity. 


ftPffl 


Chap.  XIII.  Of  Animals  Habitat  ions.  133 

from  folid  (»)  Timber  !  And  with  what  prodigi- 
ous geometrical  Subtilty  do  thole  little  Animals 
work  their  deep  hexagonal  Cells,  the  only  proper 
Figure  that  the  bell  Mathematician  could  chufc  for 
fuch  a  Combination  of  Houfcs  {0) !  With  what 
Accuracy  do  other  Infcfts  perforate  the  Earth  (/)), 
AVood,  yea,  Stone  it  felf  {q)\  For  which  Service, 
the  compleat  Apparatus  of  their  Mouths  (;),  and 
Feet  (/,!,   defervcs  particular  Obfcrvation,  as  hath 

been 


(n)  Wafps,  at  their  firft  Coming,  may  be  obferv'd  to  fre- 
quent PoHi,  Boards,  and  other  \Vood  that  is  dry  and  found; 
but  never  any  that  is  rotten.  Thele  they  may  be  heard  to 
fcrape  and  gnaw  ;  and  what  they  fo  gnaw  off,  they  heap 
clofc  together  between  their  Chin  and  Kore-Legs,  until  they 
have  gotten  enough  for  a  Ikirden,  which  they  then  carry  a- 
way  m  their  Mouths,  to  make  their  Cells  wuh. 

{0)  Circular  Cells  would  have  been  tlic  moft  capacious ; 
but  this  would  by  no  Means  have  been  a  convenient  Figure, 
by  Reafon  much  of  the  Room  would  have  been  taken  up  by 
Vacancies  between  the  Circles;  therefore  it  was  necellary  to 
make  Vit  of  fome  of  the  rcdilincar  Figures.  Among  which 
only  three  could  be  of  Ufe;  of  which  Pttpptu  Alexandrin. 
thus  difcourfeth  ;  Cum  igitur  tres  figure,  funt,  <^ui.  per  feipfat 
locum  circa  idem  punflum  confiftentem  replere  pojjunty  Triangu- 
lum fcil.  Oiuadratum  CT"  Hexa^onum,  Apes  tliam  (jus.  ex  pluribits 
anguiii  conjlat  fapieneer  delegerunt,  utpote  fujpicantes  tarn  pint 
mellis  capire  qnum  utramvis  reliqnarum.  At  Apes  cfuidem  lUud 
tantum  quod  ipjis  utile  ejl  cognojcunt,  \\i.  Hexagontim  ^^ladra- 
to  c  Trtangiilo  ejje  majtn  c  />/'«  Meliis  capere  pojje,  ntmirum^ 
4quaU  materia  in  conflruiltoncm  uniufcttjufque  confumpti.  Kot 
vera  qui  plus  fapientid  quam  Apes  hal^tre  profitemur,  aliquid  iti- 
am  magis  tnfigne  invcftigabtmui.     Collect  Math.  1.  5. 

(/>)  Sec  before  Note  (c). 

\q)  See  Chap.  11.  Hoie  {x). 

(r)  See  Chap.  11.  Note  [•^). 

(f)  Among  many  Examples,  the  Legs  and  Feet  of  the 
Mole-Cricket,  (Gryllotalpa,)  arc  very  remarkable.  The  Forc- 
l^egs  are  very  brawny  and  f^rong;  and  the  Feet  armed  each 
vith  four  flat  Itrong  Claws,  together  with  a  fmali  Lamina, 
with  two  larger  Claws,  and  a  third  with  two  little  Claws : 
Which  Lamina  is  joyntcd  to  the  Bottom  of  the  loot,  to  be 
extended,  to  make  the  Foot  wider,  or  withdrawn  within  the 
f'opt,     Xhcfc  Feet  arc  placed  to  fcratch  fomcwhat  lidcways, 

■■-■■■■  ,, 


234  Of  Animals  Habitations.    Book  IV. 

been,  and  will  be  hereafter  obferv'd.  And  fur- 
ther yet ;  With  what  Care  and  Neatnef?  do  mod 
of  thofe  little  fagacious  Animals  line  thofe  their 
Houfes  within,  and  feal  them  up,  and  fence  them 
without  {t) !  flow  artificially  will  others  fold  up 
the  Leaves  of  Trees  and  Plants  {u)-,  others  houfe 
themfelves  in  Sticks  and  Straws  5  others  glue  light 
and  floating  Bodies  together  (w),  and  by  that  Ar- 
tifice make  themfelves  floating  Houfes  in  the  Wa- 
ters, 


as  well  as  downward,  after  the  Manner  of  Moles  Feet;    and 
they  are  very  Uke  them  alfo  in  Figure.  '"" 

Somewhat  of  this  Nature,  Swammerdam  obferves  of  the 
Worms  of  the  Ephemeron.  To  this  Purpofe,  [to  dig  their 
Cells,]  the  wife  Creator  hath  furnifl/d  them,  (faith  he,)  'j:'}th 
fit  Members.  For,  befides  that  their  two  Fore^Legs  are  formed 
fomewhat  like  thofe  of  the  ordinary  Moles,  or  GryllotaJpa  ;  he 
hath  alfo  fur 7iifhd  them  with  tzvo  toothy  Cheeks,  fomewhat  like 
the  sheers  of  Lobfters,  -which  fer-ve  them  ni\)re  readily  to  bore 
the  Clay.  SwammerdamV  Eplaem.  Vit.  Publifli'd  by  Dr.  Ty- 
fon.  Chap.  3.- 
.  (/)  See  the  before-cited  Note  (c). 

(«)  They  are  f6r  the  raofl:  Part,  fome  of  the  VhaUnA- 
Tribe,  which  inhabit  the  tunnelled,  convolved  Leaves,  that 
we  meet  with  on  Vegetables  in  the  Spring  and  Summer. 
And  it  is  a  fomewhat  wonderful  Artifice,  how  fo  fmall  and 
weak  a  Creature,  as  one  of  thofe  jiewly-hatch'd  Maggots, 
(for  doubtlefs  it  is  they,  not  the  Parent-Animal,  becaufe  flbe 
emits  no  Web,  nor  hath  any  teftrine  Art,)  can  be  able  to  con- 
volve the  ftubborn  Leaf,  and  then  bind  it  in  that  neat  round 
Form,  with  the  Thread  or  Web  it  weaves  from  its  own  Bo- 
dy; with  which  it  commonly  lines  the  convolved  Leaf,  and' 
flops  up  the  two  Ends,  to  prevent  its  own  falling  out;  and 
Earwigs,  and  .other  noxious  Animals  getting  in. 

{w)  The  feveral  Sortt  of  Phryganea,  or  Cadetvs,  in  their 
Nympha,  or  Maggot-ftate,  thus  houfe  themfelves;  one  Sort 
in  Straws,  call'd  from  thence  Straw-Worms;  others  in  two  or 
more  Sticks,  laid  parallel  to  one  another,  creeping  at  the  Bot- 
tom of  Bi  ooks ;  others  with  a  fmall  Bundle  of  Pieces  of  Rufties, 
Duck-weed,  Sticks,  ^c.  glu'd  together,  where- with  they 
float  on  the  Top,  and  can  row  themfelves  therein  about  the 
Waters,  with  the  Help  of  their  Feet :  Both  thefe  are  call'd 
Cob-bait.  Divers  other  Sorts  there  are, .  which  the  Reader 
may  fee  a  Summary  of,  from  Mr.  Willuzhby,  in  Rail  Mztboi. 


Chap.  XIII.  Of  Anmals  Habit ntiovs.         i  3  5- 

tcis,  to  iranfport  thcmfclvcs  at  Plcafurc  after  their 
Food,  or  other  ncccflary  Occafions  of  Life!  ^nd 
for  a  Clofe,  let  us  take  the  fcriptural  Inllance  oF 
the  Spider^  Prov.  xxx.  28.  whicb  I's  one  of  the  four 
little  Things,  which,  f.  24.  /Jgitr  ^ly?,  is  exceeding 
Pnfe :  The  Spider  tahth  hold  ivith  her  llnnds^  a'l^d  is 
in  Kings  Palaces  {x).  I  will  not  difpiftc  the  Truth 
of  our  EugHjJj  Tranflation  of  this  Text,  but  fuppo- 
ling  the  Animal  mention'd  to. be  that  which  is 
meant}  it  is  manifell,  that  the  Art  of  that  Species 
of  Creatures,  in  fpinning  their  various  Webs,  and 
the  Furniture  then-  Bodies  afford  to  tliat  Purpofc, 
are  an  excellent  Inftin(51-,  and  Provifion  of  Nature, 
fctting  forth  its  glorious  Author. 

And 


Infe6l.  p.  II.  together  with  a  good,  though  very  brief  Def- 
cription  of  the  PapilionaceotM  Fly,  that  comes  from  the  Cod" 
bait  Cadew.  It  is  a  notable  archite<ftonick  Faculty,  wluch  ail 
the  Variety  of  thele  Animals  have,  to  gather  fuch  Bodies  as 
are  titteft  for  their  Purpolc,  and  then  to  glue  them  together; 
fomc  to  be  heavier  than  Water,  that  the  Animal  may  remain 
at  the  Bottom,  where  its  Food  is;  (for  which  I'lirpofe  they 
life  Stones,  together  with  Sticks,  Rufives,  ^c.)  and  I'ome  to 
be  lighter  than  Water,  to  float  on  the  Top,  and  gather  its 
Food  from  thence.  Thefe  little  Houfes  look  coarlc  and 
fliew  no  great  Artifice  outwardly  ;  but  are  well  tunnelled, 
and  made  within  with  a  hard  tou-^h  Pafte;  into  which  the 
hinder  Part  of  the  Maggot  is  fo  fix'd,  that  it  can  draw  us 
Cell  after  it  any  where,  without  Danger  of  leaving  it  behind; 
as  alfo  thruft  its  Body  out,  to  reach  what  it  wanteth;  or 
withdraw  it  into  its  Cell,  to  guard  it  againlt  Harms. 

{x)  Having  mention'd  the  Spider,  1  ftialJ  take  this  Occa- 
fion,  (although  it  be  out  of  the  Way,)  to  give  an  InlUnce  of 
the  Poyfon  of  foine  of  them.  Scali^er  Exerc.  rS^i.  rttarei. 
That  in  Gafcony,  his  Country,  there  are  Spiders  of  that  viru- 
iency,  that  if  a  Man  treads  upon  thim,  to  critfii  them,  if.fir 
Poyfon  wilt  pafs  through  the  very  Holes  of  his  shoe.  Boy).  Sub- 
til, of  Effluv.  c.  4. 

Mr.  Leeivenhoek  put  a  Trog  and  a  Spider  together  into  a 
Clafs,  and  having  made  the  Spider  Ib'ng  tlie  Frrg  divcr?^  Turcs, 
the  Frog  dy'd  in  about  an  Hour's  Timr.     Phil.  'Iran/'.  No.  i~z. 

In  the  lame  Tranfaclion,  is  a  curious  Account  ol  the  Man- 
lier how  Spiders  lay,   and  gu^rd  ihcir  tgg<=,    viz..  they  cnvt 

then 


t$6  Of  j^nimals  Habitations.  Book IV. 

And  now  from  this  fhort  and  tranfient  View  of 
the  archite6lonick  Faculty  of  Animals,  efpecially 
the  Irrationals  j  we  may  cafily  perceive  fome  fupe- 
riour  and  wife  Being  was  certainly  concern'd  in 
their  Creation  or  Original.  For,  how  is  it  polli- 
ble  that  an  irrational  Creature  Ihould,  with  ordina- 
ry and  coarfe,  or  indeed  any  Materials,  be  ever  a» 
ble  to  perform  fuch  Works,  as  exceed  even  the  I- 
ipitation  of  a  rational  Creature  ?  How  could  the 
Bodies  of  many  of  them,  (particularly  the  laft  men- 
tion'dj)   be  furniflVd  with  architedive  Materials? 


them  not  out  of  the  hindermoft  Part  of  tjie  Body,  but  under 
the  upper  Part  of  her  Belly,  near  the  Hind- Legs,  ^c.  Alio 
there  is  an  Account  of  the  Parts  from  which  they  emit  their 
Webs,  and  divers  other  Things  worth  Obfcrvation,  with 
Cuts  illuftrating  the  Whole. 

But  in  Phil.  Jranf.  N^,  li.  Dr.  Nath.  'Fairfax,  from  S. 
Redi,  and  his  own  Obfervations,  thinks  spiders  not  venomous; 
feveral  Perfons,  as  well  as  Birds,  fwallowing  them  without 
Hurt:  Which  I  my  felf  have  known  in  a  Pcrfon  of  Learn- 
ing, who  was  advis'd  to  take  them  medicinally  at  firft,  an4 
would  at  any  Time  fwallow  them,  affirming  them  to  be 
fweet,  and  well  tailed:  And  not  only  innocuous,  but  they 
arc  very  falutiferous  too,  in  fome  of  the  mofl:  Itubborn  Difea- 
fcs,  if  the  pleafant  Story  in  Moujfet  be  true;  of  a  rich  London 
Matron,  cur'd  of  a  defperate  T'^mpany,  by  a  certain  Debau- 
chee, that  hearing  of  her  Cafe,  and  that  Ihe  was  given  over 
by  the  Docftors,  went  to  her,  pretending  to  be  a  Phyiician, 
and  confidently  affirming  he  would  cure  her;  which  (lie  being 
willing  to  believe,  agrees  with  him  for  fo  muclv  Money,  one 
half  to  be  paid  down,  the  other  upon  Cure.  Upon  which 
he  gives  her  a  Spider,  promifing  her  Cure  in  three  Days.  Up- 
pn  which,  (not  doubting  but  that  he  had  poifon'd  her,  an4 
fearing  he  might  be  call'd  to  account  for  it,)  he  get^  out  of 
'f'own  as  faft  as  he  could.  But  inftead  of  being  poiion'd,  fhe 
foon  recover'd.  After  fome  Months,  the  Quack  gets  private- 
ly to  Town,  when  he  thought  the  Buitle  might  be  over; 
and  enquiring  how  his  Patient  did,  was  inform'd  of  her  Cure ; 
and  thereupon  vifiting  her,  and  making  an  Excufe  for  his 
Abfence,  he  receiv'd  his  Pay  with  great  Applaufe  and  Thanks. 
Mouff.  Infe6i.  I.  2.  c.  15. 

Having  faid  fo  much  of  Spiders,  I  might  here  add  theif 
Flight :  But  of  this,  fee  Book  Vlll.  Chap.  4,  j^ou  [e). 


Chap.  XIII.  Of  Animals  Habitations.  13  7 

How  could  they  ever  difcover  them  to  be  in  their 
Bodies,  or  know  what  Ufe  to  make  of  them  ?  Wc 
mull  therefore  ncccfllirily  conclude.  That  the  Ir- 
rationals either  have  Rcafon  and  Judgment,  not 
only  Glimmerings  thereof,  but  feme  of  its  fupc- 
riour  A6ls,  as  Wifdom  and  Forc(ight,  Difcretion, 
Art  and  Care;  or  elfe,  that  they  arc  only  pallivc  in 
the  Cafe,  and  aft  by  Inftinft,  or  by  the  Rcafon  of 
Tome  fuperiour  Being  imprinted  in  their  Nature,  or 
feme  Way  or  other,  (be  it  how  it  will,)  congenial 
with  them.  That  they  are  Rational,  or  excel 
Man  in  Art  and  Wifdom,  none  furely  will  be  fo 
foolifh  as  to  fay  :  And  therefore  we  mull  conclude. 
That  thofe  excellent  Ends  they  purfue,  and  that 
admirable  Art  they  exert,  is  none  of  their  own, 
but  owing  to  that  infinitely  wife  and  excellent  Be- 
ing, of  whom  it  may  be  faid,  with  reference  to 
the  irrational,  as  well  as  rational  Creatures,  as  it  is, 
PiGV.  ii.  6.  The  Lord  giveth  Wifdom  i  out  of  bis 
Mouth  conieth  Knoivledgc  and  Under  ft  anding. 


CHAP. 


13S  Book  IV. 

CHAP.    XIV. 

Of  Anmals  Self-Trefervation, 

HAving  thus  confider'd  the  Food,  Cloathing, 
and  Houfes  of  Animals  5  let  us  in  this  Chap- 
ter take  a  Glance  of  another  excellent  Provifion, 
the  wife  Creator  hath  made  for  the  Good  of  the 
animal  World  J  and  that  is,  the  Methods  which  all 
Animals  naturally  take  for  their  Self-Preferi)ation 
^n^  Safety.  And 'here  it  is  remarkable,  (as  in  the 
Cafes  before,)  that  Man,  who  is  endow'd  with  Rea- 
fon,  is  born  without  Armature,  and  is  deflitute  of 
many  Powers,  which  irrational  Creatures  have  in  a 
much  higher  Degree  than  he,  by  Reafon  he  can 
make  himfelf  Arms  to  defend  himfelf,  can  contrive 
Methods  for  his  own  Guard  and  Safety,  can  many 
"Ways  annoy  his  Enemy,  and  flave  off  the  Harms 
of  noxious  Creatures. 

But  for  others,  w^ho  are  deflitute  of  this  fuper- 
eminent  Faculty  >  they  are  fome  Way  or  other  pro- 
vided with  fufficient  Guard  (a),  proportionate  to 
their  Place  of  Abode,  the  Dangers  they  are  like  to 
incur  there  (b) ;   and  in  a  Word,  to  their  greateft 

Occa- 


(a)  Calient  m  hoc  cunSla  animaUa,  fciuntqiie  non  fua  modo 
commoda,  'verhm  cr  hofiium  adver/a;  norunt  fua  tela,  norunt 
cccafiones,  partefque  dijfidenthim  itnbelles.  In  ventre  mollis  eji 
tenuifque  cutis  CrocodiLo :  ideoque  fe,  ut  territi,  mergcnt  Del- 
pbini,  fubeuntefquc  alvum  illd  fecant  fpina.  Plin.  Nat.  Hill. 
].  8.  c.  IS- 

(h)  Omnibus  upturn  cfi  Corpus  Anim&  moribus  V  facultati^ 
bus :  Equo  fortibus  ungulis  c/  juba  eft  ornatum  (etenim  velox 
er  fuperbum  Cy'  gencrofum  eft  animal.)  Lcont  autem,  utpote  a- 
ntmofo  cr  feroci,   dentibus  ct*  unguilus  validum,     ha  autem  CT* 

Tat&P  C2'  ^pro  ;  illi  enim  Cornua,    huic  exerti  Dentes. 1 

Cervo  autem  O"  Lepori  (timida-  enim  funt  antmalia)  velox  cor- 


Chap. XIV.  OfAn'mmls Sclf-Trefcrvat'ton.  139 

Occafions,  and  Need  of  Security.  Accordingly, 
lomc  arc  kiftlcicntly  guarded  againll  all  common 
Dangers,  by  their  natural  Cloathing,  by  their  Arr 
mature  of  Shells,  or  inch  like  liard,  and  impregna- 
ble Covering  of  their  Body  {c).  Others  dclUtuic  of 
this  Guard,  are  aimed,  fome  with  Horns  (^),  fomc 
with   fharp   Qiulls    and   Prickles   (Oj    fome   with 

Claws, 


pUy  fed  inerme.     Tim/dU  enim  velocitas,  arrna  auda'cthtu  con- 

"veniebaiit Homint  autem  (fapiens  cnitn  ejl  )  tnanui 

dedir,  infirunjetitum  ad  cmna  aites  nccejjarium,  pact  non  mi- 
nus quarn  bello  idoneum.  Non  tgitur  indigtiu  Ccmu  ftht  in- 
nate cum  ff/eliora  Cornibiu  arma  tnatjibut,  quar.dcciinque  vo- 
let,  pojjit   accipere  :    Etenim  Fnjis   CT"  Hajla  majoia  junt  Arma, 

cr  ad  liicidtndum  pfLmptiora Neque  Ccmu,  neqiie  VngU' 

Id  quicquam  nifi  comtnus  a^ere  pojjhnt ;  Hcmimim  vera  arma  €• 
miniti  juxta  ac  comlnhs  a^unt :  telum  quidcm  o"  fagitta  magn 
quam  cornua.  •  Non   tgitur  ejl   nudus,  neque  intrmis.         ■ 

fed  tpff  efl  Thorax  ferretis,   quandocunque  libet,    omuibus   Cents 

difficUiM  fauciatu    orgarmm.  • Nee   Ihorax  foit'.m  fed  cr 

Dotntu,  e>'  Alurus,  cr  lurris,  bcc.  Galcn.  dc  Uf.  Part.  ].  I. 
c.  z. 

(c)  Shells  defexve  a  Tlace  in  this  Survey,  upon  tlie  Ac- 
count of  their  great  Variety;  the  curious  and  uncouth  Make 
of  fome,  and  the  beautiful  Colouis,  and  pretty  Omamenis 
of  others ;  hut  it  would  be  cndlcis  to  dcfcend  to  Particu- 
lars. Omitting  others,  I  fliall  therefore  only  take  Notice  oi 
the  Tortoifejhell,  by  Reafon  a  great  deal  of  Dexterity  ap- 
pears, even  in  the  Simplicity  of  that  Animal's  Skeleton.  For, 
befides  that  the  Shell  is  a  Ituut  Guard  to  the  Body,  and  at- 
tords  a  fate  Retreat  to  the  Head,  Legs  and  Tail,  which  it 
withdraws  within  the  Shell  upon  any  Danger;  befides  this,  I 
fay,  the  Shell  fupplicth  the  Place  ot  all  the  Bones  in  the  Bo- 
dy, except  thofc  of  the  extreme  Parts,  the  Head  and  Neck, 
and  the  four  Legs  and  Tail.  So  that  at  firlt  Sight,  it  is  fomc- 
what  lurprizing  to  fee  a  complcat  skeleton  confiOing  of  lo 
fmall  a  Number  of  Bones,  and  tiiey  abundantly  lufKcient  for 
the  Creature's  Ule. 

(d)  Dente  timentur  jipri :  defendunt  ccrnua  Tauross 
Imbelles  Dam&  quid  fi'ifi  pnda  fumus  ? 

NIartiaJ.  1.  13.  Epigr.  94. 

(e)  The  Hedghog  being  an  helplefs,  ilow,  and  patient  Ani- 
mal, is  accordingly  guarded  with  Prickles,  and  a  Power  of 
rolling  it  felf  up  ia  them.     CUtvn  tcrtbrari  ftbi  pedes,  v  dif- 

cindi 
i 


140    Of  Anmats  Self-TrefervaUon.  fiooklV. 

Claws,  fortie  with  Stings  (/)  j  fome  can  fhift  and 
change  their  Colours  i£)  j  fome  can  make  their 
Efcape  by  the  Help  of  their  Wings,  and  others  by 

the 


cind't  vlfcera  patient ijfim):  ferehat,  omnes  cultri  iflut  fine  gem'i- 
tit  plufquam  Spartana.  nobiittate  concoquens.  Borrichius  in  Blaf. 
de  Echino.  Pannictilum  camofum  amplexabatur  Mufculus  pA- 
ne  circularis,  admirandA  fabrics,  lac'mias  fucu  ad  pedes,  cau- 
da7n,  caput,  vane  exporrigens,  cujus  mmifierio  Echinus  fe  ad 
arbitrium  in  orbem  contrahir.     Adt.  Dan.  in  Blafio. 

Ifle  itc^t  digitos  tcjludine  pnngat  acuta, 

Cortice  depofito  mollis  Echinus  erit.     Mart.  1.  13.  Epig.  86. 

(y)  The  Sting  of  a  Wafp,  or  Bee,  &c.  is  fo  pretty  a  Piece 
of  Work,  that  it  is  worth  taking  Notice  of,  fo  far  as  I  have 
not  found  others  to  have  fpoken  of  it.  Others  have  obferv'd 
the  Sting  to  be  an  hollow  Tube,  with  a  Bag  of  (harp  pene- 
trating Juices,  (its  Poifon,)  joined  to  the  End  of  it,  within 
the  Body  of  the  Wafp,  which  is,  in  Stinging,  inje(fled  into  the 
Flefh  through  the  Tube.  But  there  are  befides  this,  two  fmall, 
fliarp,  bearded  Spears,  lying  within  this  Tube  or  Sting,  as  in 
a  Sheath.  In  a  Wafp's  Sting,  I  counted  eight  Beards  on  the 
Side  of  each  Spear,  fomewhat  hke  the  Beards  of  Fifli-hooks. 
Thefe  Spears  in  the  Sting,  or  Sheath,  lie  one  with  its  Point 
a  little  before  that  of  the  other;  as  is  reprefented  in  lig.  21. 
to  be  ready,  (I  conceive,)  to  be  firft  darted  into  the  Flefli; 
which  being  once  fix'd,  by  Means  of  its  foremoft  Beard,  the 
other  then  itrikes  in  too,  and  fo  they  alternately  pierce  deep- 
er and  deeper,  their  Beards  taking  more  and  more  hold  in 
the  Flcfli;  after  which  the  Sheath  or  Sling  follows,  to  con- 
vey the  Poifon  into  the  Wound.  Which,  that  it  may  pierce 
the  Better,  it  is  drawn  into  a  Point,  with  a  fmall  Slit  a  httlc 
below  that  Pomt,  for  the  two  Spears  to  come  out  at.  By 
Means  of  this  pretty  Mechanifm  in  the  Sting,  it  is,  that  the 
Sting  when  out  of  the  Body,  and  parted  from  it,  is  able  to 
pierce  and  Iting  us :  And  by  Means  of  the  Beards  being  lodg- 
ed deep  in  the  I'leQi,  it  comes  to  pafs  that  Bees  leave  their 
Stings  behind  them,  when  they  are  difturbed  before  they 
have  Time  to  withdraw  their  Spears  into  their  Scabbard.  In 
Tig.  II.  is  repreit-nted  the  two  Spears  as  they  lie  in  the  Sting. 
In  Fig.  2Z.  the  two  Spears  are  reprefented" when  fqueez'd  out 
of  the  Sting,  or  the  Scabbard  ;  in  which  Latter,  lig.  A  c  b,  is 
the  Sling,  c  d,  and  b  e,  the  two  bearded  Spears  thruft  out. 

{g)  The  Camelion  15  fufficiently  fam'd  on  this  Account. 
Beiides  which,  Phny  tells  us  of  a  IJeaft  as  big  as  an  Ox,  call- 
ed the  Tarandus,  that  when  he  pleafeth,  allumes  the  Colour 

of 


Chap.  XIV.  Of  Animals  Self'Trefervat  ton.  141 

the  Swiftncfs  of  their  Feet  j  fomc  can  {cxttx\  thcm- 
Iclves  by  diving  in  the  Waters,  others  by  tinging 
and  dilordering  the  Waters  (/j),  can  make  their  El- 
cape  J  and  fomc  can  guard  their  Bodies,  even  in 
the  very  Flames,  by  the  Ejeftion  of  the  Juice  of 
their  Bodies  (/')  >  and  fome  by  their  accurate  Smell, 
Sight  or  Hearing,    can  forefee   Dangers   {k) ;    o- 

thcrs 


of  an  Afsf  and  Colorem  omnium  fruticum,  arborum,  floritmt 
locorumque  reddit,  in  quihus  latet  meluens,  ideoque  raro  cafitur. 
Plin.  1.  8.  c.  34. 

How  true  this  is,  there  may  be  fome  Rcafon  to  doubt ; 
but  if  any  Truth  be  in  the  Story,  it  may  be  from  the  Ani- 
mal's chuling  foch  Company,  or  Places,  as  are  agreeable  to 
its  Colour:  As  I  have  I'een  in  divers  Caterpillars,  and  other 
Infers,  who  I  believe  were  not  able  to  change  their  Colour, 
from  one  Colour  to  another;  yet  I  have  conftantly  obferv'd, 
do  fix  themfelves  to  fuch  Things  as  are  of  the  fame  Colour ; 
by  which  Means  they  dodge  the  Spedator's  Eye.  Thus  the 
Caterpillar  that  feeds  on  Elder,  I  have  more  than  once  feen, 
fo  cunningly  adhering  to  the  fmall  Branches  of  the  fame  Co- 
lour, that  it  might  be  eafily  milhken  for  a  fmall  Stick,  even 
by  a  careful  View.  So  a  large  green  Caterpillar,  that  feeds 
on  Buckthorn,  and  divers  others.  To  which  I  may  add  the 
prodigious  Sagacity  of  the  Ichneumon  Flies,  that  make  the 
Kermes,  (for  of  that  Tribe  all  the  Kermes  I  ever  faw  was;,) 
how  artificially  they  not  only  inclofe  tiieir  Eggs  within  that 
gummy  Skin,  or  Shell ;  but  alfo  fo  well  humour  the  Colour 
of  the  Wood  they  adhere  to,  by  various  Streaks  and  Co- 
lours, that  it  is  not  eafie  to  dillinguifli  them  from  the  Wood 
it  felf. 

{h)  Contra  metum  V  vim,  fuii  fe  armU  qutque  defendit, 
CornibM  Tauri,  Apri  dentibtt^,  morfu,  Leones,  alix  fuga  fe,  alii, 
occultationc  tutantur :  atramenti  efjufione  Sepi&,  torpors  Torpe- 
dines.  MhUa  etiam  infet'lantes  odoru  intolerabili  facdirate  de- 
pellunt.     Cic.  de  Nat  Deor.  1.  z.  c.  50. 

(i)  A  Knight  cail'd  Corvini  at  Rome,  cafl  a  Salamander  in- 
to the  Fire,  which  prefently  fwell'd,  and  then  vomited  Store 
of  thick  flimy  Matter,  which  put  out  the  Coals;  to  which 
the  Salamander  prefently  retir'd,  putting  them  out  again  in 
the  fame  Manner,  as  foon  as  they  re- kindled,  and  by  this 
Means  fav'd  it  felf  from  the  Force  of  the  Fire  for  the  Space 
of  two  Hours:  After  which  it  liv'd  nine  Months.  Vid.  Phi- 
lof.  Tranfa£l.  No.  21.  in  Lo-wth.  Alridg.  Vol.  x.  p.  816. 

((•)  Plin'j  gives  an  Inftance  in  each.    L.  10,  c.  69.    AquiU 

R  (lariiit 


z/^z    Ofj^ntmalsSelf'TreJervafion.  Book  IV, 

thers  by  their  natural  Craft,  can  prevent  or  efcape 
them  (/)  5  others  by  their  Uncouth  Noife  {m) } 
by  the  horrid  Arpe6t,  and  ugly  Gefticulations  of 
their  Body  (») ;  and  fome  even  by  the  Power  of 
their  Excrements,  and  their  Stink  (o),  can  annoy 


claritts  cernunt  [quam  homines;]  Vultures  fagac'ths  odorantur  : 
iiqujdlus  audmni  Talp£  abrut&  terras  tarn  denfo  atque  furdo  na- 
turs.  elemento. 

(l)  The  DouhVmg  of  the  /f<z/e,  .before  (he  goes  to  Form, 
thereby  to  dodge  and  deceive  the  Dogs,  although  a  vulgar 
Obfervation,  is  a  notable  Inftinft  for  an  Animal,  lefs  fam'd 
for  Cunning  than  the  Fox,  and  fome  others. 

(«?)  It  is  natural  for  many  Quadrupeds,  Birds  and  Serpents, 
not  only  to  put  on  a  torvous  angry  Afped,  when  in  Dan- 
ger ;  but  alfo  to  fnarl,  hifs,  or  by  fome  other  Noife  deter 
their  Adverfary. 

(n)  The  lynx,  or  Wryneck,  although  a  Bird  of  very  beau- 
tiful Feathers,  and  confequently  far  enough  off  from  being  a- 
ny  way  terrible;  yet  being  in  Danger,  hath  fuch  odd  Con- 
tortions of  its  Neck,  and  Motions  of  its  Head,  that  1  remem- 
ber have  fcar'd  me,  when  I  was  a  Boy,  from  taking  their 
Nefts,  or  touching  the  Bird;  daring  no  more  to  venture  my 
Hand  into  their  Holes,  than  if  a  Serpent  had  lodged  in  it, 

(o)  Bonaftis  tuctur  fe  calcibus  CT'  fiercore,  quod  ab  fe  quater- 
n'ls  pajfihus  [trium  jugcrum  longitudine.  Pl'tn.  Nat.  Hifi.  I.  8. 
f.  15,]  cjaculatiir,  quod  fipc  cotaburit  adeo  ut  deglabrentur  ca- 
nes.    Ray'^  Synopf.  Quadr.  p.  71. 

Camtlus  Peruv'ta7ws  Clajna  dklus  nem'tnem  offendit,  fed  mi- 
ro  admodum  ingenio  fe  ab  iliatd  vindicat  injuria,  nimirum  vo- 
mitu  vel  cibi,  TJtl  humoris  in  vexaniem  retrorfum  cum  impetu 
ejaculate,   ob  protenfam  colli  longitudinem.      Id.  ib.  p.  1 46. 

Tzquiepail  (Anglice  Squnck  Praef.  and  one  that  I  faw  they 
caird  a  Stonck,)  Chm  qicis  earn  infeflatur,  fundit  cum  ventris 
crepitu  halitum  fcetidijftmum  :  quin  ipfa  tota  teterrimum  exha.- 
lat  odorem,  cr  nrina  ftercufqne  eft  foztidiffimum,  atque  adeo  pe- 
ftilens,  ut  nihil  fit  reperire  in  noftro  orbe,  cui  in  hac  re  poffit 
comparari :  quo  Jit,  ut  in  pcriculo  conftituta,  ttrinam  Qp"  fices  ad 
8  pluriumve  paffiium  intervallu?n  ejiciat,  hoc  mode  fe  ab  omni- 
bus vindicans  injuriis,  ac  veftes  inficiens  macuUs  lutcis  indelebi- 
hbus,  O'  mmquam  fatis  perfpirante  odore  :  alias  innoxium  Ani- 
mal edulcque,  hac  fold  ratione  herrendijfimum.      Id.  ib.  p.  l8z. 

Si  Ac'cipiter  Ardeam  in  fublimi  molcftat.,  fiercore  immiJJ'o  in 
ttnnas  ejus,  eas  pittrefcere  facit  ■  ut}  Solinus  feribit  de  Bonafoy 
izc.  Ita  Q^  Lupus  Hrin^am  fpargit  irt  perfequentem:  01.  Mag. 
Hift.  1,  19.  C.-14.      ■    • 

their 


Clup.  XIV.  Of  Animals  Scif-Trefcrvation.  143 

their  Enemy,  and  fccuic  tlicmfclvcs  j  and  againil 
Tome  (/)),  the  divine  Providence  it  fclf  hath  provi- 
ded a  Guard. 

By  fuch  Shifts  and  Means  as  thcfe,  a  faflicicnt 
Guard  is  minitlred  to  every  Species  of  Animals,  ia 
its  proper  refpc6live  Place  j  abundantly  cnougb  ^a 
fccure  the  Species  from  Deltru6lion,  and  to  keep 
up  that  Balance,  which  I  have  formerly  {hew'd,  is 
in  the  World  among  every,  and  all  the  Species  oF 
Animals  -,  but  yet  not  enough  to  fccure  Individuals, 
ffom  becoming  a  Prey  to  Man,  or  to  other  Crea- 
tures, as  their  Neccllitics  of  Life  require.  To 
which  Purpofe,  the  natural  Sagacity  and  Craft  of 
the  one  iiitrapping  (f),  and  captivating,  being  ia 
forne  Meafure  equivalent  to  that  of  the  other  in  c- 
vading,  is  as  excellent  a  Means  for  the  maintaining 
the  one,  as  preferving  the  others  and  if  well  con- 
fider'd,  argues  the  Contrivance  of  the  infinitely  wife 
Creator  and  Prcfcrver  of  the  World. 


(;>)  Thus  againfl  the  Crocodile,  which  can  catch  its  Prey 
only  before  it,  not  on  one  Side.  So  \\^c  Shark,  of  which  take 
my  often-commended  Friend  Sir  Hans  Sloane's  Ob.'ervation : 
It  hath  this  particular  to  it,  with  fomt  others  of  its  own  Triht ; 
that  the  Mouth  is  in  its  under  Part,  fo  that  it  mu/i  t/irn  the 
Belly  upwards  to  Prey,  And  was  it  not  for  that  Time  it  is  in 
turning,  in  which  the  purfu'd  FiJJjes  efcape,  there  zvould  he  no- 
thing that  could  avoid  it;  for  it  is  very  quick  in  Swimmings 
and  hath  a  va/I  Strength,  with  the  largeji  Swallow  of  any  FiJJjy 
and  is  very  devouring.     Sloane';  I'oya^e  to  Jamaica,  p.  i], 

iq)  Sec  chap.  II.  Note  (>/;}. 


R  X  CHAP. 


2.44  Book  IV. 

CHAP.    XV. 

Of  the  Generation  of  Animals. 

THere  remains  now  only  one  Thing  more  of  the 
ten  Things  in  common  to  Animals,  and  thac 
is  what  relates  to  their  Generation  (^),  and  Confer- 

vation 


{a)  Spontaneous  Getjerat'ton,  is  a  Dodrine  fo  generally  ex- 
ploded, that  I  fliall  not  undertake  the  Difproof  of  it.  It  is  fo 
evident,  that  all  Animals,  yea.  Vegetables  too,  owe  their 
Produftion  to  Parent- Animals  and  Vegetables ;  that  I  have  of- 
ten admir'd  at  the  Sloath  and  Prejudices  of  the  ancient  Philo- 
fophers,  in  fo  eafily  taking  upon  Truft  the  Arlfiotelian,  or  ra- 
ther, iht  JEg'yptian  Dodrine  oi'  equivocal  Generation  ;  that  when 
they  faw  Flies,  Frogs  and  Lice,  for  Inftance,  to  be  Mak  and 
Female,  and  accordingly  to  ingender,  lay  Eggs,  c:rc.  they 
could  ever  imagine  any  of  thefe  Creatures  fhould  be  fpontane- 
cufly  produc'd,  efpecially  in  fo  romantick  a  Manner,  as  in 
the  Clouds ;  as  they  particularly  thought  Frogs  were,  and  that 
they  dropp'd  down  in  Showers  of  Rain.  For  an  Anfwer  to 
this  Cafe  of  Frogs,  1  fliall  refer  to  a  Relation  of  my  own, 
which  my  late  moft  ingenious,  and  learned  Friend,  the  great 
Mr.  Ray,  requefted  of  me,  and  was  pleas'd  to  publifli  in  his 
lall  Edition  of  his  Wifdom  of  God  manifejfed,  &c.  p.  365. 

Bnt  fome  will  yet  afTert  the  Raining  of  Frogs;  among 
which  the  curious  Dr.  Plot  is  fomewhat  of  this  Opinion  ;  tell- 
ing us  of  Frogs  found  on  the  Leads  of  the  Lord  Ajlons  Gate- 
lioufe,  at  Ttxal  in  Siafordjhire,  which  he  thinks  by  fome  fuch 
Means  came  there;  as  alfo  on  the  Bowling-Green,  frequently 
after  a  Shower  of  Rain.     Plot's  Hifi.  Staff,  c.  i.  §.  47. 

But  we  may  take  a  Judgment  of  this,  and  an  Hundred  fuch 
Hke  Reports,  to  be  met  with  in  confiderable  Authors,  from 
other  the  like  Reports  that  have  been  better  inquir'd  into.  In 
a  Scarcity  in  Silefta,  a  mighty  Rumour  was  fpread  of  its  rain- 
ing  Millet-Seed;  but  the  Matter  being  inquir'd  into,  'twas 
found  to  be  only  the  SeeJs  of  the  Ivy-leaved  Speedivell,  or 
fmall  Menbit,  growing  in  the  Place  in  great  Plenty.  Eph. 
Germ.  An.  3.  Obf.  40.  So  in  the  Archipelago,  it  was  thought 
Afties  were  rain'd.  Ships  being  cover'd  therewith  at  a  hun- 
dred Leagues  Diltance;  but  in  all  ProbabiJity,  it  was  from  an 
Eruption  of  Vefuvius,  that  then  happen'd.  About  Warminfter 
m  WtltSt  'twas  reported  it  rain'd  wheat  ;hm  a  curious  Ob- 

ferver 


Chap.  XV.     The  Generatio?ty  dec.  145* 

ferver,  Mr.  Cole,  found  it  to  be  only  Ivy-Btrrie:,  blown  thi- 
ther in  a  confiderable  Quantity  by  a  Tcmpeft.  In  the  Year 
i6()6,  at  Crarftead  near  Wrotham  in  Kent,  a  rallurc- Field 
was  over-fprcad  with  little  young  Whittn^i^  fuppos'd  to  fall 
from  the  ('-louds,  in  a  Temped  of  Thunder  and  Rain;  but 
doubtlefs  they  were  brought  thither  with  Waters  from  the 
Sea  by  the  Tcmpcft.  Sec  the  before-commended  Mr.  Lowth. 
Abridg.  I'hilof.  Iranf^Vol.  i.  p.  143,  144. 

Neither  needcth  it  feem  llrange,  that  jifl)ts,  ivy-Berries, 
fmall  Fi/}}es,  or  young  Frogs,  (which  yet  may  have  fome  o- 
thcr  Conveyance,)  fliould  be  thus  tranl'ported  by  tempcJluous 
Winds,  coniidering  to  what  Diflance,  and  in  what  Quantities 
the  Sea- Waters  were  carry 'd  by  the  Great-Storw,  Nov.  z6. 
I-J03,  of  which  an  ingenious  Friend  lent  me  iheie  Accounts 
from  Lezves  in  Siiffex,  viz.  That  a  Phyfician  travelling  fo en  af- 
ter the  Storm,  to  Tlleliuift,  twenty  Miles  from  the  6ea,  as  h* 
rode  along  pluck'd  fotnc  Tops  of  Hedges,  and  cheiving  them, 
found  them  Snlt :  'Ihat  fome  Gr^Y^cs  hanging  on  the  Vines  nt 
Lewes  were  fo  too.  That  Mr.  WilliamTon  Rnlor  of  Ripe, 
found  the  Tzvigs  in  his  Garden  Salt  the  Monday  after  the  Storm ; 
and  others  obferv'd  the  fame  a  Week  after.  That  the  Grafs  of 
the  Dozens  alout  Lewes,  wa^  fo  Salt,  that  the  Sheep  zvcuU  not 
feed  till  Hunger  ccmpelfd  them  :  And  that  the  Miller  of  Ber- 
wick, (three  Miles  from  the  Sea,)  attanpiing  with  his  Man  to 
fecure  his  Mill,  ivere  fo  wajh'd  with  FlaJJjes  of  Sea-Wafer,  like 
the  Breakings  of  Waves  againfi  thje  Rocks,  that  they  were  al- 
tnofl  ftrangled  therezvith,  and  forced  to  give  over  their  Attempt. 

1  call'd  this  Doftrinc  of  equivocal  Generation,  an  JEgypti/t» 
BoHrine;  becaufe  probably  It  had  iis  Rife  in  A'.gypt,  co  falvc 
the  Hyp.othclis,  of  the  Produdtion  of  Men,  aird  other  Ani- 
mals, out  ot  the  F.airh,  by  the  Help  of  the  Sun's  Heat.  To 
prove  which,  the  A'.gyptians,  (as  Died.  Sicul.  faiih,)  produce 
rhif  <ihferxatirn.  That  about  Thebes,  when  the  Earth  is  moijt- 
ned  by  the  Nile,  by  the  Initnfe  Heat  of  ike  Sun,  an  ttmutntra- 
ble  Number  of  Mice  do  fpring  out.  Fjom  whence  he  infers, 
That  all  Kinds  of  Animals,  might  as  well  at  lirll  come  likc- 
wifc  out  of  the  Earth.  And  from  thcfe  the  learned  Bifhop 
Stillingfleet  thinks  other  Writers,  as  Ovid,  Mela,  Pliny,  &c. 
have,  without  examining  its  Truth,  taken  up  th€  fame  Hy- 
pcthefis.     V.  Stilltngfleet's  Orig.  Sacr.  Part  I.  Book  1.  Chap.  r. 

The  beforc-coi^mended  Dr.  Harris,  from  the  Obfervati- 
ons  of  Dr.  Harvey,  Sr.  Malpighi,  Dr.  de  Graaf,  and  Mr.  Leeiv- 
enhoeck,  infers  three  Things  concerning  Generation  as  liighly 
probable,  i.  'Ihat  Animals  are  cx  Animalculo.  i.  'ihat  tie 
.Animalcules  are  originally  in  icmine  Marium,  &  non  in  Fa'- 
minis.  3.  That  they  can  never  come  forward,  or  be  formed  inr 
to  Animals  of  the  refpeilive  Kind,  without  the  Ova  in  Foemi- 
nis.  His  Proofs  and  Illulbations,  fc£  under  the  Word  Gfr.e- 
ranon,  m  his  Lfx,  Techn.  Vel.  r. 

K  3  C*)  4f 


%4^  The  Generation  Book  IV. 

vation  of  their  Species  {b\  by  that  Means.  It 
would  not  be  feemly  to  advance  far  in  this  admi" 
table  Work  of  God  j  neither  ihall  I  at  all  in(ift  up- 
on that  of  Man  for  the  fame  Reafon.  And  as  for 
the  Irrationals  (0,  I  ihall  confine  my  felf  to  thefe 
five  Matters. 

I.  Their  natural  Sagacity  in  <?hufing  the  fitteft 
Places  to  rcpofite  their  Eggs  and  Young. 

II.  The  fitted  Times  and  Seafons  they  make  ufe 
of  for  their  Generation. 

III.  The  due  and  ftated  Number  of  their  Young. 

IV.  Their  Diligence  and  earned  Concern  in  their 
Breeding  up. 

V.  Their  Faculty  of  Feeding  them,  and  their 
Art  and  Sagacity  exerted  therein. 

I.  The  natural  Sagacity  of  irrational  Animals,  in 
chufing  the  fitted  Places  to  repofite  their  Eggs  and 
Young.  Of  this  I  have  given  larger  Hints  alrea- 
dy than  I  needed  to  have  done,  v^rhen  I  fpake  of  the 
Architecture  (d)  of  Animals,  intending  then  to  have 
wholly  pafs'd  by  this  Bufinefs  of  Generation:  I  fhall 
therefore  now  only  fuperadd  a  few  other  Indances, 
the  more  to  illudrate  this  Matter.. 

It  hath  been  already  diewn,  and  will  hereafter  {e) 
farther  appear,  that  the  Places  in  which  the  fe- 
veral  Species  of  Animals  lay  up  their  Eggs,   and 


{b)  ^t  eerie  Natura,  fi  fieri  potu'tjfet,  maxlrne  optafj'et  fuum 
eptficium  tjfe  itnmcrtals  :    quod  chm  per  tnateriam   nott  lueret 

(nam  quod ■     ex  came  efi  compofitum,  incorruptilile  eJJ'e  non 

fotefi)  fubfidium  quod  potuit  ipfi  ad  itntnortalitaiem  eft  facrica- 
ta,  fapient'ts  cujufdam  urbis  conditorh  exemplo,  &:c.  Nam  mi- 
rabilem  quandam  rationem  invent: ,  quomodo  in  demortui  ani- 
malis  locum,  novum  aliud  fufficiat.     Galen,  de  Ufu  Part.  1.  14- 

C.  i2.  * 

(c)  Animantia  Bruta  Obfietricibus  non  indigent  in  edendo 
Partu,  chm  indita  Natur&  vi  Umbilicus  feipfum  occlndat.  Oi. 
Rudbeck  in  Blafii  Anat.  Felis. 

(d)  Chap.  13. 

\e)  Book  Vlil.  Chap.  6. 


Young, 


Chap.  XV.  of  Animals.  147 

Young,  are  the  beft  for  that  Purpofej  Waters  (/) 
for  onej  Flerti  for  another  j  Holes  in  Wood  (^), 
Earth,  or  Stone  (/j),  for  others-,  -and  Ncfh  for  o- 
thcrs;  and  we  fliall  find,  that  lo  ardent  is  the  Pro- 
penfity  of  all  Animals,  even  of  the  mcancll  Infe6ts, 
to  get  a  fit  Place  for  the  Propagation  of  their 
Young }  that,  as  will  hereafter  appear,  there  is 
fcarce  any  Thing  that  efcapeth  the  Inquell  o^i  thofe 
little  fubtile  Creatures.  But  bcfidcs  all  this,  there 
are  two  or  three  Things  more  obfervable,  which 
plainly  argue  the  Inflindl  of  fomc  fupcrior  ratio- 
nal Being.     As, 

I.  The  complcat  and  neat  Order  which  many 
Creatures  obfervc  in  laying  up  their  Seed,  or  Eggs, 
in  proper  Rcpofitorics :  Of  which  I  fhall  fpeak  in 
another  Place  (/). 


(/)  The  Ephemeron^  as  it  is  an  unufual  and  fpccial  Inftance 
of  the  Brevity  of  Life;  fo  1  take  to  be  a  wonderful  Inlhnce 
of  the  fpecial  Care  and  Providence  of  God,  in  the  Coiilerva- 
tion  of  the  Species  of  that  Animal.  For,  i.  As  an  Animal, 
whofe  Life  is  determin'd  in  about  five  or  fix  Hours  Time, 
{viz..  from  about  fix  in  the  Evening,  till  about  eleven  a  Clock 
at  Night,)  needs  no  l-ood;  lb  neitiier  doih  ihe  hphemcron  cat, 
after  it  is  become  a  Fly.  z.  As  to  its  Generation  ;  in  thofe 
five  Hours  of  its  Life,  it  performs  that,  and  all  other,  nccel- 
fary  Offices  of  Life:  For  in  the  beginning  of  its  Life,  it 
flieds  its  Coat  ;  and  that  being  done,  and  the  poor  little  Animal 
thereby  render'd  light  and  agile,  it  ipcnds  the  rell  of  its  (hon 
Time  in  frifking  over  the  Waters,  and  at  the  fame  1  ime  the 
Female  droppeth  her  Egg  on  the  Waters,  and  the  Male  his 
Sperm  on  tliem  to  impregnate  them.  Thefe  Eggs  are  fprcad 
about  by  the  Waters ;  defcend  to  the  Bottom  by  their  own 
Gravity  ;  and  are  hatch'd  by  fhe  Warmtli  of  the  Sun,  into  lit- 
tle Worms,  which  make  themfelves  Cafes  in  the  Ciay,  and 
feed  on  the  fame  without  any  Need  of  parental  Care.  ynd. 
Ephem.  vita,  tranflatcd  by  Dr.  T'^fon  from  Sxuammcrdatn.  Scc 
alfo  Book  VIII.  Chap.  C.  Note  (r).  • 

(l)   See  Chap.  13.   Knte  (c),   and  Book  VI IL  Chap.   6. 

{h)  The  Wortni  in  Chap.  11.  Note  [x),  breed  in  the  liolci 
they  gnaw  in  Stone,  as  manifclt  from  their  \i^.^i  found 
therein. 

(>)  See  Booh  VIII.  chap.  6.  Njtc  (q). 

R  A  z.  Th- 


z^^  The  GeneraUQu  Book  IV*. 

2.  The  fuitable  Apparatus  in  every  Creature's 
Body,  for  the  laying-up  its  Eggs,  Seed,  or  Young, 
in  their  proper  Place.  It  would  be  as  endlefs  as 
needlefs  to  name  all  Particulars,  and  therefore  an  In- 
itance  or  two  of  the  Infed-Tribe  may  ferve  for  a 
Specimen  in  this  Place,  till  I  come  to  other  Parti- 
culars. Thus  Infeds,  who  have  neither  Feet  adapt- 
ed to  fcratch,  nor  Nofes  to  dig,  nor  can  make  arti- 
ficial Nefts  to  lay  up  their  Young  >  yet  what  a- 
bundant  Amends  is  there  made  them,  in  the  Power 
they  have  either  to  extend  the  Abdomen  (k),  and 

there- 


(k)  Many,  if  not  moft  Flies,  efpecially  thofe  of  the  Flejh- 
Fly-kind,  have  a  Faculty  of  extending  their  Uropygia  ,  and 
thereby  arc  enabled  to  thrull:  their  Eggs  into  convenient 
Holes,  and  Receptacles  for  their  Young,  in  Flefti,  and  what- 
ever elfc  they  Fly-blow.  But  none  more  remarkable  than  the 
Horfe-Fly,  called  by  Pennius,  in  Monffct,  (p.  6i. )  S>soA<«f©-, 
i.  e.  Curvicauda,  and  the  Whame  or  BurreL-Fly,  which  is  vex- 
atious to  Horfes  in  Summer,  not  by  flinging  them,  but  only 
by  their  bombylious  Noife,  or  tickling  them  in  (ticking  their 
Nits,  or  Eggs  on  the  Hair ;  which  they  do  in  a  very  dex- 
terous Manner,  by  thrufting  out  their  Uropygia,  bending  them 
np,  and  by  gentle,  flight  Touches,  (licking  the  Eggs  to  the 
Hair  of  the  Legs,  Shoulders,  and  Necks,  commonly  of  Hor- 
fes ;  fo  that  Horfes  which  go  abroad,  arid  are  feldom  drefTed, 
are  fomewhat  difcoloured  by  the  numerous  Nits  adhering  to 
their  Hair. 

Having  mentioned  fo  much  of  the  Generation  of  this  In- 
fetH:,  although  it  be  a  little  out  of  the  Way,  I  hope  I  fliall 
be  excufed  for  taking  Notice  of  the  long-tailed  Maggot , 
■which  is  the  Produfl  of  thefe  Nits  or  Eggs,  called  by  Dr.  Plot, 
Eruca  glabra,  [or  rather  Eula  Scabra,  it  Ihould  be]  caudata 
aqnatico-arborea,  it  being  fourtd  by  him  in  the  Water  of  an 
hollow  Tree,  but  I  have  found  it  in  Ditches,  Saw-Pits,  Holes 
of  Water  in  the  High-way ,  and  fuch-like  Places  where  the 
Waters  are  naoft  dill  and  foul.  This  Maggot  I  mention,  as 
being  a  fingular  and  remarkable  Work  of  God,  not  fo  much 
for  its  bemg  fo  utterly  unlike  as  it  is  to  its  Parent  £fe-like- 
Fly,  as  for  the  wife  Provilion  made  for  it  by  its  long  Tail ; 
which  is  fo  joynted  at  certain  Diftances  from  the  Body,  as 
that  it  can  be, /Withdrawn,  or  flieathed,  one  Part  within  ano- 
ther, to  what^'Length  the  Maggot  pleafetb,  fo  as  to  enable  it 

to 


Ghap.XV.  of  Animals.  149 

thereby  reach  the  commodious  Places  they  could 
not  otherwife  come  atj  or  cHe  they  have  fome  acu- 
leous  Part  or  Inilrument  to  tercbrate,  and  make 
Way  for  their  Eggs  into  the  Root  (/),  Trunk  [m\ 

Fruit 


to  readi  the  Bottom  of  very  fhallow,  or  deeper  Waters,  as  it 
hath  Occafion,  for  the  gathering  of  Food.  At  the  end  of 
this  tapering  is  a  Ramification  of  FibrilU ,  or  fmall  Hairs  rc- 
prefenting,  when  fpread,  a  Star;  with  the  help  of  which, 
fpread  out  on  the  top  of  the  Waters,  it  is  enabled  to  hang 
making  by  that  means  a  fmall  Deprcflion  or  Concavity  on 
the  Surface  of  the  Water.  In  the  midll  of  this  Star,  1  ima- 
gine the  Maggot  takes  in  Air,  there  being  a  Perforation, 
which  with  a  Microfcope  I  could  perceive  to  be  open,  an(J 
by  the  Star  to  be  guarded  againft  the  Incurfion  of  the 
Water. 

(I)  The  Excrefcences  on  the  Root  of  Cabbages,  Turneps^ 
and  divers  other  Plants,  have  always  a  Maggot  in  them  ;  but 
what  the  Animal  is  that  thus  makes  its  way  to  the  Root  un- 
der Ground,  whether  Ichneumon,  Phalsna,  Scarab,  or  Scolo- 
fsndra,  I  could  never  difcovcr,  being  not  able  to  bring  them  to 
any  thing  in  Boxes. 

(m)  I  prefume  they  are  only  of  the  Jchneumon-Fly-kind, 
that  have  their  Generation  in  the  Trunks  of  Vegetables.  In 
Malpigh't  de  Galits,  Fig.  6i.  -is  a  good  Cut  of  the  gouty  Ex- 
crefcences ,  or  rather  Tumours  of  the  Briar-Stalk  :  From 
which  proceeds  a  fin-i!!  black  Ichneuwon-Fly,  with  red  Legs; 
black,  fmooth  jointed  Antenns. ;  pretty  large  Thorax  ;  and 
fliort,  round  Belly,  of  the  Shape  of  an  Heart.  It  Icapeth  as 
a  Flea.  The  Male,  (as  in  other  Infeds,)  is  leiTer  than  the  Fe- 
male, and  very  venereous,  in  fpite  of  Danger,  getting  upon 
the  Female,  wkom  they  beat  and  tickle  with  their  Breeches 
and  Horns,  to  excite  them  to  a  Coit. 

Another  Example  of  the  Generation  in  the  Trunks  of  Ve- 
getables, fliall  be  from  the  Papers  of  my  often-commended 
Friend  Mr.  Ray,  which  are  in  my  Hands,  and  that  is  an  Ob- 
fervation  of  the  ingenious  Dr.  Nath.  Wood .-  ;  have  (faid  he) 
lately  obferved  many  Eggs  in  the  common  B.ujJ).  0'7e  fort  are 
little  tranfparent  tlggs,  in  Shape  fomeivhat  like  a  Pear,  or  Re- 
tort, lying  within  the  ^hin,  upon,  or  in  the  Mc'-iuil.«,  jufl  /;- 
gainjl  a  brovjnijlj  Spot  on  the  out-fide  of  the  liujh  ;  zvhich  is  ap^- 
parcntly  the  Crcatrix  of  the  IVound  made  by  the  Fly,  -vhtn  flit 
puts  her  F.^ns  there,  Another  Kind,  u  much  longer,  and  nj>t  ja 
tranfparent,  of  a    long  oval,  or  rather   cyUndmal  Jonn;   fix, 

tighi. 


15'd^  The  Generation  Book  IV. 

Fruit  («),  Leaves  (o),  and  the  tender  Buds  of  Ve- 
getables (^),  or  fome  other  fuch  curious  and  fecurc 
Method  they  are  never  deftitute  of.  To  which  we 
may  add, 

5.  The  natural  Poifon  (^),  (or  what  can  I  call 
it?)  which  many  or  moft  of  the  Creatures,  laft  in- 
tended, have,   to  caufe  the  Germination  of  fuch 


eighty  or  more,  lie  commonly  together,  acrofs  the  Ru/h,  parallel 
to  each  other,  like  the  Teeth  of  a  Comb,  and  are  as  long  a*  the 
Breadth  0/  the  RuJJo.  Letter  from  Kilkenny  in  Ireland,  Apr. 
2,8.  1697, 

(»)   See  BookVlW.  Chap.  6.   Note  {d). 

[p)  I  have  in  Chap.  13.  f^ote  («),  and  Book  VIII.  Chap.  6. 
'^ote  (e),  (/),  taken  Notice  of  the  Nidilication  and  Generati- 
on of  fome  Infers  on  the  Leaves  of  Vegetables,  and  (hall 
therefore,  for  the  IHuflration  of  this  Place,  chufe  an  uncom- 
mon Example  out  of  the  Scarab-kind  (the  Generation-  of 
which  Tribe  hath  not  been  as  yet  mentioned)  and  that  is  of 
a  fmall  Scarab  bred  in  the  very  Tips  of  Elm- Leaves.  Thei'e 
Leaves,  in  Summer,  may  be  obferved  to  be,  many  of  them, 
dry  and  dead,  as  alfo  turgid ;  in  which  lieth  a  dirty,  whitiftj, 
rough  Maggot.  From  which  proceeds  a  Beetle  of  the  fmal- 
left  Kind,  of  a  light,  IVeeJle  Colour,  that  leapeth  like  a  Graf- 
hopper,  although  its  Legs  are  but  fliort.  Its  Eyes  are  blackifli, 
Elytra  thin,  and  prettily  furrowed,  with  many  Concavities 
in  them  ;  fmall  club-headed  Antenna,  and  a  long  Rojlrum 
like  a  Probofcis. 

The  fame,  or  much  like  this,  I  have  met  with  on  Tips  of 
Oaken  and  Holly-Leaves.  How  the  Scarab  lays  its  Eggs  in  the 
Leaf,  whether  by  terebrating  the  Leaf,  or  whether  the  Mag- 
got, when  hatched,  doth  it,  I  could  never,  fee.  But  with 
great  Dexterity,  it  makes  its  Way  between  the  up})er  and  un- 
der Membranes  of  the  Leaf  feeding  upon  the  parenchymous 
Part  thereof.  Its  Head  is  flenderer  and  (harper  than  moft  of 
Maggots,  as  if  made  on  purpofe  for  this  Work ;  but  yet  I 
have  often  wondered  at  their  Artifice  in  fo  nicely  feparating 
the  Membranes  of  tKe  Elm-Leaf,  without  breaking  them, 
and  endangering  their  own  tumbling  out  of  'em,  confidcring 
how  thin  and  very  tender  the  Skins  of  that  Leaf  (particular- 
ly) are. 

(p)  See  Book  VIII.  Chap.  6.  Note  (z.). 

(q)  See  BookVlll.   Chap.  8.  to  Note  (Jbh),^C. 

Balls, 


Chap.  XV.  of  Ammals.  25-1 

Balls,  Cafes,  and  other  Commodious  Repofitorics, 
as  are  an  admirable  Lodgment  to  the  Eggs  and 
Young}  that  particularly  aflifl:  in  the  Incubation 
and  Hatching  the  Young,  and  then  afford  them 
ftifficicnt  Food  and  NourilTimcnt  in  all  their  Nfrti'.. 
pha-Statc^  in  which  they  need  Food;  and  arc  af- 
terwards commodious  Houfcs  and  Beds  for  them  in 
their  yftirelia-State^  till  they  are  able  to  break  Prl- 
fon,  fly  abroad,  and  fliift  for  themfelvcs.  But  thljj 
fhall  be  taken  Notkc  of,  when  J  come  to  treat  of 
Infers . 

•  IF.  As  irrational  Aniir..ils  chufc  the  fitrcfl  Place, 
fo  alfo  the  Httert  Times  and  S^afons  for  rhcir  Gene- 
ration. Some  indeed  are  indifferent  to  all  Times, 
but  others  make  ufc  of  peculiar  Sc.ifons  (r).  Thofe, 
for  fndance,  whofc  Proviiions  arc  ready  at  all  Sca- 
fons,  or  who  are  under  the  Tuition  of  Man,  pro^' 
duce  their  Young  without  any  great  regard  to  Heqt 
or  Cold,  Wet  or  Dry,  Summer  or  Winter.  But 
others,  whofe  Provilions  are  peculiar,  and  only  to 
be  met  with  at  certain  Seafons  of  the  Year,  or  who, 
by  their  Migration  and  Change  of  Place,  are  tied 
up  to  certain  Seafons ;  thcfe  (as  if  endowed  with  a 
natural  Care  and  Forefight  of  what  fhall  happen) 
do  accordingly  lay,  hatch  and  nurfe  up  their  Young 
in  the  moll  proper  Seafons  of  all  the  Year  for  iheir 
Purpofej  as  in  Spring,  or  Summer,  the  Times  of 
Plenty  of  Provifions,  the  Times  of  Warmth  for 
Incubation,  and  the  moll  proper  Seafons  to  breed 
up  their  Young,  till  they  arc  able  to  lliift  forthcm- 
felves ,  and  can  range  about  for  Food ,  and  fcek 
Places  of  Retreat  and  Safety,  by  flying  long  Flights 
as  well  as  their  Progenitors,   and   palling  mto  far 


■srtiii,^   T  ctwhctc-fiit  c*   tj;  x.Tx^l'^t^-))   u-x..      Arill.    H:it     An. 
\.  5-  c.  8.  ut)J  plura. 


dillani 


7ff%  The  (feneration  Book  IV. 

diftant  Regions,   which  (when  others  fail)  afford 
thofe  helplefs  Creatures  tlie  Neceflaries  of  Life. 

III.  To  the  fpecial  Seafons,  I  may  add  the  pecu- 
liar Number  of  Young  produced  by  the  irrational 
Creatures.  Of  which  I  have  already  taken  fome 
Notice,  when  I  fpake  of  the  Balance  of  Ani- 
mals {f).  Now,  if  there  was  not  a  great  deal 
more  than  Chance  in  this  Matter,  even  a  wife  Go- 
vernment of  the  Creation,  it  could  never  happen 
that  every  Species  of  Animals  fhould  be  tied  up  to 
a  certain  Rate  and  Proportion  of  its  Increafej  the 
inoft  ufeful  would  not  be  the  mod  fruitful,  and  the 
moft  pernicious  produce  the  feweft  Young,  as  I 
have  obferved  it  commonly  is.  Neither  would  eve- 
ry Species  produce  fuch  a  certain  Rote  as  it  is  on- 
ly able  to  breed  up :  But  all  would  be  in  a  confu- 
fed,  huddled  State.  Inllead  of  which,  on  the  con- 
trary, we  iind  every  Thing  in  compleat  Order  j 
the  Balance  of  Genera^  Species  and  Individuals  al- 
ways proportionate  and  even  >  the  Balance  of  Sexes 
the  famcj  moft  Creatures  tied  up  to  their  due 
Stint  and  Number  of  Young,  without  their  own 
Power  and  Choice,  and  others  (particularly  of  the 
winged  (/)  Kind)  producing  then*  due  Number  at 


(/)  chap.  lo. 

(/)  Mr.  Ray  alledges  good  Rcafons  to  cqnclnde,  that  al' 
though  Birds  have  not  an  exad  Power  of  numbering,  yet,  that 
they  have  of  dillingiiidiing  many  from  few,  and  knowing 
when  they  come  near  to  a  certain  Number;  and  that  they 
have  it  in  their  Power  to  lay  many  or  few  Eggs.  All  \vhich 
he  manifefteth  from  Hens,  and  other  domeftick  Fowls,  lay- 
ing many  more  Eggs  when  they  are  withdrawn,  than  when 
not.  Which  holds  in  wild  as  well  as  domeftick  Birds,  as  ap' 
pears  from  Dr.  Lijier's  Experiment  in  withdrawing  a  S-a^al- 
iow's  Eggs,  wiich  by  that  Means  laid  nineteen  Eggs  fuccef- 
fively  before  (he  gave  over.  v.  Ray'i  Wifdorn  of  God,  &c. 
P-I37. 

their 


Chap.  XV.  of  Ammnls.  ^S3 

their  Choice  and  Pleafurc  j  fome  hrgc  Numbers , 
but  not  more  than  they  can  cover,  feed  and  foftcr  i 
others  fewer,  but  as  many  as  they  can  well  nurfc 
and  breed  up.     Which  minds  me, 

IV.  Of  the  Diligence  and  earncft  Concern  which 
irrational  Animals  have  of  thcProduftion  and  Breed- 
ing up  their  Young.  And  here  I  have  already  ta- 
ken Notice  of  their  Sro^y)}',  or  natural  Affefti- 
on,  and  with  what  Zeal  they  feed  and  defend 
their  Young.  To  which  may  be  added  thefc  two 
Things. 

I .  The  wonderful  Inftind  of  Incubation.  It  is 
utterly  impolTible,  that  ever  unthinking,  untaught 
Animals  fhould  take  to  that  only  Method  of  hatch- 
ing their  Young,  was  it  not  implanted  in  their 
Nature  by  the  infinitely  wife  Creator.  But  fo  ar- 
dent is  their  Defire,  fo  unwearied  is  their  Patience 
when  they  are  ingaged  in  that  Bufinefs,  that  they 
will  abide  their  Nefts  for  feveral  Weeks,  deny 
themfelves  the  Pleafures,  and  even  the  Ncccflarics 
of  Life}  fome  of  them  even  ftnrvmg  themfelves 
almoll,  rather  than  hazard  their  Eggs,  to  get 
Food,  and  others  cither  performing  the  Office  by 
Turns  («),  or  elfe  the  one  kindly  Iceking  our,  and 
•  carrying  Food  to  the  other  (-«/},   engaged  in  the 


(m)  Palumbes  incubat  faernina  pojl  mgridiana  in  matutinamt 
citero  mat.  Colttmbs.  mcnbant  ambo,  inttrtiin  Mas,  notlu  Fcs- 
mina.     Plin.  Nat.  Hill.  1.  lo.  c.  58. 

(w)  Ot  the  common  Crow,  Mr.  Willughby  faith,  The  Fe- 
Tnales  only  fit,  and  that  diligently,  the  Males  in  the  mean  tm$ 
bring  them  VUiuals,  as  Arillotlc  jaith.  in  moji  other  Birds, 
which  pair  together,  the  Male  and  Fimale  fit  by  Turns.  Orni- 
thol.  1.  i.  §.  I.  c.  1.  §.  1.  And  I  have  obfcrved  the  Female- 
Crows  to  be  much  tatter  than  the  Males,  in  the  Time  of  In- 
cubatiou,  by  Reafon  the  Male,  out  of  his  conjugal  Affc- 
aion,  almoll  lUrves  himfelf,  to  fupply  the  1-emalc  with 
Plenty. 

Office 


25'4  *^^^  Generation  Book  IV. 

Office  of  Incubation.  But  of  thefe  Matters  in  a 
more  proper  Place  (a). 

2.^  When  the  young  ones  are  produced,  not  on- 
ly with  what  Care  do  they  feed  and  nurCe  them,  but. 
with  what  furprizing  Courage  do  all  or  moft  Crea- 
tures defend  them !  It  is  fomewhat  llrange  to  fee 
timid  Creatures  iy\  who  at  other  Times  are  cow- 
ardly, to  be  full  of  Courage,  and  undaunted  at  that 
Time  J  to  fee  them  furioufly  and  boldly  encounter 
their  Enemy,  infteadof  flying  from  him  >  andexpofe 
themfelves  to  every  Danger,  rather  than  hazard  and 
forfake  their  Young. 

With  this  earnell  Concern  of  the  irrational  Ani-- 
mals  for  their  Young,  we  may  join  in  the,  , 

V.  And  laft  Place,  Their  Faculty  and  Sagacity  of 
feeding  them.  About  which  I  mall  take  notice  of 
three  Things. 

I .  The  Faculty  of  fuckling  the  Young,  is  an  ex-^ 
cellent  Provifion  the  Creator  hath  made  for  thofe 
helplefs  Creatures.  And  here  the  Agreeablenefs  and 
Suitablenefs  of  that  Food  to  young  Creatures,  de- 
fei  ves  particular  Obfervation,  as  alfo  their  Delight 
in  it,  and  Defire  and  Endeavours  after  it,  even  as 
foon  as  born  {z)^  together  with  the  Willingneis  of 


{%)  See  Book  VH.   Chaf.  4.  •-  -      - 

()i)  Volucril/us  Nutura  fiovam  quandam,  Pullos  educandl,  ra- 
tjonem  excogUaii'it  :  ipfis  entm  pr&cipuutn  quendam  amorem  in  ea 
qt4£  procrearent,  ingeneravit^  quo  hnpulfu  helium  pro  pullis  cum 
ferocibus  nnitnal'tbus,  qux.  ante  declindrunt,  intrep'ide  fufcipiunty 
'vi^Mmque  ipfis  convenient  em  [uppeditant.  Galen,  de  Uf.  Part. 
1.  14.   c.  4. 

(t)  In  lis  anifnantibm  qus  la5le  aluntur,  omnis  fere  c'tbus 
matrnm  Utlejcere  inc'tpit  :  eaque,  qu,&  paulo  ante  nata  funt, 
fine  magi/lro,  duce  ?iaturd,  mammas  appetunt,  earumque  uber- 
tate  faturantur.  Atque  ut  intelligamus  nihil  horum  effe  fortui' 
Tnmy  O'  hu  omnia  ejj'e  provida,  [olertifque  naturA,  qui  multi- 
plices  foetus  procreant,  ut  Sues,  ut  Canes,  his  Mammarum  da- 
ta  ejl  multitude ;  quas  eafdem  pauccu  habent  e£  beftii,  qud  pau* 
ca  gignunt.  Cic.  dc  Nat.  Deor.  I.  i.  0.51.  Confule  quoque 
Galen  de  Uf.  Part.  1.  i4-  C-  4-  c?*  1.  15.   c.  7. 

all, 

1 


Chap.  XV.  of  Antnials,  t^f 

all,  even  the  moft  favagc  and  fierce  Animals ,  to 
part  with  it,  and  to  adminiller  it  to  their  Young, 
yea,  to  teach. and  inftitutc  chcm  m  the  Art  of  tak- 
ing It. 

And  laftl}',  to  name  no  more,  the  curious  ^ppar 
ratus  which  is  made  for  this  Service  in  the  divers 
Species  of  Animals,  by  a  due  Number  of  Breaftsy 
proportionable  to  theOccafions  of  each  Animal,  by 
curious  Glands  in  thofe  Brealts,  to  feparate  chat  nu- 
tritive Juice,  the  Milk,  by  Arteries  and  Veins  to 
convey  it  to  them,  and  proper  Rivulets  and  Cha- 
nels  to  convey  it  from  them,  with  Dugs  and  Nip- 
ples, 'placed  in  the  mod  convenient  Part  of  the 
Body  \aa)  of  each  Animal,  to  adminiifer  it  to 
their  Young}  all  thefe  Things,  I  Tiy,  do  mani- 
feftly  proclaim  the  Care  and  Wifdom  of  the  great 
Creator. 

2.  As  for  fuch  Animals  as  do  in  another  manner 
breed  up  their  Young,  by  finding  out  Food,  and 
putting  it  into  their  Mouth,  the  Provilion  made  in 
them  for  this  Service,  to  Itrike,  catch,  to  pouch 

and 


iaa)  Animaliafolidipeiij,  v  ruminant'u,  vel  cornigera,  inter 
femora  Marnmas  habent,  quorum  Fjitta  Jiatim  a  partu  pedt- 
bus  inftjiunt,  qttod  matres  inter  la:ianduvi  non  decumhant,  ut 
Etfua,  jifina,  &c.  Animalia  digitata.  CT*  multipara,  m  medio 
'ventre,  fcil.  fpatio  al>  inguine  ad  pcHus  (in  Cuntculo  ufque  ad 
jugiUum )  duplicem  mamwarum  Jcriem  fortita  funt,  qtt*  omnia 
decumbentia  ttbera  fcetibus  admozent,  ut  Urfa^  Le/tna,&CC.  Si 
vera  hitc  iA  Jolo  inguine  Mammas  gererent,  propria  cura  inter 
decumiendum  f'lxtus  accejjut?}  ad  mammas  nonnihil  prtpedi- 
rent.  Multeriius  Mamms.  bins,  funt,  ut  v  PapilU,  nimirum 
ut  latus  lateri  conformiter  rcfpondeat,  cr  ut  alternatim  infant 
^  latere  in  latus  inter  fugendum  tranjeratur ,  ne  corpus  ejus 
uni  lateri  nimis  ajjuejieus  quoquo  tnodo  incurvetur.  Simia, 
homo  S'jlveftrvs,  &c.  Blaf.  Anat.  Animal.  Par.  i.  Cap.  6, 
de^ane  ex  Whartoao'.  See  here  vihzi  Plmy  hath  alio,  L.  ii. 
Cap.  40. 


,1 


1^6  Thi  Generation  Book  iV. 

and  convey  their  Prey  and  Food  to  their  Young  {bb)^ 
is  very  confiderable.  And  To  is  alfo  their  Sagacity 
in  equally  diilributing  it  among  them,  that  among 
many,  all  (hall  be  duly,  equally,  and  in  good  Order^ 
fed. 

5.  There  is  yet  another  Initinft  remaining,  of 
fuch  Animals  as  can  neither  adminitler  Suck  to  their 
Young,  neither  lay  them  in  Places  affording  Food, 
nor  can  convey  and  bring  them  Food,  but  do  with 


In  the  Elephant,  the  Nipples  are  near  the  Breaft,  by  Rea- 
fon  the  old  one  is  forced  to  fuck  her  felf,  and  by  the  help  of 
her  Trunk  conveys  the  Milk  into  the  Mouth  of  her  Young. 
Vid.  Phil.  Tranf.  N«.  336. 

ibb)  For  an  Exemplification,  I  might  name  many  Ani- 
mals, particularly  Birds,  whofe  Parts  are  compleatly  fuited  to 
this  Service.  They  are  Charaderifticks  of  rapacious  Birds, 
to*  have  aduncous  Bills  and  Talons  to  hold  and  tear,  and 
ftrong  brawny  Thighs  to  ftrike  and  carry  their  Prey,  as  well 
as  a  (harp  piercing  Sight  to  fpy  it  afar  off.  Ra'ii  Synopf.  Me- 
thod. Av.  p.  I.  The  Pelecane  alfo  might  be  here  named,  for 
its  prodigious  Bag  under  its  Bill  and  Throat,  big  enough  to 
contain  thirty  Pints.  Id.  ibid.  p.  iii.  And  to  name  no  more, 
the  common  Heron  hath  its  moft  remarkable  Parts  adapted 
to  this  Service  ;  long  Legs  for  wading,  and  a  long  Neck  an- 
fwetable  thereto  to  reach  Prey,  a  wide,  extenfive  Throat  to 
pouch  it;  long  Toes,  with  ftrong  hooked  Talons,  (one  of 
•which  is  remarkably  ferrate  on  the  Edge)  the  better  to  hold 
their  Prey  ;  a  long  fiiarp  Bill  to  Itrike  their  Prey,  and  ferrate 
towards  the  Point,  with  ftiarp  hooked  Beards  ftanding  back- 
ward, to  hold  their  Prey  fall  when  ftruck  ;  and  laftly,  large, 
broad,  concave  Wings  (in  Appearance  much  too  large,  hea- 
vy and  cumberfome  for  fo  fmall  a  Body,  but)  of  greateft 
Ui'e  to  enable  them  to  carry  the  greater  Load  to  their  Nefts 
at  feveral  Miles  Diftance  ;  as  I  have  feen  them  do  from  fe- 
veral  Miles  beyond  me,  to  a  large  Heronry  above  three  Miles 
dillant  from  me.  In  which  I  have  feen  Plaife,  and  other 
Filh,  fome  Inches  long,  lying  under  the  high  Trees  in  which 
they  build  ;  and  the  curious  and  ingenious  Owner  there- 
of, D'Acre  Barret,  Efq;  hath  feen  a  large  Eel  convey'd  by 
them,  nocwithftanding  the  great  Annoyance  it  gave  them  in 
their  Flight,  by  its  twtfting  this  Way  and  that  Way  about 
their  Bodies.  \ 

:i  their 


Chap.  XV.  of  Animals.  i^j 

^hcir  Eggs,  lay  up  Provifions  for  their  future  Young. 
Somewhat  of  this  is  reported  of  fome  Birds  {cc)\ 
but  I  have  my  felf  with  Plcafure,  frequently  fecn 
fome  of  the  Species  of  Infc6ls  to  carry  ample  Pro- 
vifions into  their  dry  and  barren  Cells,  where  they 
have  feal'd  them  carefully  and  cautioufly  up  with 
their  Eggs,  partly,  'tis  like,  for  Incubation  fake, 
and  partly  as  an  eafy  Bed  to  lodge  their  Young  >  buc 
chiefly  for  future  Provifion  for  their  Young,  in 
their  Nympba-State^  when  they  (land  in  need  of 
Food  {del). 


(cc)  This  is  reported  of  the  American  ojlrich,  mentioned 
by  Acarette,  in  Phil.  Tranf.  N-^.  89.  Of  which  iec  BoekV II. 
Chap  4.    Kote  {e). 

(dd)  Hornets,  Wafps,  and  all  the  Kinds  of  Bees  provide  Ho- 
ney ;  and  many  of  the  Pfeudofphect,  and  Ichneumon  Wafps 
and  Fiiesy  carry  Maggots,  Spiders,  Q^e.  into  their  Nells;  of 
which  fee  above,   Note  (c)  Chap.  13. 


CHAP.   XVI. 

The  Conchtjion. 

TH  U  S  I  have,  as  briefly  as  well  I  could  (and 
much  more  briefly  than  the  Matters  defcrved) 
difpatchcd  the  Decad  of  Things  I  propofcd  in  com- 
mon to  the  fenfitive  Creatures.  And  now  let  us 
paufe  a  little,  and  refle6t.  And  upon  the  whole 
Matter,  what  lefs  can  be  concluded  than  that  there 
is  a  Being  infinitely  Wife,  Potent,  and  Kind,  who 
is  able  to  contrive  and  make  this  glorious  Scene  of 
Things,  which  I  have  thus  given  only  a  Glance  of  ? 
For  wharlefs  than  Infinite,  could  Hock  fo  vail  x 
Globe  with  fuch  a  noble  Set  of  Animals?  All  fo 
contrived,  as  to  minifter  to  one  anotliei's  Help  fome 

S  Way 


i^S  The  Cone htfion.  Book  IV. 

Way  or  other,  and  moft  of  them  ferviceable  to 
Man  peculiarly,  the  Top  of  this  lower  World,  and 
who  was  made,  as  it  were,  on  purpofe  to  obferve, 
and  furvey,  and  fet  forth  the  Glory  of  the  infinite 
Creator^  manifellcd   in  his  Works!  Who!    What 
but  the  Great  GOD  could  fo  admirably  provide 
for  the  urhole  Animal  World  every  Thing  fervice- 
able to  it,  or  that  can  be  wilhed  for,  either  to  con- 
ferve  its  Species,  or   to  minifter  to  the  Being  or 
Well-beingof  Individuals!  Particularly,  who  could 
Feed  fo  fpacious  a  World,  who  could  pleafe  fo  large 
a  Number  of  Palates,  or  fuit  fo  many  Palates  to  fo 
great  a  Variety  ofT^'ood,  but  the  infinite  Conferva- 
tor  of  the  World  !   And  who  but   the   fame  great 
HE^  could  provide  fuch  commodious  Cloathing  for 
every  Animal  i  fuch  proper /ftf^^/^j,  Ne ft s  2iudi  Habi- 
tations; fuch  fuitable  Armature  and  Weapons ;  fuch 
Subtilty^  Artifice  and  Sagacity^  as  every  Creature  is 
more  or  lefs  armed  and  furnifhcd  with,  to  fence  off 
the  Injuries  of  the  Weather,  to  refcue  it  felf  from 
Dangers,  to  preferve  it  felf  from  the  Annoyances  of 
its  Enemies  i  and,  in  a  word,  to  conferve  its  Self, 
and  its  Species  !   What  but  an  infinite  fuperintend- 
ing  Power  could  fo  equally  balance  the  feveral  Spe- 
cies of  Animals,   and  conferve  the  Numbers  of  the 
Individuals  of  every  Species  fo  even,  as  not  to  over 
or  under-people  the  terraqueous  Globe!  Who,  but 
the  infinite  wife  Lord  of  the  World,  could  allot 
every  Creature  its  moft  fuitable  Place  to  live  in,  the 
moil  fuitable  Element  to  breathy  and  move^  and  a6l 
in,     And  who  but  HE  could  make  fo  admirable  a 
Set  of  Organs,  as  thofe  of  Refpiration  are,  both 
in  Land  and  Water- Animals!  Who  could  contrive 
fo  curious  a  Set  of  Limbs,  Joynts,  Bones,  Mufcles, 
and  Nerves,  to  give  to  every  Animal  the  moft  com- 
.wiodious  Motion  to  its  State  and  Occafions !  And  to 
name  no  more,  what  Anatomift,  Mathematician, 
\Vorkman,  yea  Angel,  could  contrive  and  make  fo 
curious,  fo  commodious,  and  every  way  fo  exquifite 
;-'•""'"  a  Sec 


Chap^XVI.       The  Conclujion.  15-9 

a  Set  of  Senfes,  as  the  five  Scnfes  of  Animals  arcj 
whofe  Organs  arc  To  dcxtcroufly  contrivcJ,  fo  con- 
veniently placed  in  the  Body,  fo  nearly  adjullcd,  'io 
firmly  guarded,  and  fo  complcatly  fuited  to  every 
Occalion,  that  they  plainly  fet  forth  the  Agency  of 
the  infinite  Creator  and  Confcrvator  of  the  World. 

So  that  here,  upon  a  tranfient  View  of  the  Ani- 
mal World  in  general  only,  we  have  fuch  a  Throng 
of  Glories,  fuch  an  enravifhing  Scene  of  Things  as 
may  excite  us  to  admire,  pnife,  and  adore  the  infi- 
nitely wife,  powerful,  and  kind  CREATORj  to 
condemn  all  atheiltical  Principles  j  and  with  holy 
David^  Pfalm  xiv.  i.  to  conclude  that  he  is  in  good 
earnclt  a  Fool^  that  dares  to  fay,  There  is  no  Gody 
when  we  are  every  where  furrounded  with  fuch  ma- 
nifelt  Characters,  and  plain  Demonllrations  of  that 
infinite  Being. 

But  in  the  next  Book  wc  fhall  dill  find  greater 
Tokens,  if  pofiibic,  when  1  come  to  take  a  View  of 
Animals  in  particular. 


S  *  A  SUK^ 


2  or- 


SURVEY 

Of  the  Particular 

Trlhcsof  ANIMALS. 


ll^^^ffiN  the  foregoing  Book,  having  taken 
jS^plB^I  a  View  of  the  Things  in  common  to 


|m  Animals,  my  Bufinefs  in  the  next,  will 
&M  ^^  ^°  infpefl:  the  particular  Tribes,  in 
^fe^lJ  order  to  give  further  Manifeflations  of 
the  Infinite  Creator's  Wifdom,  Power  and  Good- 
nefs  towards  the  Animal  World. 


B  O  O  K   V. 

^  SURVEY  o/Man. 

HE  fir  ft  Genus  of  Animals  that  I  fhall 
take  Notice  of,  fhall  be  Man,  who  may 
juftly  claim  the  Precedence  in  our  Dil- 
courfe,  inafmuch  as  God  hath  given  him 
the  Superiority  in  the  Animal  World  3  Gen.  i.  16, 
uihd  Godfaid^  Let  us  make  Man  in  our  Image,  after 

our 


Chap.  I.  Of  Man's  Soul.  i<Ji 

our  IJkcncfs  •,  and  let  them  have  Dominion  over  the 
FiJIj  of  the  Sea^  and  over  the  Foivl  of  the  Jir^  and 
over  the  Cattle,  and  over  all  the  Earth,  and  over  eve- 
ry creeping  'thing  that  crcepeth  upon  the  Earth. 

And  as  to  Man,  we  have  fo  excellent  a  Piece  of 
Workmanfhip,  luch  a  Microcofm,  fuch  an  Abridge- 
ment of  the  Creator's  Art  in  him,  as  is  alone  fufii-^ 
cient  to  dcmonlliatc  the  Being  and  Attributes  ot 
GOD.  Which  will  appear  by  confidcnng  the 
Soul  and  the  Body  of  Man. 


C  H  A  P.  I. 

Of  the  So  vh  of  Man. 

Y  Survey  of  Man,  I  {hall  begin  with  the  Soul 
^.  ^  of  Man,  by  Reafon  it  is  his  his  moft  noble 
Part  {a\  the  Copy  of  the  Divine  Image  in  us  {b), 
in  which  we  have  enough  to  fill  us  with  Admirati- 
on of  the  Munifcnce,  Power,  and  Wifdom  ot  the 


M" 


(4)  54m  v«ro  Ammum  ipfum,  Mentemqut  hammts,  Ratic- 
mrn!confUium,  PruAtnuam,  qm  non  dtvma  cur^frrfiHaer^e 
perfficit,  is   his  ipfs  rebus   tnihi  videtur  curtre.     ClC.   de  Nat, 

Pcor.  1.1.  c.  59.  „.   ,     .^ 

(b)  Senfum  a  Coeltjit  demijjum  iraxtvms  arct, 

Cujus  egent  prona,  <y  1  err  am  fpeilantta  ;   mundi 
Principto  indulfit  communis  Conditor,  lU'is 
lantum  Animas;  nobis  Anitnum  quctjue. 

Juven.  Sat.  XV.  >^.  144, 
Et  cum  non  alittr  polfent  mortalia  finp. 
Adjunxit  giminas,  ttU  cum  corpcre  lapf* 
Intereunt  :   ht(  fcla  mantt,  bttjloque  jtiperfies 
j:^ol(it  Claud,  dc  4  (Jonful.  H'Ui 


s  } 


Infinite 


z6l  Of  Alarms  Soul.  Book  V. 

Infinite  Creator  (c),  when  we  contemplate  the  no- 
ble Faculties  of  this  our  fuperiour  Part,  the  vafl: 
Reach  and  Compafs  of  its  Vnderjianding^  the  prodi- 
gious QuickncTs  and  Piercingnefs  of  its  "Thought^  the 
admirable  Subtilty  of  its  Lrcention^  the  command- 
ing I^ower  of  its  Wifdom^  the  great  Depth  of  its 
Memory  (<^),  and  in  a  word,  its  Divine  Nature  and 
Operations. 

But  1  fhall  not  dwell  on  this,  tho*  the  fuperiour 
Part  of  Man,  becaufe  it  is  the  leali  known.     Only 


(c)  Na7n  fiqu'ti  nulli  fe6l&  addi^us,  fed  libera  ftntentm  re- 
rum  conjideratso'fjem  inierit,  conjpicatus  m  tanta  carnhtm  ac 
fuccorum  colluvie  tantam  mentem  habitare  ;  confpicatus  item  zy 
cujujvis  animalis  confirHtlionem  fomnia  enim  declarant  Op'ifi- 
cis  Sapientiam)  Aientis,  qu£  hlmint  ineft,  excelleniiam  wtelliget^ 
turn  opus  d»  partmfn  urjlhjte,  quod  prius  exiguUm  effe  jibi  vide- 
batur,  perjetiijjtmd  Theologi&  verum  principium  conjlituet :  c^un, 
Theolog'tA  multo  eji  major  atque  pr^ifianttor  tola,  Medicind.  Ga- 
len, dc  ulu  Part.  L.  i?-  c.  i.  ' 

(d)  Among  many  Examples  that  I  could  give  of  Perfons 
famous  for  Memory,  Seneca's  Account  of  himfelf  may  be  one, 
Hatic  \_Memonam']  aliqua:-ido  in  me  florin  (fe,  ut  non  tamhm  ad 
ufum  fufficeret,  fed  in  miraculum  ufque  procederet,  non  nego. 
Nam  O"  2000  nojninum  rccitata,  quo  ordine  erant  d'Ma,  redde- 
bam  :  e?*  ab  his  qui  ad  audiendum  pr&ceptorem  noflrum  conve- 
ner unt,  fingulos  verfus  a  ftngulis  datos,  cum  plures  quam  lOO 
efficerentur,  ab  ultimo  incipiens  ufque  ad  frimum  rccitabam. 
After  which,  mention  is  made  of  the  greac  Memory  of  La- 
tro  Porchis  ( chart jfimi  mihi  fodalis,  Seneca  calls  him)  who  re- 
tained m  his  Memory  all  the  Declamations  he  had  ever  fpo- 
ken,  and  never  had  his  Memory  fail  him,  not  fo  much  as  in 
one  fingle  Word.  Alfo  he  takes  Notice  of  Cyneas,  Ambafia- 
dor  to  the  Romans  from  King  Pyrrhus,  who  in  one  Day  had 
fo  well  learnt  the  Names  of  his  SpeAators,  t\nt  poflero  die  no- 
•vus  homo  cjT  Seiiatum,  CT*  omnem  urbanam  circumfufam  Sena- 
tuiplebem,  nominibus  fuis  perfalutavit.  Senec.  controverf. 
L.  I.  init.  Vid.  quoque  Plin.  L.  7.  c.  14.  where  he  alfo  adds 
other  Examples,  viz.  Cyrus  rex  omnibus  in  exercitu  fuo  militi- 
bus  nomina  reddidit;  L.  Scipio  populo  Rom.  Mithidrates  zz  gen' 
tium  rex,  totidem  Unguis  jura  dedit,  pro  condone  finguias  fine 

interprete  ajfatus.     Charmidas  (feu  potius  Carneades) r— 

CIU&  quii  exegerat  volnmina  in  bibliothecii,  legentis  modo  repr&- 
]entavit, 

there 


Chap. T.       Of  Maris  Iiiclinatious.  ^63 

there  arc  two  Things  1  can't  calily  pals  by,  hecaufe 
they  manifcll  the  erpecial  Concurrence  and  ITefign 
of  the  infinitely  Wife  Creator,  as  having  a  }->articu- 
lar  and  nccclliiry  Tendency  to  the  Mann^cmcnc  and 
good  Order  of  the  World's  Affairs.     The 

I.  Of  which  is  the  various  Gemi^  or  Inclinitiorjs 
of  Mcni  Minds  to  this,  and  that,  and  theorhcr  Bii- 
linefs  {e).  We  fee  how  naturally  Men  betake  them- 
felves  to  this  and  that  Employment  :  Some  delight 
moll  in  Learning  and  Books,  feme  in  Divinity, 
fome  in  Phyfick,  Anatomy  and  Botany,  fomc  in 
Critical  Learning  and  Philolog)',  fomc  in  Mathe- 
maticks,  fome  in  Metaphyficks,  and  deep  Refcarch- 
esj  and  fome  have  their  Delight  chiefly  in  Mcchu" 
nicks,  Archite61:ure,  War,  Navigation,  Commerce, 
Agriculture}  and  fome  have  their  Inclinations  lie 
even  to  the  fcrvile  Offices  of  the  World,  and  an 
hundred  Things  befidcs. 

Now  all  this  is  an  admirably  wife,  as  well  as  moH: 
neceflary  Provifion,  for  the  eafy  and  fuie  tranfafting 
the  World's  Affairs  j  to  anfwer  eveiy  End  and  Oc- 
cafion  of  Man,  yea,  to  make  Man  helpful  to  the 
poor,  helplefs  Beads,  as  far  as  his  Help  is  needful 
CO  them }  and  all,  without  any  great  Trouble,  Fa- 
tigue, or  great  Inconvenience  to  Man  j  rather  as  a 


(f)   Dlverfii  eten'im  gaudet  natura  minijlr'n, 
Ut  fieri  diverfa  qucant  ornantia  terras. 
Nee  patitur  ctinclos  ad  eandetn  currcre  mctatn, 
Sed  ziarias  jubet  tie  vias,  variofque  Lil/ores 
SuJciperCf  ttt  vario  cultu  /i:  I'tilchrior  orl/is. 

Paling,  in  Scorp. 

*A»^gai7-<»,  &c.  It  a  non  omnibus  homtnibus  fua  dona  da*  Deuj, 
ne^jue  bonam  indokrn  ,  neque  prudentiam ,  nea,  tloqueniiam  : 
Alius  narnque  "Jiiltum  halct  defonntm  ;  fed  Dtus  formajn  elo' 
quentiA  ornat,  &c.  Homer.  Odyf.  S.  The  like  alio  in  Iliad. 
I,  13. 

S  4  Plcafurc^ 


1^4  Of  Man's  Invention.        BookV. 

Plcafiire,  and  Diverfion  to  him.  For  fo  far  it  is 
from  being  a  Toil,  that  the  greateft  Labours  (/), 
Cares,  yea,  and  Dangers  too,  become  pleafant  to 
him  who  is  purfuing  his  Genius-,  and  whofe  Ardour 
of  Inclination  eggs  him  forward,  and  buoys  him 
up  under  all  Oppofition,  and  carrieth  him  through 
every  Obflaclc,  to  the  End  of  his  Defigns  and 
Defires. 

If.  The  next  is,  The  inventi'ue  Power  of  the 
Soul  {g).  Under  which  I  might  fpeak  of  many 
Things 5  but  I  fhall  take  Notice  only  of  two,  be- 
caufe  they  manifeft  the  particular  Concern  and  A- 
gency  of  the  infinitely  wife  Creator.     The 

I.  Is,  That  Man's  Invention  fhould  reach  to  fuch 
a  great  Variety  of  Matters}  that  it  fhould  hit  up- 
on every  Thing,  that  may  be  of  any  Ufc,  either  to 
himfelf,  or  to  human  Society}  or  that  may  any 
Ways  promote,  (what  in  him  lies,)  the  Benefit  of 
this  lower  Part  of  the  Creation. 

For  the  Illullration  of  this,  I  might  take  a  View 
of  all  the  Arts  and  Sciences,  the  Trades,  yea,  the 
very  Tools  they  perform  their  Labours,  and  Con- 
trivances with,  as  numerous  as  their  Occafions  and 
Contrivances  are  various.  Indeed,  What  is  there 
that  falleth  under  the  Reach  of  Man's  Senfes,  that 


(/)  Although  Solomon  declares,  Ecclef.  xii.  ix.  That  much 
Study  ii  a  Wearinefs  to  the  Flefh  f  yet  we  fee  with  what  Plea- 
fure  and  Affiduity  many  apply  themfelvcs  to  it.  Thus  Cicero 
tells  of  Cato,  whom  he  cafually  found  in  Lucul'us's  Library, 
Ai.  Catonem  vidi  in  Bihitotheca  fedentem,  multis  circumfufum 
Stotcorum  librls.  Erat  enim,  ut  fc:s,  in  eo  inexhaujla  avtdiias 
legendi,  nee  fatiari  foterat :  quippe  ne  reprehenftonem  quidem 
-julgi  inanem  reformidans,  in  ipfd  curia  foleret  legere  f£pe,  dum 

fenatU'S  cogeretur ut  Heluo  librorum videbatur.     Cicer. 

de  finib.  L.  3.  c.  2. 

(^)  Mentem  hotninh,  quamvis  earn  non  videtu,  u(  Deum  nen 
■v'ldes,  tamen  ut  Deum  agnofcis  ex  operibtis  ejus,  fie  ex  memoria 
rerHtn,  V  Inventione,  c^r  celeritate  motus,  omniqtte  pulchritudine 
■virtuiis  vim  dtvinam  mentis  agnofcito.  Cicer.  Tufc.  Quaeft. 
'.    ;.  c.  20. 


I?9 


Chap.T.         Of  Man's  Invention.  ^6$ 

he  doth  not  employ  to  fomc  V(e  and  Piirpofc,  for 
the  World's  Good?  The  cclelbal  Bodies,  the  Sun, 
the  Moon,  with  the  other  Planets,  and  the  fix'd 
Stars,  he  employs  to  the  noble  Ufcs  of  Agronomy, 
Navigation  and  Geography.  And,  What  a  noble 
Acumen,  what  a  vaft  Reach  muft  the  Soul  be  cn- 
dow'd  with,  to  invent  thofe  curious  Sciences  of 
Geometry  and  Arithmetick,  both  Specious,  and  in 
Numbers  >  and  thofe  nice  and  various  Inlbuments, 
made  ufe  of  by  the  Geometrician,  Artronomer,  Ge- 
ographer and  Sailor?  And  lafUy,  What  a  wonder- 
ful Sagacity  is  (hewn  in  the  Bufincfs  of  Optics,  and 
particularly  in  the  late  Invention  of  the  Teltfcope  ; 
wherewith  new  W  onders  are  difcover'd  among  God's 
Works,  in  the  Heavens,  as  there  are  here  on  Earth, 
with  the  Microfcope,  and  other  Glaflcs. 

And  as  for  this  lower  World,  What  Material  is 
there  to  be  found;  what  kind  of  Earth,  or  Stone, 
or  Metal  j  what  Animal,  Tree,  or  Plant,  yea,  e- 
vcn  the  very  Shrubs  of  the  Field  5  in  a  Word,  what 
of  all  the  excellent  Variety,  the  Creator  has  fur- 
nifli'd  the  World  with,  for  all  its  Ufcs  and  Occafi- 
ons,  in  all  Ages ;  what,  I  fay,  that  Man's  Contri- 
vance doth  not  extend  unto,  and  make  fomc  Way 
or  other  other  advantagious  to  himrdf,  and  ufeful 
for  Building,  Cloathing,  Food,  Phyfick,  or  for 
Tools  or  Utenfils,  or  for  even  only  Plcafure  and 
Diverfion  ? 

But  now  confidcrmg  the  great  Power  and  Ex- 
tent of  human  Invention. 

2.  There  is  another  Thing,  that  doth  farther  de- 
monllrate  the  Super- intendcnce  of  the  great  Crea- 
tor, and  Confervator  of  the  World  >  and  that  is, 
That  Things  of  great,  and  abfolutcly  nccclTary  Vi'cy 
have  foon,  nnd  eafily  occurr'd  to  the  Invention  of 
Man  >  but  Things  of  little  Ufc,  or  very  dangerous 
Ufe,  are  rarely  and  flowly  difcover'd,  or  Hill  utter- 
ly undilcover'd.  We  have  as  early  as  the  Mojaick 
Hirtory,  an  AaCCouhc  of  the  Inventions  of  the  more 

ufcfuI 


2,66  Of  Man's  Invent hm        Book  V. 

ufeful  Crafts  and  Occupations:  Thus  Gen.  iii.  25. 
Adam  ivas  fent  forth  front  the  Garden  of  Eden,  by 
God  himfelfy  to  till  the  Ground.  And  in  the  next 
Chapter,  his  two  Sons  Cain  and  Abel;  the  one  was 
of  the  fame  Occupation,  a  Tiller  of  the  Ground, 
the  other  a  Keeper  of  Sheep  (/&).  And  the  Polleri- 
ty  of  thefe,  are  in  the  latter  End  of  Ge-a.  iv.  record- 
ed, Jabal  to  have  been  the  Father,  fif  fuch  as  dwell  in 
stents  {i) ',  i.  e.  He  was  the  Inventor  of  Tents^  and 
pitching  thofe  moveable  Houfes  in  the  Fields,  for 
looking  after,  and  depafturing  their  Catttl  in  the 
Defarcs,  and  uncultivated  World.  Tubal- Cain  w^?^ 
an  inflruUer  of  every  Artificer  in  Brafs  and  Iron  (k),  or 
the  Firlt  that  found  out  the  Art  of  melting,  and 
malleatitig  (I)  Metals,  and  making  them  ufeful  for 
Tools,  and  other  necefiary  Implements.  And  his 
Sifter  Naamah,  whofe  Name  is  only  mention'd,  is 
by  fome  thought  to  have  been  the  Inventor  of  tS^^/V 
mng  and  Cloathing.  Yea,  the  very  Art  of  Muftck 
is  thus  early  afcribed  to  Jubal  {m)  j  lb  indulgent  was 
the  Creator,  to  find  a  iVIeans  to  divert  Melancho- 
ly, to  cheer  the  Spirits,  and  to  entertain  and  pleafe 
Mankind.  But  for  Things  of  no  life,  or  but  little 
Ufe,  or  of  pernicious  Confequence  j  either  they  have 
been  much  later  thought  of,  and  with  great  Diffi- 
culty, and  perhaps  Danger  too,  brought  to  pafsj 
orclfe  they  ttill  are,  and  perhaps  will  always  remain, 
Exercifes  of  the  Wit  and  Invention  of  Men. 

Of  this  we  might  give  divers  Inftances :  In  Me- 

thematicks,  about  fcjuaring  the  Circle  (»)  j  in  Me- 

'■    •    ■  chanicks 


(<&)  Gen.  iv.  1.. 
(f)   ^.  2C. 

{k)  a.  22. 

(I)  2<pt<29«^©>',  the  LXX  call  him,  i.  e.   A  Worker  with 
^  Hammer. 
(m)  f.  XI. 

"(js)  Although  the  Gluadrature  of  the  CircU,  hath  in  former 
Ages  exercised  foiue  of  the  greateft  mathematical  Wits ;  yet 

nothing 


Chap.  I.         Of  Man's  lu'jcnt  ion.  iGy 

chanicks  (<)),  about  the  Art  of  Flying  j  and  in 
Navigation,  about  finding  the  Longitude.  Thcfe 
Things,  although  Tome  oV  them  in  Appearance  in- 
nocent, yea,  perhaps  very  ulcliil,  yet  remain  for 
the  moll  Part  lecret  j  not  becaulc  the  Dircovciy  of 


nothing  has  been  done  in  that  VV:>y  fo  ecnfiderahle,  as  in, 
and  iince  the  Middle  of  the  latt  Ctntury;  when  in  the  Year 
1657,  thole  very  ingenious  and  grcu  NU'n,  iMr  IVilUam  Nedet 
and  my  Lord  Bronuker,  and  Sir  Chnjicti-Jir  Wren  afterwards, 
in  the  lame  Year,  geometrically  d'onionfUatcd  th^-  I:,c]uaHty  of 
fome  Curves  to  n  Ihtlit  Line.  Scon  atttr  which,  others  nt 
Home,  and  Abroad,  did  the  like  in  oth^r  Curves.  And  not 
long  afterwards,  this  was  brought  \x\-\AtX  an  Mn.aly.'ical  Calcti- 
lui :  The  firft  Specimen  whcicof,  thst  \\z%  ever  publifli'd, 
Mr.  iW/rr4/or  gave  ill  16P8,  in  a  Demonftration  of  my  Lord 
Brounker's  Quadrature  of  the  Hi^-erlola,  by  Dr  WaUis\  Rc- 
d^iflion  of  a  Fr<u^ion,  inro  an  infinite  Sciies  by  Divifion. 
Uut  the  penetrarijig  Genius  of  Sir  Ifaac  Newton,  had  diicc- 
ver'd  a  Way  of  actauiing  the  Quantity  of  all  quadrible  Curves 
analytically,  by  his  Method  or  Flnxtons^  fome  Time  before 
the  Year  1668,  as  I  find  very  propable  from  an  hiflorica!  Ac- 
count, in  a  long  Letter  of  Mr.  Colli/rs,  wiitten  in  his  own 
Hand,  and  lent  to  Rtchard  Tcvjnleyy  hfq;  ot'  Lancajhire,  whoic 
Papers  are  in  my  Hands.  In  that  Letter,  Mr.  CoWns  f.uth. 
That  in  September  1668,  Mr.  Klercntor  f-ubUjh'd  hh  V.ogJi- 
rithmotechnia,  one  pf  zvhich  he  foov  fettr  t.i  l^r.  Harrow,  -.vhf 
thereupon  fent  him  up  fome  Papers  of  Mr.  Newton'/,  (now  Sir 
Ifaac;]  by  which,  and  former  ConimHUtcaivms  made  thereof  bj 
the  Author,  to  the  Doctor ;'  it  appear i  tl.M  the  f^id  Method  zvas 
invented  fome  Tears  before,  by  the  f aid  Mr.  Newton,  and  gene- 
rally apply  d.  And  then  he  goes  on  to  give  fome  Account  of 
the  Method;  what  ft  performs  in  tlie  Circle,  crc.  what  Mr. 
Gregory  had  done  in  that  kind,  ivho  intended  to  publifh  fomt- 
ii'hat  in  Latin  about  it,  but  would  not  anticipate  Mr.  Newton, 
th  fr/i  Inventor  thereof;  with  much  more  of  th;.<  Nature. 
'J'he  Dcfign,  I  find,  of  that  indefatigable  fromoter  of  Mi- 
thematicks,  Mr.  Collins,  was  to  acc^uaitit  Mr.  Toivnh\,  in  his 
Letter,  with  what  had  been  done;  mi  to  get  the  AlManre 
of  th^t  ingenious  Gentleman,  towards  the  cumplcating  a  Bo- 
dy of  Algebra. 

(0)  I  do  not  mention  here  the /<.v;if//^d/  Afntior,  wliich  hath 
exercis'd  the  mechanical  Wits  for  many  Af^es;  becanl'c  it  is  a 
Thing  impoflible,  if  not  a  Contradifitrm  :  A."!  the  bcforc- 
comraendcd  Dr.  Clarke  aircTr*;  in  Rohani'.  Phyf  p.  133. 

mo  ft 


^6^  Of  Man's  Invention.         BookV. 

mod:  of  them  is  more  impoflible,  or  difficult  than 
of  many  other  Things,  which  have  met  with  a 
Difcovery }  nor  is  it  for  want  of  Man's  Diligence 
therein,  or  his  careful  Purfuit  and  Enquiry  after 
them,  (for  perhaps,  nothing  already  difcovcr'd  hath 
been  more  eagerly  fought  after  j)  but  with  much 
better  Reafon,  (I  am  fure  with  greater  Humility 
and  Modefty,)  we  may  conclude  it  is,  becaufe  the 
infinitely  wife  Creator,  and  Ruler  of  the  World, 
hath  been  pleas'd  to  lock  up  thefe  Things  from 
Man's  Underllanding  and  Invention,  for  fome  Rea- 
fons  beft  known  to  himfelf,  or  becaufe  they  might 
be  of  ill  Confequence,  and  dangerous  amongft  Men. 

As  in  all  Probability  the  Art  of  Flying  would 
particularly  be :  An  Art  which  in  fome  Cafes  might 
be  of  good  Ufe,  as  to  the  Geographer  and  Philofo- 
phcrj  but  in  other  Refpe6i:s,  might  prove  of  dan- 
gerous and  fatal  Confequence :  As  for  Inftancc,  By 
putting  it  in  Man's  Power  to  difcover  the  Secrets 
of  Nations  and  Families,  more  than  is  confident 
with  the  Peace  of  the  World,  for  Man  to  know  j 
by  giving  ill  Men  greater  Opportunities  to  do  Mif- 
chief,  which  it  would  not  lie  in  the  Power  of  o- 
thers  to  prevent;  and,  as  one  (/>)  obferves,  by  ma-^ 
king  Men  lefs  fociable :  "  For  upon  every  crue  or 
"  falfe  Ground  of  Fear,  or  Difcontent,  and  other 
"  Occafions,  he  would  have  been  fluttering  away 
"  to  fome  other  Place  j  and  Mankind,  inltead  of 
^'  cohabiting  in  Cities,  would,  like  the  Eagle,  have 
^  built  their  Nefts  upon  Rocks". 

That  this  is  the  true  Reafon  of  thefe  Matters,  is 
manifeft  enough  from  holy  Scripture,  and  Rea- 
Ibn  (^)  alfo  gives  its  Suffrage  thereto.  The  Scrips 
ture  cxpreflly  tell  us.  That  e"jery  good  Gift^  and  every 


ip)  Grcw'f  Cofmol.  Sacr.  /,  i.  c  5.  §.  25. 
.  (a)  Nemo  igitur  vir  magnum  fine  aliquo  affiatu  divino  Hnc^tiam 
fu'tt.    Cic,  de  Nat.  Deor.  1.  z,  c.  66, 

terfei 


rje 


Chap.T.        Of  Man's  Invent  ion »  169 

perfect  Gift,  is  from  abo'vc,  and  comet h  doiun  from  the 
Father  of  Lights,  5*.  James  i.  17.  Solomon^  Prov.  ii.  6, 
faith,  'The  Lord  giveth  IVifdom-j  out  of  his  Month  cO' 
metb  Knoiv/edge  and  Under Jlanding.  And  Elihit  is 
very  cxprefs,  Job  xxxii.  8.  But  there  is  a  Spirit  in 
Man,  and  the  Infpiratiun  of  the  yflmighty  ^iveth  them 
Undcrjlanding,  rivo;  7r«v.'c>t(^T0f0f  l^iv  >;  ^iSoi'Ttixcoc,  as 
the  LXX  render  it,  The  Infpiratus,  the  Jjflatus  of 
the  Almighty,  is  their  Inflru^or,  Miflrefs  or  Teacher. 
And  in  Scripture,  not  only  the  more  noble,  ibperi- 
our  A6l:s  of  Wifdom  or  Science  j  but  much  inferi- 
our  alfo,  bear  the  Name  of  Wifdom,  Knowledge 
and  Underdanding,  and  are  afcrib'd  unto  GOl3. 
'Tis  well  known  that  Solomon's  Wifdom  is  wholly 
afcrib'd  unto  GODj  and  the  Wifdom  and  Under- 
Handing  which  GOD  is  faid  to  have  given  him, 
1  Kings  iv.  19.  is  particularly  fet  forth  in  the  fol- 
lowing Verfes,  by  his  great  Skill  in  moral  and  natural 
Philoiophy,  in  Poetry,  and  probably  in  Altronomy, 
Geometry,  and  fuch  other  of  the  politer  Sciences, 
for  which  uEgypt,  and  the  eaflern  Nations  were  ce- 
lebrated of  old  {r) :  And  Solomon\f  JVijdom  exccWd 
the  IVifdom  of  all  the  Children  of  the  eall  Country, 
and  all  the  IVijdom  of  i^gypt.  For  he  was  iviftr 
than  all  Men,  than  Kthan,  tsfc.  And  he  [pake  3000 
Proverbs  :  And  his  Songs  were  loof .  And  he  [pake 
of  Trees,  from  the  Cedar  to  the  iiyJJ'op  of  the  JFall^ 
(/.  e.  of  all  Sorts  of  Plants  >)  alfo  of  Beafls,  Fowl, 
creeping  Things,  and  Fifjes.  So  likewilc  the  Wif- 
dom of  Daniel,  and  his  three  Companions,  is  af- 
crib'd unto  GOD,    Dan.  i.  17.  As  for  thefe  four 


(r)  JF.gypt,  and  fome  of  the  eaflem  NatiooN,  aie  celebra- 
ted for  ilieir  Skill  in  polite  I.iteraiure;  both  in  Scripture  and 
protaiie  Story:  "job  was  of  thofe  I'arts;  fo  were  the  'Zt^$\ 
and  M«yo<,  the  Brachwans  and  G'jmnojophijli.  Mofts  and  Da- 
met  had  their  Education  in  ihcle  Parts:  And  Pythagoras,  De- 
mecrittts,  and  others,  travell'd  into  thefe  Paits  tor  the  Sake 
of  their  Learning. 

Children^ 


170  Of  Man^s  Invention.  BookV. 

Children^  God  gave  them  Knowledge^  and  Skill  in  all 
Learning  and  Wifdom  j  and  Daniel  had  Under jiand^ 
ing  in  all  Plfions  and  Dreams.  And  accordingly  in 
the  next  Chapter,  Daniel  acknowledgeth  and  prai- 
fech  God.  ir.  26.  21.  Daniel  anpwered  and  [aid ^ 
Blejfed  he  the  Name  of  God  for  ever  and  ever^  for 

Wisdom  and  Might  are  his. He  glveth  Wifdom 

unto  the  Wife.,  and  Rnoivledge  to  them  that  knozv  Un- 
derfianding.  But  not  only  Skill  in  the  fuperiour 
Arts  and  Sciences  j  but  even  in  the  more  inferiour 
niechanick  Art,  is  call'd  by  the  fame  Names,  and 
afcrib'd  unto  GOD:  Thus  for  the  Workmaniliip 
of  the  Tabernacle,  Exod.xxx\.z.x.of.6.  See^  Ihave 
caird  Bezaleel ;  and  I  have  filTd  him  with  the  Spirit 
of  God^  in  Wifdom^  and  in  Under Jianding^  and  in 
all  Manner  cf  IVorkmanfoip :  To  devife  cunning  Works^ 
to  ''juprk  in  Goldj  Silver ^and  Brafs  5  and  in  cutting  of 
StoneSy  to  fet  them  ;  and  in  carving  of  1'imber.,  to 
isQork  in  all  Manner  of  Worhnanjhip.  So  the  Spin- 
Jhrsy  Weavers^  and  other  Crafts- people,  are  call'd 
wife-hearted,  Exod.  xxxiv.  10.  2f.  and  other  Pla- 
ces. And  in  Exod.  xxxvi.  i.  &c.  the  LORD  is 
faid  to  have  put  this  Wifdom  in  them,  and  Under- 
Handing  to  know  how  to  work  all  thefe  Manner 
of  Works,  for  the  Service  of  the  San6luary,  And 
laftly,  to  name  no  more  Inftances,  Hiram  the  chief 
Architect  of  Solomon's  'temple^  is  in  i  Kings  vii.  14. 
and  2,  Chron.  ii.  14.  call'd  a  cunning  Man^  fiWd  with 
Wifdom  and  Under flanding^  to  work  in  Gold,  Silver^ 
Brafs^  Irony  Stone,  Ttmber,  Purple,  Blue,  fine  Li- 
mn, and  Crimfon  -,  alfo  to  grave,  and  find  out  every 
Device  which  fljould  be  put  to  him. 

Thus  doth  the  Word  of  God,  afcribe  the  Contri- 
vances and  Crafts  of  Men,  to  the  Agency,  or  Influ- 
ence of  the  Spirit  of  God,  upon  that  of  Man.  And 
there  is  the  fame  Reafon  for  the  Variety  of  Genii,  or 
Inclinations  of  Men  alfo  i  which  from  the  fame  Scrip- 
tures, may  be  concluded  to  be  a  Defignation,  and 
Tranfadion  of  the  fame  almighty  Governour  of  the 

World'g 


Cbap  I.        Of  Man's  Invention.  ryi 

World's  Affairs.  And  who  indeed  but  HE,  could 
make  luch  a  divine  Subltance,  cndovv'd  with  thofc 
admirable  Faculties,  and  Powers,  as  the  rational  Soul 
hath  •,  a  Bcin^  to  bear  the  great  Creator's  Vicegcrcn- 
cy  in  this  lower  World  ;  to  employ  the  levcral  Crea- 
tures i  to  make  \JCe  of  the  various  Materials  j  to  ma- 
nage the  grand  Biifineflcsi  and  to  furvcy  the  Glories 
ot  all  the  vifiblc  Works  of  God  ?  A  Creature,  with- 
out which  this  lower  World  would  have  been  a  dull, 
uncouth,  and  dciblatc  kind  of  Globe.  Who,  1  fay, 
or  what  lels  than  the  infinite  GOD,  could  make  fuch 
a  rational  Creature,  fuch  a  divine  Subihince  as  the 
Soul  ?  For  if  we  fliould  allow  the  Athciil:  any  of  his 
nonfenfical  Schemes,  the  Epicurean  his  fortuitous 
Concourfe  of  Atoms,  or  the  Cartefian  {J')  his  crea- 
ted Matter  put  in  Motion  5  yet  with  what  tolerable 
Senfe  could  he,  in  his  Way,  produce  fuch  a  di- 
vine, thinking,  fpeaking,  contriving  Subftance  as 
the  Soul  is-,  endow'd  exactly  with  fuch  Faculties, 
Power,  and  Dilpofitions  as  the  various  Necellkies 
and  Occafions  of  the  World  require  from  fuch  a 
Creature?  Why  fliould  not  rather  all  the  A£b,  the 
Difpofitions  and  Contrivances  of  fuch  a  Creature  ;i$ 
Man,  (if  made  in  a  mechanical  Way,  and  not  con- 


(/)  As  we  are  not  to  accufe  any /^//v ;  fo  far  he  it  trom 
me  to  detract  trom  lb  great  a  Man  as  Monfieur  Cartes  was: 
Whole  Principles,  although  many  have  perverted  to  achcilli- 
ca!  Purpofes,  and  whole  Notions  have,  fome  ot  them,  but  an 
ill  Afpcd  ;  yet  1  am  unwilling  to  believe  he  was  an  Athcill ; 
fince  in  his  I'rmcifta  PhUofophU,  and  other  of  )iis  Works,  he 
vindicates  himftlf  from  this  Charge;  and  frequently  ftiews 
fecmingly  s  great  Re(pc(ft  for  Religion:  Befidci,  That  many 
of  his  fuipici(jus  Opinions  are  capable  of  a  favourable  Inter- 
pretation, v.hich  will  make  them  appear  in  a  better  Form : 
Thus  when  he  difcardcth /w<j/ C<i«/«  from  his  Philofophy,  ft 
is  not  a  Denial  of  them  ;  but  only  excluding  the  Confidcra- 
lion  of  them,  for  the  Sake  of  free  philolbphifuig;  it  being 
tho  Bulinel's  of  a  Divine,  rather  than  a  PhiJofophcr,  to  ircit 
of  ihcm. 


trivM 


271  Of  Man^s  Invention.  BookV. 

triv'd  by  God,)  have  been  the  fame?  Particularly, 
Why  fhould  he  not-have  hit  upon  all  Contrivances 
of  equal  Ufe,  early  as  well  as  many  Ages  fince  ? 
Why  not  that  Man  have  efFeded  it,  as  well  as 
this,  fome  thoufands  of  Years  after?  Why  alfo 
ihould  not  all  Nations,   and  all  Ages  (/),  improve 


(0  For  Ages  of  Learning  and  Ignorance^  we  may  compare 
the  prcfent,  and  fome  of  the  Ages  before  the  Reformation. 
The  laft  Century,  and  the  few  Years  of  this,  have  had  the 
Happinefs  to  be  able  to  vie  with  any  Age  for  the  Number  of 
learned  Men  of  all  Profeflions,  and  the  Improvement  made 
in  all  Arts  and  Sciences;  too  many,  and  loo  well  known  to 
need  a  Specification. 

But  for  Ignorance,  we  may  take  the  ninth  Age,  and  fo 
down  to  the  Reformation;  even  as  low  as  Queen  Elizabeth, 
although  Learning  began  to  flourifti;  yet  we  may  guefs  how 
Matters  ftood,  even  among  the  Clergy,  by  her  53  Injun^l.  N". 
1559,  Such  cu  are  but  mean  Readers,  Jliall  perufe  over  before, 
cnce  or  twice,  the  Chapters  and  Homilies,  to  the  Intent  they 
tnay  read  to  the  better  Under/landing  of  the  People,  the  more  En- 
(ouragemtnt  of  Godltnejs.  Spar.  Colled,  p.  8z.  But  this  is 
nothing,  in  comparifon  to  the  Ages  before,  when  the  Monk 
laid,  GrAcum  non  efi  legi ;  or  as  EfpencAtu  more  elegantly  hath 
it,  Gnce  nofj'e  fufpeilum,  Hebraice  prope  Hireticum.  Which 
Sufpicion,  (laid  the  learned  Hakewill,)  Rhemigius  furely  was 
not  guilty  of,  in  commenting  upon  difamatus,  i  Thef.  i.  8. 
who  faith,  that  St.  Paul  fomewhat  improperly  put  that  for  di- 
vulgatus,  not  being  aware  that  St.  Paul  wrote  in  Greek,  and 
not  in  £ij/i».  Nay,  fo  great  was  their  Ignorance,  not  only  of 
Creek,  but  of  Latin  too,  that  a  Prieft  baptiz'd  in  nomine  Patri- 
a,  v  Filia,  o"  Spiritua  fan6la.  Another  fuing  his  Pariftiioners 
for  not  paving  his  Church,  prov'd  it  from  Jer.  xvii.  18.  Pa" 
'vtant  illi,  non  paveam  ego.  Some  Divines  in  Erafmus's  Time, 
undertook  to  prove  Hereticks  ought  to  be  burnt,  becaufe  the 
Apoftle  faid,  Hdreticum  devita.  Two  Fryars  difputing  about 
a  Plurality  of  Worlds,  one  prov'd  it  from  Anrton  decern  funt 
facli  mundi?  The  other  reply'd,  Sed  ubi  funt  novem?  And 
notwithftanding  their  Service  was  read  in  Latin,  yet  fo  little 
was  that  underllood,  that  an  old  Prieft  in  Hen.  VIII.  read 
Mumpfimus  Domtne,  for  Sumpfimus :  And  being  admonifli'd 
of  it,  he  faid,  he  had  done  io  for  thirty  Years,  and  would 
not  leave  his  old  Mumpfimus  for  their  new  Sumffimus.  Vid. 
Jiakew.  Apol.  L.  3.  C.  7.  Se£l.  1. 

Nation 


Chap.  I.        Of  Man's  Invention.  173 

in  every  Thing,  as  well  as  this,  or  that  Age,  or 
Nation  («)  only?  why  fhould  the  Greeks,  the-/f- 
rabians,  the  Perfians,  or  the  jEgyptians  of  old,  fo 
far  exceed  thofe  of  the  fame  Nations  now  ?  Why 
the  Africcim  and  Americam  fo  generally  ignorant 
and  barbarous,  and  ih^  Europeans ,  for  the  moll 
part,  polite  and  cultivated,  addifted  to  Arts  and 
Learning  ?  How  could  it  come  to  pals  that  the 


(«)  There  is  (it  feems )  in  Wits  and  Arts,  as  in  all  Things 
hejide,  a  kind  of  circular  Progrefs :  They  have  their  Birth, 
their  Growth,  their  Flourijhing,  their  Failing,  their  Fading  ; 
and  within  a  while  after,  thtir  Refurre^ion,  and  Refiourijlj- 
ing  again.     The  Arts  flourijhed  for  a  long  lime  among  the  Per* 

lians,  the  Chaldaeans,  the  i^gyptians. But  afterxvards 

the  Grecians  got  the  Jl art  of  them,  and  are  now  become  as 
barbarous  themlelves,  as  formerly  they  efteemed  all  befides 
themfelves  to  be.  About  the  Birth  of  Chri/i,  Learning  be- 
gan to  flourid^  in  Italy,  and  fpread  all  over  Chrijiendom ;  till 
the  Goths,  Huns,  and  Vandals  ranfackcd  the  Libraries,  and 
defaced  almoft  all  the  Monuments  of  Antiquity  :  fo  that  the 
Lamp  of  Learning  feemed  to  be  put  out  for  near  the  Space 
of  looo  Years,  till  the  firft  Manfor,  King  of  Africa  and 
Spain,  raifed  up,  and  fpurred  forward  the  Arabian  Wits,  by 
great  Rewards  and  Encouragements.  Afterwards  Petrarch 
opened  fuch  Libraries  as  were  undemoliflied.  He  was  fe- 
condcd  by  Boccace,  and  'John  of  Ravenna,  and  foon  after  by 
Aretine,  Philelphus,  Valla,  8<c.  And  thofe  were  followed 
by  /Eneas  Sylvius,  Angelus  Politianus,  Hermolaus  Barbarus^ 
Marftitus  Ficinns ,  and  "Joh.  Picus ,  of  Mirandula.  Thefe 
were  backed  by  Rud.  Agricola,  Reucline,  MelanHhon,  Joach. 
CamerariuStJVol/fhlazius,  Beat.  Rhenanus,  Almaincs;  By£"- 
rafmus  of  Rotterdam ;  Vtvei  a  Spaniard  ;  Bembus,  Sadoletus, 
Eugubinus ,  Italians:  Tumebus ,  Muretus ,  Ramus,  Piihsut, 
Budsus,  Amiot,  Scaliger,  Frenchmen;  S\x  Tho.  More  ■nx\(\Lt- 
naker,  Engliftimen.  And  about  this  Time,  even  thofe  Nor- 
thern Nations  yielded  their  great  Men  ;  Denmark  yielded  O- 
laus  Magnus,  Holjler,  Tycho  Brahc,  and  Hemingius;  and  Ro- 
land, Hofius,  Frixius,  and  Crumerus.  But  to  name  the  Wor- 
thies that  followed  thefe,  down  to  the  prcfentTime,  would 
be  endlcfs,  and  next  to  impoffible.  bee  therefore  MaktwiU'i 
Apolog,  L.  3.  c.  6.  §.  1. 

T  Ufc 


174  ^f  ^^^'^  Invention.        Book  V. 

Ufe  of  the  Magnet  (w),  Printing  (at),  Clocks  ()»), 

Telefcopes 


{xv)  Dr,  Gilbert,  the  moft  learned  and  accurate  Writer  on 
\\\z  Magnet,  fliews,  that  its  Attrailive  Virtue  was  known  as 
early  as  Plato  and  Arifiotle :  but  its  DtreHion  was  a  Difcove- 
xy  of  later  Ages.  He  faith,  Superiori  avo  300  aut  400  la- 
bentibus  annis,  Motus  Magnettcus  in  Boream  cr  Aujlrum  re- 
ferttts,  aut  ab  hojntnibus  rurfus  recognitus  fuit.  De  Mag. 
L.  I.  c.  I.  But  who  the  happy  inventer  of  this  lucky 
Difcovery  was,  is  not  known.  There  is  fome,  not  incon- 
liderab!?,  Reafon,  to  think  our  famous  Country-man,  Rog. 
iacon,  either  difcovered,  or  at  leaft  knew  of  it.  But  for 
its  Ufe  in  Navigation,  Dr.  Gilbert  faith,  in  regno  Neapolitano 
Melphitani    omnium  primi  (utl  ferunt )   pyxidcm   inftruehant 

nauticam,  edoSli  a.  cive  quodam  \}ol.  Goia  A.  D,  1300. 

ibid.  If  the  Reader  hath  a  mind  to  fee  the  Arguments  for 
the  Invention,  being  as  old  as  Solomons  or  Plautus's  Time, 
or  of  much  younger  Date,  he  may  confult  ii^^ezi^i//.  ib.  c.  10, 
§.4.  or  Purchas  Pilgr.  L.  x.  c.  i.    §.  i. 

As  to  the  Magnetick  Variation,  Dr.  Gilbert  attributes  the 
Difcovery  of  it  to  Sebaftian  Cabott.  And  the  Inclination, 
or  Dipping  of  the  Needle,  was  the  Difcovery  of  cur  inge- 
nious Rob.  Norman.  And  laftly,  The  Variation  of  the  Va- 
riation was  firft  found  out  by  the  ingenious  Mr.  H.Gellibrand. 
Aftr.  Prof,  of  Grejham-Col.  about  1634.  Vid.  GelUbr.  Difc. 
Math,  on  the  Variat.  of  the  Mag.  Need,  and  its  Variat.  An- 
no 1635. 

But  fmce  that,  the  before  commended  Dr.  Halley,  having 
formerly,  in  Philof.  Tranf.  No.  148,  and  195,  given  a  pro- 
bable Hypothefis  of  the  Variation  of  the  Compafs,  did  in 
the  Year  1700,  undertake  a  long  and  hazardous  Voyage,  as 
far  as  the  Ice  near  the  South  Pole,  in  order  to  examine  his 
faid  Hypothefis,  and  to  make  a  Syftem  of  the  Magnetical 
Variations:  Which  being foon  after  publifhed,  has  been  lince 
abundantly  confirmed  by  the  French,  as  may  be  feen  in  fe- 
vcral  of  the  late  Memoirs  de  Phyfique  CT'  de  Mathematique, 
publifli'd  by  the  French  Academie  des  Sciences. 

To  thefe  Difcovenes,  I  hope  the  Reader  will  excufe  me, 
if  1  add  one  of  my  own,  which  I  deduced  fome  Years  ago, 
from  fome  magnetical  Experiments  and  Obfervations  I  made; 
which  Difcovery  I  alfo  acquainted  our  Royal  Society  with 
fom.e  time  fince,  'viz..  That  as  the  common,  horizontal  Nee 
die  is  continually  varying  up  and  down,  towards  the  E.  and 
W.  fo  is  the  Dipping-Needle  varying  up  and  down,  to- 
wards 


Chap.  I.        Of  Man" s  Invention.  275- 

Tclefcopcs  (;r),   and  an  hundred  Things  befides, 
ihould  cfcape  the  Difcovery  of  Archimedes^  Anaxi- 

mandery 


wards  or  fromwards  the  Zenith,  with  irs  Magnetick  Ten- 
dency, defcribing  a  Circle  round  the  Pole  of  the  World,  as 
I  conceive,  or  fome  other  Point.  So  that  if  we  could  pro- 
cure a  Needle  fo  nicely  made,  as  to  point  exadly  according 
to  its  Magnetick  Diredion,  it  would,  in  fome  certain  Num- 
berof  Years,  defcribea  Circle,  of  about  i^gr.  Radius  round 
the  Magnetick  Poles  Northerly  and  Southerly,  l^his  1  have 
for  leveral  Years  fufpeded,  and  have  had  fome  Reafon  for 
it  too,  which  I  mentioned  three  or  four  Years  ago  at  a 
Meeting  of  our  Royal  Society  ,  but  I  have  not  yet  been 
fo  happy  to  procure  a  tolerable  good  Dipping-Needle,  or 
other  proper  one  to  my  Mind,  to  bring  the  Thing  to  fuffi- 
cient  Teft  of  Experience;  as  in  a  fliort  Time  I  hope  to  do, 
havmg  lately  hit  upon  a  Contrivance  that  may  do  the  Thing. 

(x)  It  is  uncertain  who  was  the  Inventcr  of  the  Art  of 
Printing,  every  Hiflorian  afcribing  the  Honour  thereof  to 
his  own  City  or  Country.  Accordingly  fome  afcribe  the  In- 
vention of  it  to  John  Gnttenburg  ,  a  Knight  of  Argentine, 
about  1440,  and  lay,  that  F<j«y?;«  was  only  hisAffiltant.  Ber- 
tius  afcribes  it  to  Laurence  'John,  of  Harlem,  and  faith,  Tuft 
or  Faiifl,  ftole  from  him  both  his  Art  and  Tooif.  And  to 
name  no  more,  fome  attribute  it  to  John  Fttft  or  Tauft,  and 
Peter  Schoeffer  (called  by  luft  in  fome  of  his  Imprimaturs, 
Pet.  de  Gernefliem  puer  meus. )  But  there  is  now  to  be  feen  at 
Haerlem,  a  Book  or  two  printed  by  Lau.  Kofter,  before  any 
of  thefe,  viz.  in  1430.  and  1431.  {See  Mr.  ¥A\Ws  Letter  to 
Dr.  Tylbn,  in  Phil.  Tranf.  N".  iS6.)  But  be  the  firft  Inven- 
ter  who  it  will,  there  is  however  great  Reafon  to  believe, 
the  Art  receiv'd  great  Improvements  from  Fauft  and  his  Son- 
in-Law  Schoejfer,  the  latter  being  the  Inventer  of  metalline 
Types,  which  were  cut  in  Wood  before,  lirlt  in  whole 
Blocks,  and  afterwards  in  fingle  Types  or  Letters.  See  my 
learned  Friend  Mr.  lVanley'$  Obfcrvaticns,  m  Philof.  Tranf. 
No  188,   and  310. 

(y)  Concerning  the  Antiquity  and  Invention  of  Clockt 
and  Clock  Work,  I  refer  the  Reader  to  a  little  Book,  called 
the-Arttficial  Clock-maker,  chip.  6.  Where  there  is  fome  Ac- 
count of  the  Ancients  Inventions  in  Clock-Work,  as  Archi- 
medes's  Sphere,   CtcftOius's  Clock,  o'c. 

(i)  The  Invention  of  Telefcopes,  Hieron.  Syrturus  gives 
this  Account  of,  Prod'm  Anno  1609,  Sti*  Gtmns,  [tu  aU*r 

T  2  VtF 


^y6  Of  Man's  Invention,        Book  V. 

mander,  jinaximenes^  Poftdonius,  or  other  great  Vir- 
cuofo's  of  the  early  Ages,  whofe  Contrivances  of 
various  Engines,  Spheres,  Clepfydrae  and  other  cu- 
rious Inftruments  are  recorded  (aa)^  And  why 

cannot 


vir  adhuc  incognitus,  Hollandi  fpecie,  qui  M'tddUburgl  in  Z$- 
landid  conventt  ^oh.  Lipperfein  •    <  Jujfit  perfpicilla  pltt- 

ra  tam  cava  quam  convexa,  confici.  CondiSto  die  rediit,  ab- 
folittum  opHi  cupiens,  atqtte  ut  ftatim  habuit  prs  manibm,  bt- 
na  fufcipiens,  cavuni  fcil.  cr  convexum,  unum  v  alterum  ocu- 
lo  admovebat,  CT'  fenfim  dimovehat  five  ut  pun6lum  concurfusy 
five  ut  artificis  opus  probaret^  pofiea  abiit.  Arttfex,  ingenii 
minime  expers,  v  novitatis  curiojus  coepit  idem  facere  V  itni- 
tari,^c.     Vid.  Muf.  Worm.  L.  4.  c.  7. 

(aa)  Among  the  curious  Inventions  of  the  Ancients  Ar- 
chytas's  Dove  was  much  famed;  of  which  Aul.  Gellius  gives 
this  Account :    Scripferunt  Simulachrum  ColumbA  e  ligno  ab 
Archyta  ratione  quddam  difciplindque  mechanicd  faHum,  v(h- 
Idjfe  :  Ita  trat  fcilicet  libramentis  fufpenfiim,  c/  aura,  fpiritus 
inclufd  atque  occulta  concitum.    Nodi.  Attic.  L.  10.  c.  ii. 
The  fame   eminent  Pythagor&an  Philofopher  (as  Favorinus 
in  Gellius  calls  him)  is  by  Hcrace  accounted  a  noble  Geome- 
trician too,  Te  maris  extern,  numeroque  carentis  arena  Men- 
forem  Archyta.     Among  the  reft  of  his  Inventions,  Chil- 
dren's Rattles  are  afcribed  to  him.     Ariftotle  calls  them  *Af- 
XVTn   zs-^iuld-yii,  Polit.  8.  i.  e.  Archytas's  Rattle.     And  Dio- 
genianus  the  Grammarian,  gives  the  Reafon  of  his  Inventi- 
on, 'A^yjra  -si-XctTccy^  Itt)  twv,  &c.    That  Archytas'f  Rattle 
■was  to  quiet  Children  ;  for  he  having  Children,  contrived  the 
Rattle,  which  he  gave  them  to  prevent  their  [^tumbling,  ^ixtcc- 
Adl;6-(y(r<]  Other  Things  about  the  Houfe. 

To  thefe  Contrivances  of  Archytas,  we  may  add  Regio- 
rnontartus's  Wooden  Eagle,  which  flew  forth  of  the  City  aloft 
in  the  Air,  met  the  Emperor  a  good  Way  off,  coming  towards 
it,  and  having  faluted  him,  return  d  again,  waiting  on  him 
to  the  City  Gates.  Alfo  his  Iron-fly,  which  at  a  Feaft  flew 
forth  off  his  Hands,  and  taking  a  Round,  returned  thither  a- 
gain.     Vid.  Hakewill  ub.  fupr.  c.  10.  §.  i. 

As  to  other  Inventions  of  the  Ancients,  fuch  as  of  Let- 
ters, Brick  and  Tiles,  and  building  Houfes,  with  the  Saw, 
Rule,  and  Plumber,  the  Lath,  Augre,  Glue,  ctt.  alfo  the 
making  Brafs,  Gold,  and  other  Metals ;  the  ufe  of  Shields, 
Swords,  Bows  and  Arrows,  Boots,  and  other  Inftruments 

of 


Chap.  I.       Of  Man's  Invent  ion.  277 

cannot  the  prcfent  or  pad  Age,  fo  eminent  for 
polite  Literature,  for  Difcovcries  and  Improve- 
ments in  all  curious  Arts  and  Bufinefles  (perhaps 
beyond  any  known  Age  of  the  World  j  why  can- 
not it,  I  fay)  difcoverthofe  hidden ^^^/i/^,  which 
may  probably  be  referved  for  the  Difcovery  of  fu- 
ture and  lefs  learned  Generations  ? 

Of  thefe  Matters,  no  fatisfaftory  Account  caa 
be  given  by  any  mechanical  Hypothefis,  or  any  o- 
ther  Way,  without  taking  in  the  Superintendence 
of  the  great  Creator  and  Ruler  of  the  World  j 


of  War;  the  Pipe,  Harp,  and  other  Mufical  Inftruments; 
the  building  of  Ships  and  Navigation,  and  many  other 
Things  belides ;  the  .Inventors  of  thefe  (as  reported  by  an- 
cient Heathen  Authors)  may  be  plentifully  met  within  Plin. 
Nat.  Hifi.  L.  7-  c.  56. 

But  in  this  Account  of  Pliny,  we  may    obferve  whence 
the  Ancients  (even  the  Ro»3d»j  themfelves  m  fome  meafure) 
had  their  Accounts  of  thefe  Matters,  viz.  from  the  fabu- 
lous Greeks,   who  were  fond  of  afcribmg  every  Thing  to 
themfelves.     The  Truth  is  faith  the  molt  learned  B;(hop  Stil- 
lingfieet)  there  is  nothing   in   the   World  ufeful  or  beneficial  to 
Mankind,  but   they  have  made   a  Jliift    to  find  the  Author  of 
it  among  themfelves.      if  we  enquire  after  the  Original  of  A- 
griculture,  we  are  told  of  Ceres  and  Triptolemus;  //  of  Pa- 
flurage,  we  are  tcld  of  an  Arcadian  Pan  ;  if  of  Wine,  vjc  pre- 
fently  hear  of  a  L\heT  ?zxex;   if  of  Iron  Infiruments,  then  who 
but  Vulcan .-'  if  of  Mufick,  none  like  to  Apollo.     1/  we  prefs 
them  then  with  the  Htflory  of  other  Nations,  they  are  as  well 
provided  here  ;  if  we  enquire  an  Account  of  Europe,  Afia,  or 
Libya  ;  for  the  firfi  we  are  told  a  fine  Story  of  Cadmus'i  Si- 
f{er ;  for  the  fecond  of  Prometheus'f  Mother  of  that  Name ; 
and  for  the   third  of  a  Daughter  of  Epaphus.     And  fo  the 
learned  Author  goes  on    with    other    particular    Nations, 
which  they  boafted  themfelves  to  be  the  Founders  of.    Only 
the  grave  Athenians  thought  Scorn  to  have  any  Father  ajfigned 
them,  their  only  Ambition  was  to  be  accounted  Aborigines  8c 
gcnuini  Terrae.     But  the  Ignorance  and  Vanity  of  the  Greek 
Hiftory,  that  learned  Author  hath  fufiv:iently  refuted.     Vid. 
Stilling.  Orig.  Sacr.  Part.  i.  B.  i.  c  4. 

T  5  who 


2,78  Of  Maris  Invention.        Book  V. 

who  oftentimes  doth  manifeft  himfelf  in  fome  of 
the  moft  confiderable  of  thofe  Works  of  Men, 
by  fome  remarkable  Tranfaftions  of  his  Providence, 
or  by  fome  great  Revolution  or  other  happening 
in  the  World  thereupon.     Of  this  I  might  in- 
flance  in  the  Invention  of  Printing  {hh)^  fucceed- 
cd  firft  by  a  train  of  Learned  Men,  and  the  Re- 
vival of  Learning,  and  foon  after  that  by  the  Re- 
formation ,   and  the  much  greater  Improvements 
of  Learning  at  this  Day.     But  the  moft  confide- 
rable Inftance  I  can  give  is,  the  Progrefs  of  Chri- 
ftianity,  by  means  of  the  civilized  Difpofition,  and 
large  Extent  of  the  Roman  Empire.     The  latter 
of  which,  as  it  made  way  for  human  Power;  fo 
the  former  made  way  for  our  moft  excellent  Re- 
ligion into  the  Minds  of  Men.     And  fo  I  hope, 
and  earneftly  pray,  that  the  Omnipotent  and  AU- 
wife  Ruler  of  the  World  will  tranfaft  the  Affairs 
of  our  moft  Holy  Religion,  e'er  it  be  long,  in  the 
Heathen  World ;    that  the  great  Improvements 
made  in  the  laft,  and  prefent  Age,  in  Arts  and 
Sciences,   in  Navigation  and  Commerce,  may  be 
a  Means  to   tranfport  our  Religion,    as   well  as 
Name,  through  all  the  Nations  of  the  Earth.    For 
we  find  that  our  Culture  of  the  more  polite  and 
curious  Sciences,  and  our  great  Improvements  in 
even  the  Mechanick  Arts,  have  already  made  a 
Way  for  ,us  into  fome  of  the  largeft  and  fartheft 


(Jbb)  Whether  Printing  was  invente'd  in  X440,  as  many 
imagine,  or  was  fooner  pradlifed,  in  1430,  or  1432,  as 
Mr.  Ellts's  Account  of  the  Dutch  Infcription  in  Phtl.  Tranf, 
No.  z86.  doth  import;  it  is  however  manifeft,  how  great 
an  Influence  (as  it  was  natural)  this  Invention  had  in  the 
promoting  of  Learning  foon  afterwards,  mentioned  before 
in  note  (*).  After  which  followed  the  Reformation  about 
|he  Year  15 17. 


diftant 


Chap.  I.      Of  Man's  Invention.  279 

diftant  Nations  of  the  Earth  j  particularly  into  the 
great  Empire  of  China  {cc). 

And  now,  before  I  quit  this  Subjcdt,  I  cannot 
but  make  one  Remark,  by  way  of  praftical  Infe- 
rence, from  what  has  been  lalt  faid  ;  and  that  is, 
Since  it  appears  that  the  Souls  of  Men  are  order- 
ed ,  difppled  and  aftuatcd  by  God ,  even  in  fecu- 
lar,  as  well  as  fpiritual  Chrillian  Aftsj  a  Duty 
arifeth  thence  on  every  Man,  to  purfuc  the  Ends, 
and  anfwer  all  the  Defigns  of  the  divine  Provi- 
dence, in  bellowing  his  Gifts  and  Graces  upon 
him.  Men  are  ready  to  imagine  their  Wit,  Lear- 
ning, Genius,  Riches,  Authority,  and  fuch  like, 
to  be  Works  of  Nature,  Things  of  Courfc,  Grow- 
ing to  their  own  Diligence,  Subtilcy,  or  fome  Se- 
condary Caufes  i  that  they  are  Matters  of  them, 
and  at  Liberty  to  ufe  them  as  they  pleafe,  to  gra- 
tifie  their  Lull  or  Humour,  and  fatisfie  their  de- 
praved Appetites.  But  it  is  evident,  that  thcfc 
Things  are  the  Gifts  of  God,  they  arc  fo  many 
Talents  cntrufted  with  us  by  the  infinite  Lord  of 


(cc)  The  Chlnefe  being  much  addided  to  Judicial  Allro- 
logy,  are  great  Obfervers  ot  the  Heavens,  and  the  A;;pca- 
rances  in  them.  For  which  Purpolc  they  have  an  ObjervA- 
tory  at  Pehin,  and  five  Mathematicians  appointed  to  watch 
every  Night;  four  towards  the  tour  Quarters  of  the  World, 
and  one  towards  the  2-enith,  that  nothing  inay  efcape  their 
Dbl'ervation.  Which  Obfervations  are  the  next  Morning 
brought  to  an  Office  to  be  regiftred.  But  notwitliflanding 
this  their  Diligence  for  many  Ages,  and  that  the  Emperor 
hath  kept  in  his  Service  above  ico  Perfons  to  regulate  the 
Kalendar,  yet  are  they  fuch  mean  Aftronomers,.ihat  they 
owe  the  Regulation  of  their  Kalendar,  the  Exadnefs  in  cal- 
culating Eclipfes,  crc  to  the  Europaam;  which  renders  the 
if«ro/i4:<7»  Mathematicians  fo  acceptable  to  the  Emperor,  ihit 
Father  Verbteji  and  divers  others,  were  not  only  made  Prin- 
cipals in  the  Obfervatory,  but  put  into  I'laces  of  great  Tiujl 
in  the  Empire,  and  had  the  greated  Honours  paid  them  at 
their  Deatiis.     Vid.  La  Qomie  Mem.  of  China.  Let(;r  i\.  arc 

T  4  the 


x8o  Of  Man's  Invention,        BookV. 

the  World,  a  Stewardfhip,  a  Truft  repofed  in  us  i 
for  which  we  muft  give  an  Account  at  the  Day 
when  our  Lord  fhall  call  j  according  to  the  para- 
bolical Reprefentation  of  this  Matter  by  our  Blcf- 
fed  Saviour,  Matt.  xxv.  14. 

Our  Duty  then  is  not  to  abufe  thefe  Gifts  of 
God,  not  to  negkSl  the  Gift  that  is  in  us^  not  to 
hide  our  'Talent  in  the  Earth  5  but  as  St.  Paul  ex- 
horteth  Timothy^  1  Tim.  i.  6.  we  muft  ftir  up  the 
Gift  of  God  which  is  in  us^  and  not  let  it  lie  idle, 
concealed  or  dead  5  but  we  muft  ccv«(w7ryf«v  to;^<»- 
e/a-fxct,  blow  it  up^  and  enkindle  ity  as  the  Original 
imports  i  we  muft  improve  and  employ  our  Gift 
to  the  Glory  of  the  Giver ;  or  in  that  Miniftrati- 
on,  that  Ufe  and  Service  of  the  World,  for  which 
he  gave  it.  Our  Stewardfhip,  our  Craft,  our  Cal- 
ling, be  it  that  of  AmbafTadors  of  Heaven,  commit- 
ted to  us,  as 'twas  to  Timothy,  (dd)  by  the  laying  on 
of  Hands }  or  be  it  the  more  fecular  Bufinefs  of  the 
Gentleman,  Tradefman,  Mechanick,  or  only  Ser- 
vant ;  nay,  our  good  Genius,  our  Propenfity  to 
any  Good,  as  fuppofe  to  Hiftory,  Mathematicks, 
Botany,  Natural  Philofophy,  Mechanicks,  Cffc.  I 
fay  all  thefe  Occupations,  in  which  the  Providence 
of  God  hath  engaged  Men,  all  the  Inclinations  to 
which  his  Spirit  hath  difpofed  them,  ought  to  be 
difcharged  with  that  Diligence,  that  Care  and  Fi- 
delity, that  our  great  Lord  and  Mafter  may  not 
fay  to  us,  as  we  faid  to  the  unfaithful  Steward, 
huke  xvi.  z.  Give  an  Account  of  thy  Stewardfhip^ 
for  thou  mayefl  be  no  longer  Steward ;  but  that  he 
may  fay,  as  'tis  in  the  Parable  before  cited.  Mat. 
xxv.  21.  Well  done  thou  good  and  faithful  Ser- 
vant, thou  hafi  been  faithful  over  a  few  Things,  I 
will  make  thee  Ruler  over  many  Things,  enter  thou 


{dd)  I  Tim.  iv.  14.    1  Tim.  i.  6'. 

into 


Chap.  II.       Of  Man's  ToJIure.  i8i 

into  the  Joy  of  thy  Lord.  Since  now  the  Cafe  is 
thus,  let  us  be  perfuaded  to  follow  Solomon's  Ad- 
vice, Ecckf.iyi.  10.  IVhatfoever  thy  Hand  findeth 
t9  do^  do  it  "juith  thy  Might  (ee) :  "  Lay  hold  on 
"  every  Occafion  that  prclents  it  felf,  and  improve 
'^  it  with  the  utmoft  Diligcncej  bccaufe  now  is  the 
"  Time  of  A6kion,  both  in  the  Employments  of 
"  the  Body,  and  of  the  Mind  -,  now  is  the  Sea- 
"  fon  of  Undying  either  Arts  and  Sciences,  or 
"  Wifdom  and  Virtue,  for  which  thou  wilt  have 
"  no  Opportunities  in  the  Place  whither  thou  art 
"  going  in  the  other  World,  for  there  is  no  ^^ork^ 
"  tior  Device^  nor  Kno'wledge^  nor  IVifdom  in  the 
'*  Grave  'whither  thou  goeji. 


{ee)  Bifiiop  Patrick  in  loc. 


CHAP.    II. 

Of  Man's  Body,  particularly  /Vj  P  o  s  t  u  r  e. 

HAving  thus,  as  briefly  as  well  I  could,  furvey- 
ed  the  Sotil^  let  us  next  take  a  View  of  Man""! 
Body.  Now  here  we  have  fuch  u  Multiplicity  of 
the  moft  cxquifite  Workmanfhip,  and  of  the  bcft 
Contrivance,  that  if  we  fhould  Ihiftly  furvey  the 
Body  from  Head  to  Foot,  and  fearch  only  into  the 
known  Parts  (and  many  more  lie  undifcovered)  wc 
ihould  find  too  large  and  tedious  a  Task  to  be  dif- 
fpatchcd.  I  (liall  therefore  have  Time  only  to 
take  a  tranficnt  and  general  Kind  of  View  ot  this 
admirable  Machine,  and  that  fome  what  briefly  too, 
being  prevented  by  others,  paititulaily  iwo  excel- 
lent 


^J8^  Of  Man's  Tofture.        .  Book  V. 

lent  Authors  of  our  own  {a\  who  have  done  it 
on  the  fame  Account  as  my  felf.     And  the 

I.  Thing  that  prefents  itfelf  to  our  View,  is  the 
Ere^  Poflure  {b)  of  Man's  Body  5  which  is  far  the 
moft,  if  not  the  only  commodious  Poilure  for  a 
rational  Creature,  for  him  that  hath  Dominion 
over  the  other  Creatures,  for  one  that  can  invent- 
ufeful  Things,  and  praftife  curious  Arts.  Ifor- 
without  this  ere6b  Poilure,  he  could  not  have 
readily  turned  himfelf  to  every  Bufinefs,  and  on  c- 
very  Occafion.     His  Hand  {c)  particularly  could 

not 


(4)  Mr.  Ray  in  his  IVifdom  of  God  manifefted  in  the  Works 
of  Creation  ,  Part  i.  and  Dr.  Cockburu'i  ^'Jl^y^  on  Faith, 
Part  I.  Effay  5. 

(Jb)  Adhanc providentiam  Natur&tam  diligeritem  [of  which 
he  had  been  before  fpeaking]  tamque  folertem  adjungi  multa 
foffunt.,  e  quibus  intdiigatur,  quants,  res  hotnimbus  a  Deo, 
quamque  eximiA  tribute  [tint :  qui  primhtn  eos  humo  excita- 
tos,  celfos  CT*  ereSlos  confiituit,  ut  Deorum  cognitionem,  caelum 
intuentes,  capere  pojfunt.  Sunt  enim  e  terra  homines  non  ut  in- 
coU,  atque  habitatores,  fed  quafi  fpe^latores  fuperarum  rerum, 
atque  caelejiiuw,  quarum  fpeSiaculum  ad  nullum  aliud  genius 
animantium  pertinet.     Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  L.  z.  c.  56. 

(c)  Ut  autem  fapientiffimum  animalium  eft  Homo,  ft  car  Ma - 
»us  funt  organa  fapientt  animali  convenientia.  Non  enim  quia 
Manus  habuit,  propterea  eft  fapientiffimum,  ut  Anaxagoras  di- 
cd>at ;  fed  quia  fapientijfimum  erat,  propter  hoc  Manus  ha- 
buit, ut  retiijftme  cenjuit  Ariftoteles,  Non  enim  Manus  ipfd 
hominem  artes  docuerunt,  fed  Ratio.  Manus  autem  ipf&  funt 
artium  organa,  &c,  Galen,  de  Uf.  Part.  L,  i.  c.  3.  After 
which,  in  the  reft  of  this  firft  Book,  and  part  of  the  fecond, 
he  confiders  the  Particulars  of  the  Hand,  in  order  to  enquire, 
as  he  faith,  ch.  5.  Num  eam  omnino  Conftitutionem  habeat 
[manus]  qua  meliorem  aliam  habere  non  potuit. 

Of  this  Part,  (and  indeed  of  the  other  Parts  of  human 
Bodies)  he  gives  fo  good  an  Account,  that  I  confefs  I  could 
not  but  admire  the  Skill  of  that  ingenious  and  famed  Hea- 
then. For  an  Example,  (becaufe  it  is  a  little  out  of  the 
Way,)  I.ftjall  pitch  upon  his  Account  of  the  different  Length 
of  the  Fingers.    L.  .1.  i.  24.    The  Reafon  of  this  Mecha- 

nifm, 


Chap.II.         OfMansToJiiire.  ^^3 

not  have  been  in  fo  great  a  Rcadinefs  to  execute 
the  Commands  of  the  Will,  and  Diftatcs  of  the 
Soul.  His  Eyes  would  have  been  the  moft  prone, 
and  incommodioufly  iituatcd  of  all  Animals  i  but 
by  this  Situation,  he  can  call  his  Eyes  upwards, 
downwards,  and  round  about  him  j  he  hath  a 
Horious  Hcmifphere  of  the  Heavens  (^,  and 
an   ample    Horizon   on   Earth    (^),    to    entertain 

^'^^y"       •  And 


nifm,  he  faith,  is.  That  the  Tops  of  the  Fingers  may  come 
to  an  Equahty,  cum  magnm  aliqucn  tntles  tn  circuttu  compre- 
hendunty  cr  chm  tn  feipfis  humtdum  vel  par-vum  corpm  conti- 

nere  conantur. Apparent  lero  in  unam  circuit  ctrcumfe- 

rtntiam  convtnire  Diittt  quinque  in  atltontbus  hujufmodt  Tnt- 
xime  quando  exqtufite  fphiricum  corpus  comprehendunt.  And 
this  Lvcnnefs  of  the  Fingers  Ends,  in  grai'ping  fphasncal, 
and  other  round  Bodies,  he  truly  enough  iaiih,  makes  the 
Hold  the  firmer.  And  it  feems  a  noble  and  pious  Defign 
he  had  in  fo  ftriftly  furveymg  the  Parts  of  Man's  Body, 
which  take  in  his  own  tranflated  Words,  Cum  multa  nawque 
efl'et  apud  -veteres,  tarn  Mtdicos,  qukm  Philofophos  de  uttlttate 
particuUrum  difjenfio  (qutdam  cmm  corpora  noflra  nullim  gra- 
tia efl'e  fa£U  exijiimant,   nulUque  omntno  arte ;  alii  autem  CT 

altcu'Ui  zratia,    cr  artificios-e, ;  pnmum   qmdem   tants 

huit^  dtjfenfionii  .ce,:rve/t«»  invemre  ftudui :  detnde  vero  c  unam 
aliquant  univcrfalem  tnethcdum  conjlituere,  qua  fingularum 
partium  corporis,  V  eerum  qui  Hits  accidunt  utiittatem  inve- 
nire  poJJemM.     Ibid.  cap.  8. 

(^d)  Pronaque  cutn  fpeHant  animalta  cetera  terram, 
Os  Hommi  ftibhme  dedit,  caelumque  tueri 
^ujfit,  V  erecHos  ad  ftdera  tollere  vultus. 

Ovid.  Metam.  L.  r.  car.  84. 
(e)  If  any  (hould  be  fo  curious,  to  delire  to  know  how 
far'  a  Man's  Profpeft  reacheth,  by  Means  of  the  Height  of 
his  Eye,  fuppofmg  the  Earth  was  an  uninterrupted  Globe; 
the  Method  is  a  common  Cafe  of  right-angled  pl^in  Trian- 
gles, where  two  Sides,  and  an  oppofite  Angle  are  given: 
Thus  in  Fig.  />,.  A  H  B  \%  the  Surface,  or  a  great  Circle  of 
the  terraqueous  Globe;  C  the  Center,  H  C  us  Scmidizme- 
ter,  £  the  Height  of  the  Eye  ;  and  forafmuch  as  //  II  is  a 
Tangent,  therefore  the  Angle  at  //  is  a  right 'Angle:  So 
that  there  are  given  H  C  398,386  Miies,   or  21034781  F»- 

iltft, 


i84  Of  Man's  Tofiure.        BookV. 

glifh  Feet,  (according  to  Book  II.  Chap.  2.  Note  {a);)  C  E 
the  fame  Length  with  the  Height  of  the  Eye,  on  the  Malt 
of  a  Ship,  or  at  only  a  Man's  Height,  vc  added  to  it;  and 
£  H  C  the  oppofite  right  Angle.  By  which  three  Parts  gi- 
ven, it  is  eafy  to  find  all  the  other  Parts  of  the  Triangle. 
And  firft,  the  Angle  at  C,  in  order  to  find  the  Side  H  £", 
the  Proportion  is,  As  the  Side  C  E,  to  the  Angle  at  H;  fo 
the  Side  H  G,  to  the  Angle  at  E,  which  being  fubftrafted  out 
of  90  gr.  the  Remainder  is  the  Angle  at  C.  And  then.  As 
the  Angle  at  E,  is  to  its  oppofite  Side  H  C,  or  elfe  as  the 
Angle  at  H  is  to  its  oppofite  Side  C  £ ;  fo  the  Angle  at 
C,  to  its  oppofite  Side  E  H,  the  vifible  Horizon.  Or  the 
Labour  may  be  (liortned,  by  adding  together  the  Logarithm 
of  the  Sum  of  the  two  given  Sides,  and  the  Logarithm  of 
their  Difference ;  the  half  of  which  two  Logarithms,  is  the 
Logarithm  of  the  Side  requir'd,  nearly.  For  an  Example, 
We  will  take  the  two  Sides  in  Yards,  by  Reafon  fcarce 
any  Table  of  Logarithms  will  ferve  us  farther.  The  Se- 
midiameter  of  the  Earth  is  7011594  Yards;  the  Height 
of  the  Eye  is  two  Yards  more,  the  Sum  of  both  Sides,  is 
14013190. 

Logar.  of  which  Sum  is,  7,1468468 

Logar.  of  two  Yards  (the  Differ.)  is,        0,3010300 

Sum  of  both  Logar.  7,4478768 

The  half  Sum,  3.71393^4 

is  the  Logar.  of  5196  Yards  =  three  Miles,  which  is  the 
Length  of  the  Line  E  H,  or  Diftance  the  Eye  can  reach  at 
fix  Feet  Height. 

This  would  be  the  Diftance,  on  a  perfeft  Globe,  did  the 
vifual  Rays  come  to  the  Eye  in  a  ftrait  Line;  but  by  Means 
of  the  Refraaions  of  the  Atmofphcre,  diftant  Objeds  on 
the  Horizon,  appear  higher  than  really  they  are,  and  may 
be  feen  at  a  greater  Diftance,  efpccially  on  the  Sea ;  which 
is  a  Matter  of  great  Ufe,  efpecially  to  difcover  at  Sea  the 
Land,  Rocks,  z^c.  and  it  is  a  great  Ad  of  the  divine  Pro- 
vidence, in  the  Contrivance  and  Convenience  of  the  At- 
mofphere,  which  by  this  Means  enlargeth  the  vifible  Hori- 
zon, and  is  all  one,  as  if  the  terraqueous  Globe  was  much 
larger  than  really  it  is.  As  to  the  Height  of  the  Apparent 
abovp  the  true  Level,  or  how  much  diftant  Objeds  are 
rais'd  by  the  Refradlions,  the  ingenious  and  accurate  Gentle- 
men of  the  Trench  Academy  Royal^  have  given  us  a  Table 
in  their  Meafure  of  the  Earth,  Art.  ii. 

if)  See 


Chap.  11.         Of  MatisToJiure.  i8^ 

And  as  this  Ercftion  of  Man's  Body  is  the  mod 
complcat  Pofture  for  him  j    fo  if  we  furvcy  the 
Provifion  made  for  it,  we  find  all  done  with  mani- 
fed  Defign,  the  utmoll  Art  and  Skill  being  em- 
ploy'd  therein.     To  pafs  by  the  particular  Con- 
formation of  many  of  the  Parts,   the  Ligaments 
and  Faftnings  to  anfwer  this  Pofture  j  as  the  Faft- 
ning,  for  Inftance,  of  the  Pericardium  to  the  Di- 
aphragm,   (which  is  peculiar  to  Man  (/)>  I  Giy, 
pafling  by  a  deal  of  this  Nature,  manifefting  this 
Pofture  to  be  an  Aft  of  Defign,)  let  us  ftop  a  lit- 
tk  at  the  curious  Fabrick  of  the  Bones,  thofe  PiW 
lars  of  the  Body.     And  how  artificially  do  wc 
find  them  made,   how  curioufly  plac'd  from  the 
Head  to  Foot !    The  Vertebra  of  the  Neck  and 
Back-bone  (|),  made  fhort  and  complanated,  and 
firmly  braced  with  Mufcles  and  Tendons,  for  ea- 
fy  Incurvations  of  the  Bodyj  but  withal  for  grea- 
ter Strength,  to  fupport  the  Body's  own  Weight, 
together  with   other  additional  Weights  it  may 
have  Occafion  to  bear.    The  Thigh-bones  and  Legs 
long,  and  ftrong,  and  every  Way  well  fitted  for 
the  Motion  of  the  Body.     The  Feet  accommoda- 
ted with  a  great  Number  of  Bones,  curioufly  and 
firmly  tacked  together,  (to  which  muft  be  added 
the  Miniftry  of  the  Mufcles  {h)y  to  anfwer  all  the 

Motions 


(/•)  See  Book  VI.  Chap.  5.  Nott  {g). 

\g)   See  Book  IV.  Chap.  8,  Note  ^c). 

{h)  The  Mechanifm  oi  the  Foot,  would  appear  to  be 
wonderful,  if  I  (hould  dcfcend  to  a  Deicnption  of  all  its 
Parts;  but  tiiat  would  be  too  long  tor  thcfe  Notes;  there- 
fore a  brief  Account,  (moft  of  which  I  owe  to  the  before- 
commended  Mr.  Chefelden,)  may  fcrve  for  a  Sample:  In  the 
firft  Place,  It  is  neccffary  the  Foot  fliould  be  concave,  to 
enable  us  to  (land  firm,  and  that  the  Nerves  and  Blood- 
Veffcls  may  be  free  from  Compreffion  when  wc  ftand  or 
walk.    In   order   hereunto,   the  long  lUxin  of  the  Toes 

crofs 


lU  Of  Man's  Tofture.        Book  V. 

Motions  of  the  Legs  and  Thighs,  and  at  the  fame 
Time  to  keep  the  Body  upright,  and  prevent  its 
falling,  by  readily  aflifting  againft  every  Vacillation 
thereof,  and  with  eafy  and  ready  Touches  keep- 
ing the  Line  of  Innixiony  and  Center  of  Gravity  in 
due  Place  and  I?ofture  (/). 

And  as  the  Bones  are  admirably  adapted  to 
prop }  fo  all  the  Parts  of  the  Body  are  as  incom- 
parably plac'd  to  poife  it.  Not  one  Side  too  hea- 
vy for  the  other  5  but  all  in  nice  iEquipoife :  The 
Shoulders,  Arms,  and  Side  equilibrated  on  one 
Part}  on  the  other  Part  the  Vifcera  of  the  Belly 
counterpois'd  with  the  Weight  of  the  fcapular 
Part,  and  that  ufeful  Cufhion  of  Flefh  behind. 

And  laftly.  To  all  this  we  may  add  the  wonder- 
ful Concurrence,  and  Miniftry  of  the  prodigious 
Number  and  Variety  of  Mufcles,  plac'd  through- 
out the  Body  for  this  Service ;  that  they  fhould 
fo  readily  anfwer  to  every  Pofturej  and  comply 
with  every  Motion  thereof,  without  any  previous 


crofs  one  another  at  the  Bottom  of  the  Foot,  in  the  Form 
of  a  St.  Axdrezu's  Crofs,  to  incline  the  lefTer  Toes  towards 
the  great  One,  and  the  great  One  towards  the  lefTer.  The 
fiort  Flexors  are  chiefly  concern'd  in  drawing  the  Toes  to- 
wards the  Heel.  The  tranfverfalk  Pedis  draws  the  Out- 
lides  of  the  Foot  towards  each  other;  and  by  being  in- 
ferted  into  one  of  the  fefamoid  Bones,  of  the  great  Toe,  di- 
verts the  Power  of  the  abduSlor  Mufcie,  (falfly  fo  call'd,) 
and  makes  it  become  a  Flexor.  And  laftly,  the  feron&t'U 
LongHs  runs  round  the  outer  Ankle,  and  obliquely  forwards 
crofs  the  Bottom  of  the  Foot,  and  at  once  helps  to  extend 
the  Tarfus,  to  conlbitft  the  Foot,  and  to  direft  the  Power 
of  the  other  Extenjors  towards  the  Ball  of  the  great  Toe : 
Hence  the  Lofs  of  the  great  Toe,  is  more  than  of  all  the  o- 
ther  Toes.     See  alfo  Mr.  Cowper's  Anat.  Tab.  i8.  cj'c. 

(f)  It  is  very  well  worth  while  to  compare  here  what  Bo- 
relli  faith,  de  mottt  Animal.  Par.  i.  cap.  18.  Be  fiatione 
Animal.  Prop.  132,,  o'c.  To  which  I  refer  the  Reaaer,  it 
being  too  long  to  recite  here. 

Thought 


Chap.  III.       Of  Man's  Figure.  187 

Thought  or  Reflex  afb,  fo  that  (as  the  excellent 
BorclU  {k)  faith),  ^'  It  is  worthy  of  Admiration, 
*'  that  in  fo  great  a  Variety  'of  Motions,  as  run- 
^'  ning,  leaping,  and  dancing,  Nature's  Laws  of 
"  ^Equilibration  {hould  always  be  obfcrvcd  j  and 
"  when  negledted,  or  wilfully  tranfgrcflld ,  that 
*'  the  Body  muft  neccflarily  and  immcdiauly  tum- 
ble down. 


(k)  Borel.  ibid.  Prop.  141. 


CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  FiGVKEand  Shave  of  Mau*s  Body. 

TH  E  Figure  and  Shape  of  Man's  Body,  is  the 
mod:  commodious  that  could  poflibly  be  in- 
vented for  fuch  an  Animal  j  the  moil:  agreeable  to 
his  Motion,  to  his  Labours,  and  all  his  Occafions. 
For  had  he  been  a  rational  Reptile,  he  could  not 
have  moved  from  Place  to  Place  fail  enough  for 
hisBufinefs,  nor  indeed  have  done  any  almoil.  Had 
he  been  a  racional  Quadrupedc,  among  other  Things, 
he  had  loft  the  Benefit  of  his  Hands,  thofe  noble 
Inftruments  of  the  moftufeful  Performances  of  the 
Body.  Had  he  been  made  a  Bird,  befides  many 
other  great  Incoveniencies,  thole  before-mention- 
ed of  his  Flying  would  have  been  fome.  In  a 
word,  any  other  Shape  of  Body,  but  that  which 
the  All-wife  Creator  hath  given  Man,  would  have 
been  as  incommodious,  as  any  Pofture  but  that  of 
ered:j  it  would  have  rendered  him  more  helplefs, 
or  have  put  it  in  his  Power  to  have  been  more  per- 
nicious, or  deprived  him  of  Ten  thoufand  Benefits, 

or 

HTM  * 


a88  Of  Man's  Stature,         Book  V. 

or  Pleafures,  or  Conveniences,  which  his  prefent 
Figure  capacitates  him  for. 


CHAP.   IV. 
O/'^^^Statuke  and  Size  ofMan'sBoDv. 

AS  in  the  Figure,  fo  in  the  Stature  and  Size  of 
Man*s  Body,  we  have  another  manifeft  In- 
dication of  excellent  Defign.  Not  too  Pygme- 
an (^),  nor  too  Gigantick  (^),  either  of  which 
Sizes  would  in  fome  particular  or  other,  have  been 
incommodious  to  Himfelf,  or  to  his  Bufinefs,  or 
to  the  reft  of  his  Fellow-Creatures.  Too  Pyg- 
mean would  have  rendered  him  too  puny  a  Lord 
of  the  Creation;  too  impotent  and  unfit  to  manage 
the  inferiour  Creatures,  would  have  expofed  him 
to  the  Aflaults  of  the  weakeft  Animals,  to  the  ra- 
vening Appetite  of  voracious  Birds,  and  have  put 
him  in  the  Way,  and  endangered  his  being  trod- 
den in  the  Dirt  by  the  larger  Animals.  He  would 
have  been  alfo  too  weak  for  his  Bufinefs,  unable 
to  carry  Burdens,  and  in  a  word,  to  tranfa6t  the 
greater  part  of  his  Labours  and  Concerns. 

And  on  the  other  hand,  had  Man's  Body  been 
made  too  monftroufly  Itrong,  too  enormoufly  Gi- 


(a)  What  is  here  urged  about  the  Size  of  Man's  Body, 
may  ani'wer  one  of  Lucretius's  Reafons  why  Nil  ex  nihilo 
gignitur.     His  Argument  is 

Deniqtte  cur  Homines  tantos  natura  parare 
Non  potuit,  pedibus  qui  pontum  per  vada.  pojfent 
Tranfirey  v"  ma^nos  tnanibus  divellere  monteis  ? 

Lucret.  L.  i.  Carm.  zoo.' 
(^)  Haud  facile  fit  ut  quifquam  v  ingentes  corporis  vires, 
c  inzeHUitn  fuhiile  habeat.    Diodor.  Sic.  L.  17. 

ganticK 


Chap.  IV.       Of  Man's  Stature.  2.89 

gantick  (r),  it  would  have  rendered  him  a  dange- 


rous 


[c)  Altho'  we  read  of  Giants  before  Noah's  Flood,  Gen. 
vi.  4.  and  more  plainly  afterwards  in  Numb.  xiii.  33.  Yet 
there  is  great  Reafon  to  think  the  Size  of  Man  was  always 
the  fame  from  the  Creation.  For  as  to  the  NephiUm  or  Gi- 
an:s,  in  Gen.  vi.  the  Ancients  vary  about  them;  fome  taking 
them  for  great  Atheifts,  and  Monfters  of  Impiety,  Rapine* 
Tyranny,  and  all  Wickednefs,  as  well  as  of  nionlUous  Sta- 
ture, according  as  indeed  the  Hebrew  Signification  allows. 

And  as  for  the  NephiUm  in  Numb.  xiii.  which  were  evi- 
dently Men  of  a  Giganrick  Siie,  it  muft  be  confidered,  that 
'it  is  very  probable,  the  Fears  and  Difcontentments  of  the 
Spies  might  add  foraewhat  thereunto. 

But  be  the  Matter  as  it  will,  it  is  very  manifeft,  that  in 
both  thefe  Places,  Giants  are  fpoken  of  as  Rarities,  and 
Wonders  of  the  Age,  not  of  the  common  Stature.  And 
fuch  Inftances  we  have  had  in  all  Ages;  excepting  fome  fa- 
bulous Relations;  fuch  as  I  take  to  be  that  of  Theutobocchusi 
who  is  fAid  to  have  been  dug  up,  Anno  161 3,  and  to  have 
been  higher  than  the  Trophies,  and  26  Feet  long;  and  no 
better  1  fuppofe  the  Giants  to  have  been,  that  Ol.  Magnus 
gives  an  Account  of  in  his  5'^  Book,  fuch  as  Hart  hen,  and 
^tarchater,  among  the  Men;  and  among  the  Women,  re- 
pert  a  ejl  (lailh  he)  puella in  capiie  vulnerata,  acmor- 

tua,  induta  chlamyJe purpurea,  longitudinis  cubitorum  50,  la- 
tituJinis  inter  humeros  quatuor.     Ol.  Mag.  Hift.  L.  5.  c.  Z. 

But  as  for  the  more  credible  Relations  of  Goliath  (whoft 
Height  wctf  6  Cubits  and  a  Span,  I  Sam.  xvii  4.  which  accord- 
ing to  the  late  curious  and  learned  Lord  Bijhop  of  Peterbo- 
rough is  fomewhat  above  11  Feet  Englifl),  vid.  Bifliop  Cum- 
berland of  Je-wijfj  Weights  and  Meafures)  of  Maximmus  the 
Emperor,  who  was  9  Feet  high,  and  others  in  Augujlus,  and 
other  Reigns,  of  about  the  fame  Height:  To  which  we 
may  add  the  Dimenfions  of  a  skeleton,  dug  up  lately  in  the 
Place  of  a  Roman  Camp  near  St.  Albans,  by  an  Urn  infcrib- 
ed,  Alarcus  Antoninus;  of  which  an  Account  is  given  by 
Mr.  Chefelden,  who  judgeth  by  the  Dimenfions  of  the  Bores, 
that  the  Perfon  was  8  Foot  high,  vid.  Philof.  Jranf  N".  333. 
Thefe  antique  Examples  and  Relations,  1  fay,  wccanmatch, 
yea,  out-do,  with  modern  Examples;  of  which  we  have  di- 
vers in  ^.  Ludolph.  Comments  in  Hift.  JEthiop.  L.  i.  C.  i 
§.  2.Z.  Magus,  Conringiui,  Dr.  Hakc-viil,  and  others.  Which 
later  relates  from  Nannez,  of  Porters  and  Archers  bcWng- 

U  »«'3 


1^0  Of  Man's  Stature.      '  BookV. 

ing  to  the  Eraperor  of  China,  of  15  Feet  high  ;  and  others 
from  Purchas,  of  10  and  11  Feet  high,  and  more.  Seethe 
learned  Author's  Apolog.  p.  208. 

Thefe  indeed  exceed  what  I  have  feen  in  England;  but 
in  1684,  I  my  felf  meafur'd  an  Irijij  Youth,  faid  to  be  not 
19  Years  old,  who  was  7  Feet  near  8  Inches,  and  in  1697, 
a  Woman  who  was  7  Feet  3  Inches  in  Height. 

But  for  the  ordinary  Size  of  Mankind,  in  all  Probability, 
it  was  always  (as  I  faid)  the  fame,  as  may  appear  from  the 
Montimcnts,  Mummies,  and  other  ancient  Evidences  to  be 
feen  at  this  Day,  The  moft  ancient  Monument  at  this  Day, 
I  prefume  is  that  of  Cheops,  in  the  firft  and  faireft  Pyramid 
of  JEgypt;  which  was,  no  doubt,  made  of  Capacity  every 
"Way  fufficient  to  hold  the  Body  of  fo  great  a  Perfon  as  was 
intended  to  be  laid  up  in  it.  But  this  we  find  by  the  nice 
Meafares  of  our  curious  Mr.  Greaves,  hardly  to  exceed  ou» 
common  Coffins.  The  hollow  Part  within  (faith  he)  is  in  Length 
only  6,488  Feet,  and  in  Bteadth  but  z,zi8  leet :  The  Depth 
1,860  Teet.  A  narrow  /pace,  yet  large  enough  to  contain  a 
moft  potent  and  dreadful  Monarch,  being  dead ;  to  whom  liv" 
ing,  all  ^gypt  was  too  ftreight  and  narrow  a  Circuit.  By 
thefe  Dinienftons,  and  by  fuch  other  Obfervations,  as  have 
heen  taken  by  me  from  fever  al  embalmed  Bodies  in  T^gypt,  we 
may  conclude  there  is  no  decay  in  Nature  (though  the  §}uefti' 
en  is  as  old  as  Homer)  but  that  the  Men  of  this  Age  are  of 
the  fame  Stature  they  were  near  30CO  Years  ago,  vid.  Greaves 
of  the  Pyr.  in  1638,  in  Ray'%  CoUedt.  of  Trav,  Tom.  i, 
pag.  118. 

To  this  more  ancient,  we  may  add  others  of  a  later  Date." 
Of  which  take  thefe,  among  others,  from  the  curious  and 
learned  Hakewill.  The  Tombs  at  Pifa,  that  are  feme  thou- 
fand  Years  old,  are  not  longer  than  ours ;  fo  is  Athelftane's 
in  Malmesbury-Chnrch ;  fo  Sehba's  in  St.  PauCSf  of  the  Year 
693;  fo  Etheldred's,dcc.  Apol.  il6,cc. 

The  fame  Evidence  we  have  alfo  from  the  Armour, 
Shields,  Veflels,  and  other  Utenfils  dug  tip  at  this  Day. 
The  Brafs  Helmet  dug  up  at  Metaurum,  which  was  not 
doubted  to  have  been  left  there  at  the  Overthrow  of  Afdru- 
bal,  will  fit  one  of  our  Men  at  this  Day. 

Nay,  befides  all  this,  probably  we  have  fome  more  cer- 
tain Evidence.  Auguflus  was  5  Foot  9  Inches  high,  which 
was  the  juft  Meafure  of  our  famous  Queen  Elizabeth,  who 
exceeded  his  Height  z  Inches,  if  proper  Allowance  be  made 
for  the  Difference  between  the  Roman  and  our  Fool.  Vid. 
Hakew,  ib.  p.iis. 

(d)  To 


Chap.  IV.      Of  Man's  Stature.  191 

rous  Tyrant  in  the  World,  too  ftrong  {d)  in  fomc 
Refpcdbs,  even  for  his  own  Kind,  as  well  as  the 
other  Creatures.     Locks   and  Doors   might  pcr- 


{d)  To  the  Stature  of  Men  in  the  foregoing  Note,  we 
may  add  fome  Remarks  about  their  unufual  ^trenith.     That 
of  Sampfon  (who  is  not  faid  to  have  exceeded  othet  Men  in 
Stature  as  he  did  in  Strength)  is  well  known.     So  of  old, 
Beilor,  Diomedts,  Hercules,  and  yljax  are  famed  ;   and  fincc 
them  many  others ;  for  which  I  (hall  feck  no  farther  than 
the  before  commended  Hakewitl,  who  by  his  great  and  cu- 
rious Learning,  hath  often  moft  of  the  Examples  that  are  to 
be  met  with  on  all  his  Subjedls  he  undertakes.     Of  the  Af- 
.ter-Ages  he  names  C.  Marius,   Maximinus,   Aurelian,  Scan- 
derberge,  Bardeftn,  Tamerlane,  S\/ka,  and  Hunniades.     AnnO 
1519,  Klunher,  Provoft  of  the  great  Church  at  Alifnia,  car- 
ry'd  a  Pipe  of  Wine  out  of  the  Cellar,  and  laid  it  m  the 
Cart.     Mayolus  faw  one  hold  a  Marble  Pillar  in  his  Hand 
3  Foot  long,  and  r   Foot  diameter,  which  he  tofs'd  up  in 
the  Air,  and  catched  again,  as  if  it  were  a  Ball.     Another 
of  Mantua,  and  a  little  Man,  named  Rodamas,  could  break 
a  Cable,  crc.     tLrnando  Burg,  fetched  up  Stairs  an  Afs  laden 
\vith  Wood,  and  threw  both  into  the  Fire.     At  ConftantiKo- 
fle.  Anno  T582,  one  lifted  a  Piece  of  Wood,   that  twelve 
Men  could  fcarce  raife  :   then  lying  along,  he  bare  a  Stone 
that  ten  Men  could  but  juft  roll  to  him.     G.  of  Fronsl/erge, 
baron  Mindlehaim,  could  raife  a  Man  off  his  Seat,  with  on- 
ly his  middle  Finger ;  flop,  an  Horfe  in  his  full  Career;  and 
fhove  a  Cannon  out  of  its  Place.     Cardan  faw  a  Man  dance 
with  two  Men  in  his  Arms,  two  on  his  Shoulders,  and  one 
on  his  Neck.     Patacoua,  Captain  of  the  CoJJ'achs,  could  tear 
an  Horfe-Shoe  (  and  if  I  miftake  not,  the  fame  is  reported 
bf  the  prefent  King  Auguftus  of  Poland)  A  Gigantick  Wo- 
man of  the  Netherlands  could  lift  a  Barrel  of  Hamburgh  Beer. 
Mr.  Carew  had  a  Tenant  that  could  carry   a  But's  Length, 
6  Bufhel  of  Wheaten  Meal  (of  15  Gallon  Meafure)  with  the 
Lubber,  the  Miller  of  z4  Years  of  Age,  on  the  top  of  it. 
And  J.  Roman  of  the  fame  County,  could  carry  the  Carcafs 
of  an  Ox.     Vid.  Hakewill,  ib.  p.  238. 

Viroi  aliquot  moderna  memoria  tarn  a  mineralihus,  a/n.hn  a- 
liis  Seuthi<e  c'' GothU  provinciis  adJiicere  congruit,  t  am  A  for- 
titudint  prdditos,  ut  qui/que  eorum  in  hurncros  fuLlevatum  B- 
quum,  vel  Bovem  maximum,  imo  vas  Jerri  600,  8co,  aut 
1000  librarum  (quale  CP*  aliquA  PuelU  levari  foff'unlj  ad plu- 
*-tt  ftadia  portarct.     Ol.  Mag.  ubi  fupr. 

U  Z  haps 


1^2)  Of  Man's  Stature.         BookV, 

haps  have  been  made  of  fufficient  Strength  to  have 
barricaded  our  Houfes  j  and  Walls,  and  Ramparts 
might  perhaps  have  been  made  ftrong  enough  to 
have  fenced  our  Cities.     But  thefe  Things  could 
not  have  been  without  a  great  and  inconvenienE 
Expence  of  Room,  Materials,  and  fuch  Necefla- 
ries,  as  fuch  vaft  Stru61:ures  and  Ufes  would  have 
occafioned  j  more  perhaps  than  the  World  could 
have  afforded  to  all  Ages  and  Places.     But  let  us 
take  the  Defcant  of  a  good  Naturalift  and  Phyfi- 
cian  on  the  Cafe  {e).     "  Had  Man  been  a  Dwarf 
"  (faid  he)  he  had  fcarce  been  a  reafonable  Crea- 
"  ture.     For  he  mud  then  have  had  a  Jolt  Hcadj* 
*'  fo  there  would  not  have  been  Body  and  Blood 
^'  enough  to  fupply  his  Brain  with  Spirits  j  or  he 
"•  muft  have  had  a  fmall  Head,  anfwerable  to  his 
"  Body,  and  {o  there  would  not  have  been  Brain 
*'  enough  for  his  Bufinefs — ^Or  had  the  Species  of 
"  Mankind  been  Gigantick,  he  could  not  have 
"  been  fo  commodioufly  fupplied  with  Food.  For 
*'  there  would  not  have  been  Flefh  enough  of  the 
"  beft  edible  Beafls,  to  ferve  his  Turn.     And   if 
*'  Beails  had  been  made  anfwerably  bigger,  there 
"  would  not  have  been  Grafs  enough.     And  fo  he 
goeth  on.     And  a  little  after,  "  There  would  not 
"  have  been  the  fame  Ufe  and  Difcovery  of  his 
"  Reafon  j    in  that   he  would   have  done  many 
"  Things  by  mere  Strength,  for  which  he  is  now 
"  put  to  invent  innumerable  Engines  — .  Neither 
"  could  he  have  ufed  an  Horfe,  nor  divers  other 
"  Creatures.     But  being  of  a  middle  Bulk,  he  is 
"  fitted  to  manage  and  ufe  them  all.     For  (faith 
"  he)  no  other  Caufe  can  be  affigned  why  a  Man 
was  not  made  five  or  ten  Times  bigger,  but  his 


ic 


.(#)  Grew's  Cofmol,  Sacr.  B.  i.  ch,  5.   §,  25. 

-    ..  "  Relatiew 


Chap.V.       Of  the  StruBurc^^c.  193 

"  Relation  to  the  reft  of  the  Univcifc.     Thus  far 
our  curious  Author. 


CHAP.    V. 

Of  the  S  T  R  u  c  T  u RE  0/  ^/;£'  Parts  of 
Man's  Body. 

HAving  thus  taken  a  View  of  the  Pofture, 
Shape,  and  Size  of  Man's  Body,  let  us  in 
this  Chapter  furvey  the  Strudurc  of  its  Parts. 
But  here  we  have  fo  large  a  Profped,  that  it 
would  be  endlefs  to  proceed  upon  Particulars.  It 
mud  futlice  therefore  to  take  Notice,  in  general 
only,  how  artificially  every  Part  of  our  Body  is 
made.  No  Botch,  no  Blunder,  no  unneccflary  y^/>- 
paratus  (or  in  other  Words)  no  Signs  of  Chance  {a) ; 
but  e\fcry  Thing  curious,  orderly,  and  performed 
in  the  fhorteft  and  bcft  Method,  and  adapted  to 
the  molt  compendious  VCc.  What  one  Part  is 
there  throughout  the  whole  Body,  but  what  is 
compofcd  of   the  fitteft   Matter  for   that  Part ; 


(a)  It  is  manifeftly  an  Argument  of  DeGgn,  that  in  the 
Bodies  of  different  Animals,  there  is  an  Agreement  of  the 
Parts,  fo  far  as  the  Occafions  and  Ortices  agree,  but  a  diffe- 
rence of  thofe,  where  there  is  a  difference  of  thefe.  In  a^ 
Human  Body  are  many  Parts  agreemg  with  thofe  of  a  Dog 
for  Inlhnce;  but  in  his  Forehead,  Fingers,  Hand,  Inliru- 
ments  of  Speech,  and  many  other  Paris,  there  are  Mufclcs, 
and  other  Members  which  are  not  in  a  Dog.  And  fo  con- 
trariwife  in  a  Dog,  which  is  not  in  a  Man.  If  the  Reader 
is  minded  to  fee  what  particular  Mufcles  arc  in  a  Man,  that 
are  not  in  a  Dog ;  or  in  a  Dog  that  are  not  in  an  Humane 
Body,  let  him  confult  the  curious  and  accurate  Anatomill 
Dr.  Douglafi's  Myogr,  compar. 

U  5  naadff 


194  Of  the  StruBure  BookV. 

made  of  the  moft  proper  Strength  and  Texture  \ 
fhaped  in  the  eompleatefl  Form  j  and  in  a  word, 
accouter'd  with  every  Thing  neceflary  for  its  Mo- 
tion, Office,  Nourifhment,  Guard,  and  what  not! 
What  fo  commodious  a   Strufture  and  Texture 
could  have  been  given  to  the  Bones,  for  Inftance, 
to  make  them  firm  and  ftrong,  and  withal  light, 
as  thap  which  every  Bone  in  the  Body  hath  ?  Who 
could  have  fhaped  them  fo  nicely  to  every  Ufe, 
and  adapted  them  to  ever  Part,  made  them  of  fucH 
jufl  Lengths,  given  them  fuch  due  Sizes  and  Shapes^ 
chanelled ,  hollowed ,  headed ,  lubricated  ,  and  e- 
very  other  Thing  miniftring,  in  the  bell  and  mofl 
compendious  manner  to  their  feveral  Places  and 
Ufes  ?  What  a  glorious  CoUeftion  and  Combinati- 
on have  we  alfo  of  the  moft  exquifite  Workman- 
fhip  and  Contrivance  in  the  Eye,  in  the  Ear^  in  the 
Hand  (^),  in  the  Foot  (^),  in  the  Lungs,  and  other 
Parts  already  mention'd?  What  an  Abridgment  of 


{h)  Gdt/ew  having  defcribed  the  Mufcles,  Tendons,  and  o- 
ther  Parts  of  the  Fingers,  and  their  Motions,  cries  out.  Con- 
sider a  igitur  tt'iam  h\c  mirabilem  Ckeatoris  fapieniiam f 
DeUf.  Part.  L.  i.  c.  i8. 

(c)  And  not  only  in  the  Hand,  but  in  his  Account  of  the 
Foot  (£.  3.)  he  frequently  takes  notice  of  what  he  calls  ^r- 
tem,  Providentiam  CT*  Sapienttam  Conditor'ts.  As  Ch.  13.  An 
igitur  non  e,quuro  eft  htc  quoque  admirari  Providentiam  Condi- 
sorts,  qui  ad  utrumque  ufumy  etfi  certe  contrariuoj,  exa^e 
convenientes  c^  confentientes  invicem  fabricatus  eft  totius  mem- 
hri  [tibiae]  particulas?  And  at  the  end  of  the  Chap.  G^ubd 
fi  omnia  qu&  ipfarum  funt  partium  mente  immutaverimus,  ne- 
que  inveaerimus  pofitionem  aliam  meliorem  ea  quam  nunc  for- 
lita  funt,  neque  figuram,  neque  magnitudinem,  neque  connexi- 
»ntm,  neque  (ut  paucis  omnia  comple^ar )  aliud  quidquam 
eorum,  qu*  corporibus  necejfario  infunt,  perfe^lijfimam  pronun- 
iiare  oportet,  cr  undique  reSte  conftitutam  pr^fentem  ejus  coU" 
ftru6lionem.    The  like  ?lfo  concludes,  Ch.  15. 


Arts 


Cbap.V.  of  Man's  Body.  19^ 

Art,  what  a  Variety  of  Ufcs  (^),  hath  Nature  lai4 
upon  that  one  Member  of  the  Tongue,  the  grand  In- 
ftrument  of  Tall,  the  faithful  Judge,  th^CcntincI, 
the  Watchman  of  all  our  Nourifhmcnr,  the  artful 
Modulator  of  our  Voice,  the  neccflary  Servant  of 
Mallication,  Swallowing,  Sucking,  and  a  great 
deal  befidcs  ?  But  I  mull  defilt  from  proceeding 
upon  Particulars,  finding  I  am  fallen  upon  what  I 
proposed  to  avoid. 

And  therefore  for  a  Clofe  of  this  Chapter,  I 
{hall  only  add  Part  of  a  Letter  I  receiv'd  from  the 
before-commended  very  curious  and  ingenious  Phy- 
fician  Dr.  Tancred  Roblnfon^  JVhat^  (faith  he,)  can 
fojfibly  be  better  contriv''d  for  animal  Motion  and 
Life^  than  the  quick  Circulation  of  the  Blood  and 
Fluids^  which  run  out  .of  Sight  in  capillar:^  Vejfehy 
and  very  minute  DuHs^  without  Impediment^  (except 
in  fome  Difeafes^)  being  all  direSled  to  their  peculiar 
Glands  and  Chanels^  for  the  different  Secretion^  fen- 
fible  and  infenfible ;  whereof  the  lafl  is  far  the  grea^ 
tefi  in  ^tantity  and  EffeUs^  as  to  Health  and  Sick- 
nefs^  acute  Difiempers  frequently  arifing  from  a  Di' 
minution  ofTranfpiration^  through  the  cutaneous  Chim- 
neysy  and  fome  chronical  Ones  from  an  Augment 
iation :  Whereas  ObftruSlions  in  the  Liver,  Panr 
creas,  and  other  Glands^  may  only  caufe  a  SchirruSy 
a  'Jaundice,  an  Ague,  a  Dropfy,  or  other  flow  Di- 
feafes.  So  an  Increafe  of  that  Secretion  may  accom- 
pany  the  general  Colliquations,  as  in  Fluxes,  he^lick 
Sweats  and  Coughs,  Diabetes,  and  other  Confump- 
tions.  What  a  mighty  Contrivance  is  there  to  pre- 
ferve  tbefe  due  Secretions  from  fhe  Blood,  (on  which 


(li)  At  enim  Opificis  indujlr'ti  maximum  eft  indicium  Cqutm- 
admodum  ante  fsfenumero  jam  diximusj  iis  qu*  ad  alium  u- 
fum  fuerunt  comparata,  ad  alias  auoque  utilitates  abuti,  nequg 
laborare  ut  fingulis  utilitatibus  ftngul;K  fuiiat  propria^  parti- 
mlas,    Galciu  ub.  fupr.  L.  9.  c.  5. 

■      ■   ■     -      -  u  ^  liff 


z^6  Of  the  Structure ^  dec.       BookV. 

Life  fo  much  depends^)  by  frequent  j^ttritions,  and 
Communications  of  the  Fluids  in  their  PaJJage  through 
the  Hearty  the  Lungs,  and  the  whole  Syfiem  of  the 
Mufcles?  IVhat  Meanders  and  Contortions  of  F'effeJs, 
in  the  Organs  of  Separation?  And,  What  a  Con- 
courfe  of  elajiick  Bodies  from  the  Air,  to  fupply  the 
Springs,  and  continual  Motions  of  fome  Parts,  not 
only  in  Sleep,  and  Refi ;  hut  in  long  'violent  Exercifes 
of  the  Mufcles  ?  Whofe  Force  drive  the  Fluids  round 
in  a  wonderful  rapid  Circulation  through  the  minutefi 
ftuhes,  ajfified  by  the  conjiant  Pabulum  of  the  At-- 
mofphere,  and  their  own  elafiick  Fibres,  which  im- 
prefs  that  Velocity  on  the  Fluids. 

Now  I  ha'oe  mentioned  fome  Ufes  of  the  Air,  in 
carrying  on  fever al  Fun^ions  ra  animal  Bodies  j  / 
may  add  the  Share  it  hath  in  all  the  Digefiions  of  the 
folid  and  fluid  Parts.  For  when  this  Syfiem  of  Air 
comes,  by  divine  Permittance,  to  be  corrupted  with 
poyfonous,  acrimonious  Steams,  cither  from  the  Earthy 
from  Merchandife,  or  infe6led  Bodies,  What  Ha^ 
vock  is  made  in  all  the  Operations  of  living  Crea- 
tures ?  The  Parts  gangrene,  and  mortify  under  Car- 
buncles, and  other  '7'okens :  Indeed,  the  whole  animal 
Oeconomy  is  ruined  j  of  fuch  Importance  is  the  Air  to 
all  the  Parts  of  it.    Thus  my  learned  Friend. 


CHAP, 


Chap.  VI.  -97 

CHAP.    VI. 
Of  the  Placing  the  Parts  of  Man's  Body. 


I 


N  this  Chapter,  I  propofe  to  confider  the  Lodg- 
ment of  the  curious  Parts  of  Man's  Body, 
which  is  no  Icfs  admirable  than  the  Parts  thcm- 
felvcs,  all  fct  in  the  moft  convenient  Places  of  the 
Body,  to  minifter  to  their  own  fcveral  Ufes  and 
Purpofcs,  and  aflift,  and  mutually  to  help  one  a- 
nother.  Where  could  thofe  faithful  Watchmen 
the  Eye,  the  Ear,  the  Tongue,  be  fo  commodi- 
oufly  plac'd,  as  in  the  upper  Part  of  the  Buildmg? 
Where  could  we  throughout  the  Body  find  fo 
proper  a  Part  to  lodge  four  of  the  five  Senfes,  as 
in  the»Head  (^),  near  the  Brain  (/>),  the  common 
Senfory,  a  Place  well  guarded,  and  of  little  other 
Ufe  than  to  be  a  Seat  to  thofc  Senfes  ?  And,  How 
could  we  lodge  the  fifth  Senfe,  that  of  Touching 
otherwife  (Oj  than  to  difpcrfc  it  to  all  Parts  of  the 


{a)  Senfui,  ifiterpretes  ac  nuntn  rerum,  in  captte,  tanquam 
in  arte,  m'tnfice  ad  ufus  necejjarios  CT*  f'aCli,  cr  colbcati  funt. 
Nam  octili  tanquatn  fpeculatores,  altijjmum  locum  obtintnt  ; 
ex  quo  piurima  confpiaenres,  fungantur  fuo  munerc.  Ht  anret 
cum  fontim  recipere  dehea7it,  qui  naturd  m  fuhlime  fertur  ;  re- 
^e  in  Hits  corporum  partialis  collocate  junt.  ClC.  de  Nat.  Dc- 
or.  L.  1.  c.  56.  ubi  plura  de  caeteris  Scnlibus. 

{b)  Galen  well  ohferves,  that  the  Nerves  minidring  to  Mo- 
tion, are  hard  and  firm,  to  be  leis  fubjedt  to  Injury;  but: 
thofe  miiiilirmg  to  Senfe,  are  foft  and  tender;  and  that  tor 
this  Reafnn  it  is,  that  four  of  the  five  Senfes  are  lodg'd  fo 
near  the  Brain,  viz..  partly  to  partake  of  the  Brain's  Sottnels 
and  Tendernefs,  and  partly  for  the  Sake  of  the  ftrong  Guard 
of  the  Skull.      Vid.  Gal.  de  Vf.  Part.  L.  8.  C.  5.  6.   > 

(f)  See  Book  IV.  Chap.  6.  Note  {c), 

Body  ? 


X98  Of  the  T lacing  Book  V. 

Body?  Where  cculd  we  plant  the  Hand  {d\  but 
juft  where  it  is,  to  be  ready  at  every  Turn,  on  all 
Ocgafions  of  Help  and  Defence,  of  Motion,  A6bi- 
on,  and  every  of  its  ufeful  Services?  Where  could 
we  fet  the  Legs  and  Feet,  but  where  they  are,  to 
bear  up,  and  handfomely  to  carry  about  the  Body  ? 
Where  could  we  lodge  the  Heart,  to  labour  about 
the  whole  Mafs  of  Blood,  but  in,  or  near  the 
Center  of  the  Body  {e)  ?  Where  could  we  find 
Room  for  that  noble  Engine  to  play  freely  in? 
Where  could  we  fo  well  guard  it  again  ft  external 
Harms,  as  it  is  in  that  very  Place  in  which  it  is 
lodg'd  and  fecur'd?  Where  could  we  more  com- 
modioufly  Place,  than  in  the  Thorax  and  Belly, 
the  ufeful  Fifcera  of  thofe  Parts,  fo  as  not  to  fwag, 
and  jog,  and  over-fet  the  Body,  and  yet  to  mini- 
iler  fo  harmonioufly,  as  rhey  do,  to  all  the  feve- 
ral  Ufes  of  Concoction,  Sanguification,  the  Sepa- 
ration of  various  Ferments  from  the  Blood,  for 
the  great  Ufes  of  Nature,  and  to  make  Dif^harges 
of  what  is  ufelefs,  or  would  be  burdenfome  or 
pernicious  to  the  Body  (/)  ?  How  could  we  plant 
the  curious  and  great  Variety  of  Bones,  and  of 
Mu(cles,  of  all  Sorts  and  Sizes,  necefiary,  as  I 
have  faid,  to  the  Support,  and  every  Motion  of 
the  Body?  Where  could  we  lodge  all  the  Arte- 
ries and  Veins,  to  convey  Nouriihment  j  and  the 
Nerves,  Senfation  throughout  the  Body  ?  Where, 
I  fay,  could  we  lodge  all  thefe  Implements  of  the 


(/i)  S^am  vera  aptcis,  quamque  mult  arum  art'iutn  lainijiras 
'Manus  natura  homini  dedit  ?  The  Particulars  of  which,  enu- 
merated by  him,  fee  in  Cic.  ubi  fupr.  c.  60. 

(0  See  Book  VI.  Chap.  5. 

(/)  Ut  in  Adificns  Architect  avertunt  ab  oculis  O"  nar'ibm 
dominorum  ea,  qui  profluentia  necejfario  tetr't  ejfent  aliqutd  ha- 
bitura ;  fie  natura  res  fimlles  (foil,  excrementa)  procul  amandn- 
-vit  a  fenfibsti.    Cicer.  de  Nat.  Dsor.  L.  z.  c.  j.6. 


Pody, 


Chap. VI.  oftheTartsofMatisBody.      2,99 
Body,    to    perform   their   fevcral   Offices?    How 
could  we  fecuje  and  guard  them  fo  well,  as  in  the 
verv  Places,  and  in  the  felf  fame  Manner  in  which 
they  arc  already  plac'd  in  the  Body  ?  And  laftly, 
to  name  no  more,  What  Covering,  what  Fence 
could  we  find  out  for  the  whole  Body,  better  than 
that  of  Nature's  own  providing,    the  Skin  C?)? 
How  could  we  fhape  it  to,  or  brace  it  about  eve- 
ry Part  better,  either  for  Convenience  or  Orna- 
ment?   What  better  Texture  could  we  give  it, 
which  although  Icfs  obdurate  and  firm,  than  that 
of  fomc  other  Animals  j  yet  is  fo  much  the  more 
fcnfible  of  every  touch,  and  more  compliant  with 
every  Motion?  And  being  eafily  defenfible  by  the 
Power  of  Man's   Reafon  and   Art,    is  therefore 
much  the  propercll  Tegument  for  a  reafonablc 
Creature. 


{g)  Compare  here  Galen s  Obfervations  dt  Uf.  Part.  L.  if . 
C.  IS-  Alfo  L.  1.  c.  6.  See  alfo  Cowper.  Anat.  where  ia 
Tab.  4.  are  very  elegant  Cuts  of  the  Skin  in  divers  Parts  of 
the  Body,  drawn  from  microfcopical  Views;  as  alfo  of  the 
tap'tlls,  Pyramidales,  the  [udoriferous  Glandi  and  Veffels,  the 
Halrst  8cc. 


CHAP. 


§00  BookV. 

CHAP.    VII.  • 

Of  the  Provision  in  Man's  Boay  againft 
Evils. 

HAving  taking  a  tranfient  View  of  the  Stru- 
6ture,  and  Lodgment  of  the  Parts  of  hu- 
man'Bodies  >  let  us  next  confider  the  admirable 
Provifion  that  is  made  throughout  Man's  Body, 
to  ftave  off  Evils,  and  to  difcharge  {a)  them  when 
befallen.  For  the  Prevention  of  Evils,  we  may 
take  the  Inftances  already  given,  of  the  Situation 
of  thofe  faithful  Sentinels,  the  Eye,  the  Ear,  and 
Tongue,  in  the  fuperiour  Part  of  the  Body,  the 
better  to  defcry  Dangers  at  a  Diftance,  and  to 
call  out  prefently  for  Help.  And  how  well  fitu- 
ated  is  the  Hand  to  be  a  fure  and  ready  Gmrd  to 
the  Body,  as  well  as  the  faithful  Performer  of 
snoft  of  its  Services  ?  The  Brain,  the  Nerves,  the 
Arteries,   the  Heart   {b\   the   Lungs  >   and  in  a 


{a)  One  of  Nature's  moft  conftant  Methods  here,  is  hj 
the  Glands,  and  the  Secretions  made  by  them ;  the  Particu- 
lars of  which  being  too  long  for  thefe  Notes,  I  ftiall  refer 
to  the  modern  Anatomifts,  who  have  written  on  thefe  Sub- 
jeds;  and  indeed,,  who  are  the  only  Men  that  have  done  it 
tolerably:  Particularly,  our  learned  Drs.-Coc^^«r«,  Keil,  Mor- 
tand,  and  others  at  Home  and  Abroad:  An  Abridgment  of 
whofe  Opinions  and  Obfervations,  for  the  Reader's  Eafe, 
may  be  met  with  in  Dr.  Harris's  Lex.  Tech.  Vol.  2,.  under 
the  Words  Glands,  and  Animal  Secretion. 

(h)  In  Man,  and  moft  other  Animals,  the  Heart  hath  the 
Guard  of  Bones;  but  in  the  Lamprey,  which  hath  no  Bones, 
^no  not  fo  much  as  a  Back-bone,)  the  Heart  is  very  firangely 
fecur'd,  and  lies  immur'd,  or  capfulated  in  a  Cartilage,  or  grif- 
ly  Subjlance,  which  includes  the  Heart,  and  its  Auricle,  ws  the 
Skull — '—doth  the  Brain  in  other  Animals.  Powers  Microf. 
<;)bfer.  II, 

♦  6  Word 


Chap.  VII.  Trovifions  agatnfl  Evils.         301 

Word,  all  the  principal  Parts,  how  well  are  they 
barricaded,    cither  with    llrong   Bones,    or   deep 
Lodements  in  the  Ficili,  or  fonie  luch  the  wifcfV, 
and  titteft  Method,  moll  agreeable  to  the  Office 
and  Aftion  of  the  Part?  Bcfidcs  which,  for  grea- 
ter Precaution,   and  a  farther  Security,    what  an 
incomparable  Provifion  hath  the   infinite  Contri- 
ver of  Man's  Body  made  for  the  Lofs  of,  or  any 
Defect  in  fome  of  the  Parts  we  can  leaft  fpare,  by 
doubling   them  ?    By  giving    us   two  Eyes,    two 
Ears,   two  Hands,   two  Kidneys,    two  Lobes  of 
the  Lungs,  Pairs  of  the  Nerves,  and  many  Rami- 
fications of  the  Arteries  and  Veins  in  the  flefliy 
Parts,  that  there  may  not  be  a  Defed  of  Nou- 
rifliment  of  the  Parts,  in  Cafes  of  Amputation,  or 
Wounds,  or  Ruptures  of  any  of  the  Veflels. 

And  as  Man's  Body  is  admirably  contriv'd,  and 
made  to  prevent  Evils  j  fo  no  lefs  Art  and  Cauti- 
on hath  been  us'd  to  get  rid  of  them,  when  they 
do  happen.  VVheh  by  any  Misfortune,  Wounds 
or  Hurts  do  befal-,  or  when  by  our  own  wicked 
Fooleries  and  Vices,  we  pull  down  Difcafes  and 
Mifchiefs  upon  our  fclves,  what  Emunftories  (0, 
what  admirable  Paflages  {d\  are  difpei^'d  through- 
out 


(c)  Ktrt  [from  the  Puftules  he  obfcrv'd  in  Monoraotapa,] 
-were  Grounds  to  admire  the  Contrivance  of  our  Blood,  ivhhi> 
on  fome  L/Ccafions,  fo  foon  as  any  Thing  dtjiruiiive  to  the  Cor." 
flttution  of  It,  comes  into  it,  immediately  by  an  nuefiine  Com- 
motion, endeavoureth  to  thru  ft  it  forth^  and  is  not  only  freed 
ft  cm  the   new  Gueft ;  but  jcmetimes  what  Itkczvife  77tay  haze 

lain  lurking  therein for  a  great  while.     And  from  heme 

it  comes  to  pafs^  that  moft  Parr  of  Mtdianes,  when  duly  rd- 
mmiftred,  aie  not  only  fent  out  of  the  Body  themjelues;  out 
Itktwife  great  ^luantines  of  morlijick  Matter  ••  As  m  baliva/i- 
«»,  Sic.     Dr.  thane's  Voy.  to  Jamaica,  p.  15. 

(d)  ValfalvA  dilcover'd  fome  PalVigcs  into  the  Region  of 
l,he  Ear-drum,  of  mighty  XJ'ic,  (amorg  others,)  to  make  L'li- 
charges  of  Bruifcs,  impoflhumcs,  or  any  purulent,-  or  :.  <  r- 


3 ox  Trovijions  agatnft  Evils.    BookV. 

out  the  Body}  what  incomparable  Methods  doth 
Nature  take  {e) }  what  vigorous  Efforts  is  fhe  ena- 
bled 


bifick  Matter  from  the  Brain,  and  Parts  of  the  Head.  Of 
which  he  gives  two  Examples :  One,  a  Perfon,  who  from  a 
Blow  on  his  Head,  had  difmal  Pains  therein,  grew  Speech- 
lefs,  and  lay  under  an  abfolutc  Suppreffion  and  Decay  of  his 
Strength  ;  but  found  certain  ReHef,  whenever  he  had  a  Flux 
of  Blood,  or  purulent  Matter  out  of  his  Ear ;  which  after 
his  Death  Valfalva  difcdver'd,  was  through  thofe  Paffages. 

The  other  was  an  apople5lical  Cafe,  wherein  he  found  a 
large  Quantity  of  extravafated  Blood,  making  Way  from  the 
Ventricles  of  the  Brain,  through  thofe  fame  PafTages.  Val- 
fat.  de  Aure  hum.  c.  1.  §.  14.  and  c.  5.  §,  8. 

{e)  Hippocrates  Lib.  de  Mimentis,  tak^s  notice  of  the  Saga- 
city of  Nature,  in  finding  out  Methods  and  Paflages  for  the 
difcharging  Things  ofFenfive  to  the  Body,  of  which  the  late 
learned  and  ingenious  Biftiop  of  Clogher,  in  Ireland,  (Boyle,) 
gave  this  remarkable  Inftance,  to  my  very  curious  and  inge- 
nious Neighbour  and  Friend,  D'  Acre  Barret,  Efq;  "v'tz..  That 
in  the  Plague  Year,  a  Gentleman  at  the  Univerfity,  had  a 
large  Plague  Sore  gather'd  under  his  Arm,  which,  when  they 
expefted  it  would  have  broken,  difcharg'd  it  felf  by  a  more 
than  ordinary  large  and  foetid  Stool;  the  Sore  having  no  o- 
ther  Vent  for  it,  and  immediately  becoming  found  and  well 
thereon. 

Like  to  which,  is  the  Stofy  of  Jof._Latohm{,  of  a  Soldi- 
er of  thirty  five  Years  of  Age,  who  had  a  Swelling  in  his 
right  Hip,  accompany'd  with  great  Pain,  crc  By  the  Ufe 
of  emollient  Medicines,  having  ripen'd  the  Sore,  the  Sur- 
geon intended  the  next  Day  to  have  open'd  it;  but  about 
Midnight,  the  Patient  having  great  Provocations  to  ftool, 
disburthen'd  himfelf  three  Times;  immediately  upon  which, 
both  the  Tumor  and  Pain  ccas'd,  and  thereby  difappointed 
the  Surgeon's  Intentions.  Ephem.  Germ.  Anno  1690.  Obf. 
49.  More  fuch  Initances  we  find  of  Mr.  Tonget  in  Philof. 
TranfaSl.  N^.  313.  But  indeed  there  are  fo  many  Examples 
of  this  Nature  in  our  Phil.  Tranf.  in  the  Ephem.  German. 
Tho.  Bartholine,  Rhodius,  Stnnertm,  Hildanus,  &c.  that  it 
•would  be  endlefs  to  recount  them.  Some  have  fwallow'd 
Knives,  Bodkins,  Needles  and  Pins,  Bullets,  Pebbles,  and 
twenty  other  fuch  Things  as  could  not  find  a  PalTage  the  or- 
dinary Way,  but  have  met  with  an  Exit  through  the  Bladder, 
or  fome  other  Way  of  Nature's  ow^n  providing.  But  pafling 
over  many  Particulars,  I  fliall  only  give  one  Inftance  merci 
6  becaUfe 


Chap.  VII.  Trovljions  againft  Evils.         303 

bled  to  make,  to  difcharge  the  peccant  Humours, 
to  correft  the  morbifick  Matter  ;  and  in  a  Word, 
to  fet  all  Things  right  again?  But  here  we  had 
bed  take  the  Advice  of  a  learned  Phyfician  in  the 
Cafe:  "  The  Body,  (faith  he,)  is  fo  contriv'd,  as 
"  to  be  well  enough  fecur'd  againll  the  Mutati- 
"  ons  in  the  Air,  and  the  lelTer  Errors  we  daily 
*'  run  upon;  did  we  not  in  the  Excefles  of  Eat- 
«  ing.  Drinking,  Thinking,  Loving,  Hating,  or 
"  fome  other  Folly,  let  in  the  Enemy,  or  lay  vio- 
"  lent  Hands  upon  our  felves.  Nor  is  the  Body 
"  fitted  only  to  prevent  5  but  alfo  to  cure,  or  mi- 
"  tigate  Difeafes,  when  by  thefe  Follies  brought 
"  upon  us.     In  moft  Wounds,  if  kept  clean,  and 

"  from  the  Air, the  Flefh  will  glew  together, 

*'  with  its  own  native  Balm.  Broken  Bones  arc 
"  cemented  with  the  Callus^  which  themfelves 
"  help  to  make".  And  fo  he  goes  on  with  am- 
ple Inllanccs  in  this  Matter,  too  many  to  be  here 
fpecify'd  (/).  Among  which  he  inllanceth  in  the 
Diftempers  of  our  Bodies,  flievving  that  even  ma- 
ny of  them  are  highly  ferviceable  to  the  Difcharge 
of  malignant  Humours,  and  preventing  greater 
Evils. 

And  no  lefs  kind  than  admirable  is  this  Con- 
trivance of  Man's  Body,  that  even  its  Diftempers 


becaufc  it  may  be  a  good  Caution  to  fome  Perfons,  that 
thefe  Papers  may  probably  fall  into  the  Hands  of;  and  that 
is,  the  Danger  of  fwallowing  Phm-ftoncs,  Prune-fionts,  &c. 
Sir  Francis  Butler's  Lady  had  many  Prune  JJones  that  made 
Way  through  an  Abfcefs  near  her  Navel.  Phibf.  Jranf.  N". 
265,  where  are  other  fuch  like  Examples.  More  alio  may 
be  found  in  N^.  281,  304,  trc  And  at  this  Day,  a  young 
Man,  living  not  far  olf  mc,  laboureth  under  very  trouble- 
some and  dangerous  Symptoms,  from  the  Stones  of  itbtt 
and  BuUact,  which  he  fwallow'd  eight  or  ten  Years  ago. 
(/)  Grew'*  CofmoL  §.  zS.  19. 

iliould 


304  ^rov'tjions  agatnfi  Evils.     BookV. 

ihould  many  Times  be  its  Cure  (^)  j  that  when  the 
Enemy  lies  lurking  within  to  deftroy  us,  there 
fliould  be  fuch  a  Reluftancy,  and  all  Nature  exci- 
ted with  its  utmoft  Vigour  to  expel  him  thence. 
To  which  Purpofe,  even  Pain  it  felF  is  of  great 
and  excellent  Ufe,  not  only  in  giving  us  Notice 
of  the  Prefence  of  the  Enemy,  but  by  exciting  us 
to  ufe  our  utmoft  Diligence  and  Skill  to  root  out 
fo  troublefome  and  dellru6txve  a  Companion. 


ig)  Nor  are  Difeafes  themfelves  ufelefs  :  For  the  Blood  in  a 
Tever,  if  well  govern  d,  like  Wine  upon  the  Fret,  difchargeth 
it  felf  of  all  heterogeneous  Mixtures ;  and  Nature,  the  Difeafe, 
and  Remedies,  clean  all  the  Rooms  of  the  Houfe  ;  whereby  that 
which  threatens  Death,  tends,  in  Conclufion,  to  the  prolong- 
ing of  Life.     Grew  ubi  fupr.  §.  52. 

And  as  Difeafes  minifter  fometimes  to  Health;  fo  to  0- 
ther  good  Ufes  in  the  Body,  fuch  as  quickning  the  Senfes : 
Of  which  take  thefe  Inftances  relating  to  the  Hearing  and 

Sight.  .  _#.     , 

A  very  ingenious  Phyfician  falltn^intd  an  odd  Kind  of  Fe- 
*v£r',  had  his  Senfe  of  Hearing  thereby  made  fo  very  nice  and 
tender,  that  he  very  plainly  heard  foft  Whifpers,  that  zvere 
made  at  a  confiderable  Dijiance  off,  and  zvhich  were  not  in  ths 
leaji  perceiv'd  by  the  Byfianders,  nor  vjotild  have  been  by  him 
before  his  Sicknefs. 

A  Gentleman  of  eminent  Parts  and  Note,  during  a  Diflem* 
per  he  had  in  his  Eyes,  had  his  Organs  of  Sight  brought  to  be 
fo  tender,  that  both  his  Friends,  and  himfelf  have  affur'd  me, 
that  when  he  wak'd  in  the  Night,  he  could  for  a  while  plainly 
fee  and  diflinguifl}  Colours,  as  well  m  other  ObjeSis,  difcerni- 
hle  by  the  Eye,  as  xvus  more  than  once  try  d.  Boy),  deter,  nat. 
of  Effluv.  ch.  4- 

Daniel  Frafer cominud  Deaf  and  Dumb  from  his  Birth^ 

till  the  I7tl"-  Year  of  his  Age Af^^^  his  Recovery  from  a  Fe- 
ver, he  perceivd  a  Motion  in  his  Brain,  which  was  very  unea- 
fy  to  him ;  and  afterwards  he  began  to  hear,  and  in  Procefs  of 
Time,  to  underfiand  Speech,  &:c.    "Vid.  Philof.  Tranf.  No.  311. 


CHAP. 


Chap.Vlir.  "  30J 


CHAP.    VIII. 

Of  the  Confent  between  the  Parts  of 
Man's  Body. 


IT  is  an  admirable  Provifion  the  merciful  Crea- 
tor hath  made  for  the  Good  of  Man's  Body, 
by  the  Confent  and  Harmony  between  the  Parts 
thereof:  Of  which  let  us  take  St.  PaiW^  Defcrip- 
tion,  in  i  Cor.  xii.  8.  But  noiv  hath  God  fet  the 
Members^  every  one  of  them  in  the  Body^  as  it  hath 
pleased  him.  And  {f.  21.)  The  Eye  cannot  fay  unto 
the  Hand^  I  have  no  need  of  thee :  Nor  again,  the 
Head  to  the  Feet^  I  have  no  need  of  you.  But  fuch 
is  the  Confent  of  all  the  Parts,  or  as  the  Apoftle 
wordeth  it,  God  hath  fo  temper'' d  the  Body  together^ 
that  the  Members  fhould  have  the  fame  Care  one  for 
another .^  ^.  2^.  So  that  whether  one  Member  fiif' 
fer^  all  the  Members  fuffer  with  it  -,  or  one  Member 
be  honoured^  (or  affected  with  any  Good,)  all  the 
Members  rejoyce,  [and  fympathize]  with  it^  ^.  i6. 

This  mutual  Accord,  Confent  and  Sympathy  of 
the  Members,  there  is  no  Reafon  to  doubt  («),  is 
made  by  the  Commerce  of  the  Nerves  (^),   and 


{a)  See  Book  4.  Chap.  8. 

{b)  Tria  propoftta  ipji  Naturt  in  Nervorum  difiributione  fue- 
runt.  I.  IJt  fenforiis  infirumentis  Senfum  impertiret.  1.  Ut 
motortis  Aiotum.  3.  Ut  omnibus  aliis  [partibus]  daret,  ut  qud 
fi  dolorem  adferrent,  dignofcerent.  And  atterwards,  Si  quis 
in  diffeCliunibus  fpe£lavitt  confideravitque  juftene,  an  Jecus  Sa~ 
tura  Nervos  non  tddem  menfurd  omnibus  partibus  dijlnbutrit, 
fed  aliis  quidem  liberalius,  aliis  vera  parcius,  eadem  cum  Htp' 
focrate,  velit  noli:,  dt  Naturd  omnino  pronunciakity  quod  eA 
fcilicet  fagax,  jujla^  artifictofa,  animaliumque  provida  tjt.  Ga- 
len, dc  Uf.  Part.  L.  j.  c.  s>. 

X  their 


jo6  Confent  of  the  Tarts.      BookV. 

their  artificial  Poficions,  and  curious  Ramificati- 
ons throughout  the  wjlole  Body,  which  is  admi- 
rable and  nicomparable,  and  might  deferve  a  Place 
in  this  Survey,  as  greatly,  and  manifettly  fetting 
forth  the  Wifdom  and  Benignity  of  the  great  Cre- 
ator} but  that  to  give  a  Defcription  thereof  from 
the  Origin  of  the  Nerves,  in  the  Brain^  the  Cere- 
helium  and  Spine,  and  fo  through  every  Part  of 
the  Body,  would  be  tedious,  and  intrench  too 
much  upon  the  Anatomift's  Province;  And  there-* 
fore  one  Inftance  fhall  fuffice  for  a  Sample  of  the 
Whole  J  and  that  fhall  be,  (what  was  promis'd  be- 
fore (f),  the  great  Sympathy  occafion'd  by  the 
fifth  Pair  of  Nerves ;  which  1  chufe  to  inllance 
in,  rather  than  the  Par  vagum^  or  any  other  of  the 
Nerves  j  becaufe  although  we  may  have  lefs  varie- 
ty of  noble  Contrivance  and  Art,  than  in  that 
Pair  5  yet  we  fhall  find  enough  for  our  Purpofe, 
and  which  may  be  difpatch'd  in  fewer  Words. 
Now  this  fifth  Conjugation  of  Neri'es,  is  branch'd 
to  the  Ball,  the  Mufcles,  and  Glands  of  the  Eye  j 
to  the  Ear}  to  the  Jaws,  the  Gums,  and  Teeth  j 
to  the  Mufcles  of  the  Lips  {d)  j  to  the  Tonfils, 
the  Palate,  the  Tongue,  and  the  Parts  of  the 
Mouth  i  to  the  Pracordia  alfo,  in  ibme  Meafure, 
by  inofculating  with  one  of  its  Nerves  j  and  laftlyj 


(c)   Book  4.  Chap.  5. 

\d)  Dr.  Willii  gives  the  Reafon,  cur  tvHtua  Amafiorum  of- 
cula  Libiis  irfi(>re[fa,  turn  pmcordia,  turn  genu  alia  afficitndo,  a- 
fnoran  ac  Libuii/icm  tarn  facile  irritant,  to  be  from  the  Con- 
Jeni  of  thofe  Parts,  by  the  Branches  ol:"  this  fifth  Pair.  Nerv. 
H^fcr.  c.  iz. 

And  Dr.  Sachs  judges  it  to  be  from  the  Confent  of  the  i«»- 
Vui  Oris  cum  Labiis  Uteri,  that  in  April  1669,  a  certain  bree-4- 
ing  Lady,  being  affrighted  with  feeing  one  that  had  fcabby 
i.ips,  which  they  told  her  were  occaiion'd  by  a  peftilential 
Fever,  had  fiich  like  Piifiules  brake  out  in  the  Labia  Uteri. 
ivpiw^n.  Germ.  T,  i^  Obf.  io. 

to 


Chap.  Vlir.  Confent  of  the  Tarts.  307 

to  the  Mufcles  of  the  F.icc,  particularly  the  Cheeks, 
whofc  fanguifcrous  VeHlls  it  twifts  about. 

From  hence  it  comes  to  pals,  that  there  is  a 
great  Confent  and  Sympathy  {c)  between  thcfc 
Parts  >  fo  that  a  guftablc  Thing  feen  or  fmelt,  ex- 
cites the  Appetite,  and  affefts  the  Glands  and 
Parts  of  the  Mouth  ;  that  a  Thing  (een  or  heard, 
that  is  fhamcful,  afFeds  the  Cheeks  -with  modeft 
Bluflies ;  but  on  the  contrary,  if  it  pleafes  and 
tickles  the  Fancy,  that  it  afVe£ls  the  Pr^ecordia^ 
and  Mufcles  of  the  Mouth  and  Face  with  Laugh- 
ter j  but  a  Thing  caufing  Sadnefs  and  Melancholy, 
doth  accordingly  exert  it  fclf  upon  the  Pracordia^ 
and  dcmonltrate  it  fclf  by  cauling  the  Glands  of 
the  Eyes  to  emit  Tears  (/),  and  the  Mufcles  of 
the  Face  to  put  on  the  forrowful  Afpeft  of  Cry- 
ing. Hence  alfo  that  torvous  four  Look  produc'd 
by  Anger  and  Hatred:  And  that  gay  and  pleafing 
Countenance  accompanying  Love  and  Hope.  And 
in  fhort,  it  is  by  Means  of  this  Communication  of 
the  NenTS,  that  whatever  affeds  the  Soul,  is  de- 
monftrated,  (whether  we  will  or  no,)  by  a  con- 
fcntaneous  Difpofirion  of  the  Procardia  within, 
and  a  fuitable  Configuration  of  the  Mufcles  and  Parts 
of  the  Face  without.  And  an  admirable  Contri- 
vance of  the  great  GOD  of  Nature  this  is ;  That 
as  a  Face  is  given  to  Man,  and  as  Pliny  faith  (^), 
to  Man  alone  o-f  all  Creatures ;  fo  it  ihould  be,  (as 
he  obferves,)  the  Index  of  Sorrow  and  Chearfuhtcfs^ 


{e)  Confuk  Willis  ubi  fupra. 

if)  Tears  ferve  not  only  to  moirtca  the  Eye,  to  cle«n 
and  brighten  the  Cornta,  and  to  exprefs  our  Griet;  but  alfo 
to  alleviate  it,  according  to  thai  of  L'lyjfgs  to  Androm^thf, 
in  ^cnecs's  Troas,  "p.  761. 

'Tempus  moramque  dab'wim,  arbitrio  tu) 
Implere  latrytnis :   Fletus  drumnm  lev§t. 
Or)  PUn.  Nat.  Hift.  L,  11.  c.  37. 

X    Z  6f 


3o8  Confent  of  the  Tarts.      Book  V. 

of  Compajfion  and  Severity.  In  its  afcendiyig  Part 
is  the  Brow^  and  therein  a  Part  of  the  Mind  too. 
Therewith  we  deny^.  therewith  we  confent.  With 
this  it  is  we  fhew  our  Pride.,  which  hath  its  Source 
in  another  Place ;  but  here  its  Seat :  In  the  Heart  it 
hath  its  Birth;  but  here  it  abides  and  dwells ;  and 
that  hecaufe  it  could  find  no  other  Part  throughout 
the  Body  higher^  or  more  craggy  {h)^  where  it  might 
re  fide  alone. 

Thus  I  have  difpatch'd  what  I  fhall  remark  con- 
cerning the  Soul  and  Body  of  Man.  There  are 
divers  other  Things,  which  well  deferve  a  Place 
in  this  Survey  i  and  thefe  that  I  have  taken  No- 
tice of,  deferv'd  to  have  been  enlarged  upon :  But 
"what  hath  been  faid,  may  fuffice  for  a  Tafte  and 
Sample  of  this  admirable  Piece  of  God's  Handy- 
work;  at  leaft  ferve  as  a  Supplement  to  what  o- 
thers  have  fliid  before  me.  For  which  Reafon  I 
have  endeavouT'd  to  fay  as  little  wittingly  as  I 
could,  of  what  they  have  taken  Notice  of,  except 
where  the  Thread  of  my  Difcourfe  laid  a  Necef- 
{ity  upon  me. 

(^h)  Nihil  altius  fimul  abruptiufe^ue  invenlt. 


CHAP.    IX. 

Of  the  Variety  of  Mens  Faces,  Voices, 
and  Hand- Writing. 

HERE  I  would  have  put  an  End  to  my  Ob- 
fervations  relating  to  Man;  but  that  there 
are  three  Things  fo  expreflly  declaring  the  Divine 
Management  and  Concurrence,  that  I  fhall  juft 
mention  them,  although  taken  Notice  of  more 
amply  by  others  -,  and  that  is,  The  great  Vari- 
ety 


C^ap.  IX.  The  Variety  ofMeiCs  Faces^  8cc.  3  09 

cty  throughout  the  World  of  Mens  Faces  («), 
Voices  (/^),  nnd  Hand- writing.  Had  Man's  Bo- 
dy !)ccn  made  according  to  any  of  the  atheiftical 
Schemes,  or  any  other  Method  than  that  of  the 
infinite  Lord  of  the  World,  this  wife  Variety 
would  never  have  been  :  But  Mens  Faces  would 
have  been  call:  in  the  fame,  or  not  a  very  different 
Mould,  their  Organs  of  Speech  would  have  found* 
ed  the  lame,  or  not  fo  great  a  Variety  of  Notes-, 
and  the  fame  Structure  of  Mufclcs  and  Nerves, 
would  have  given  the  Hand  the  fame  Direction 
in  Writing.  And  in  this  Cafe,  what  Confufion, 
what  Diiturbance,  what  Mifchicfs  would  the 
World  eternally  have  lain  under  ?  No  Security 
could  have  been  to  our  Perfons  j  no  Certainty,  no 
Enjoyment  of  our  Pofleflions  (c) ;  no  Juftice  be- 
tween 


(a)  If  the  Reader  hath  a  Mind  to  fee  Examples  of  Men's 
Likenefs,  he  may  confult  VaUr.  Maximus,  (L.  9.  c.  14  )  con- 
cerning the  Likenefs  of  Pompey  the  Great,  and  Vibius  and 
Publkiui  Libertinus ;  as  alfo  of  Pornpey  the  Father,  who  got 
the  Name  of  Coquas,  he  being  hke  Menogena  the  Cook  ; 
with  divers  others. 

{b)  As  the  Difference  of  Tone  makes  a  Difference  between 
every  Man's  Voice,  of  the  fame  Country,  yea,  Family;  lb 
a  different  Dialed  and  Pronunciation,  differs  Perfons  of  di- 
vers Countries;  yea,  Perfons  of  one  and  ihe  fame  Country, 
fpeaking  the  fame  Language :  Thus  in  Greece,  there  were 
the  lonkk,  Dorick,  Attick,  and  JEolick  Dialeds.  So  in  Great- 
Britain,  befides  the  grand  Diverfity  of  Englijh  and  Scotch,  the 
different  Counties  vary  very  much  in  their  Pronunciation, 
Accent  and  Tone,  although  all  one  and  the  fame  Language. 
And  the  Way  of  the  GiUadites  proving  the  Efhrairnite<,  Judg. 
xii.  6.  by  the  Pronunciation  of  Shibboleth,  with  a  Schin,  ox 
Siiboletb  with  a  Samech,  is  well  known.  So  a  J.apide  faith, 
the  Flemings  prove  whether  a  Man  be  a  Trenchman  or  not, 
by  bidding  him  pronounce,  Acht  en  tachtsntuh  ;  which  they 
pronounce,  Acl  en  taclentic,  by  Reafon  they  can't  pronounce 
the  Afpirate  h. 

(c)  Regi  Ant'tocho  unus  ex  Aqual'tluS'-—— nomine  Artemon, 
ferquam  fimilis  futjfe  traditur.  'jlifept  Laodice,  uxor  Antiochi, 
fpterfttlo  viroy   dijimulandt  fcelens  gratia,  in  leciulo  fenndt 

X  3  <i»''-i* 


310  The  Variety  of  Men's  Faces,  ^c.  BookV. 

tween   Man  and  Man  j    no  Di{lin£tion  between 
Good  and  Bad,   between  Friends  and  Foes,    be- 
tween Father  and  Child,  Husband  and  Wife,  Male 
or  Female  5  but  all  would  have  been  turn'd  topfey- 
turvey,  by  being  expos'd  to  the  Malice  of  the  En- 
vious and  lU-natur'd,  to  the  Fraud  and  Violence  of 
Knaves  and  Robbers,  to  the  Forgeries  of  the  craf- 
ty Cheat,  to  the  Lulls  of  the  Effeminate  and  De- 
bauch'd,  and  what  not !  Our  Courts  of  Juftice  (^), 
can  abundantly  teftify  the  dire  Effefts  of  miftaking 
Men's  Faces,  of  counterfeiting  their  Hands,  and 
forging  Writings.     But  now,  as  the  infinitely  wife 
Creator  and  Ruler  hath  order'd  the  Matter,  every 
Man's  Face  can  diftinguifli  him  in  the  Light,  and 
his  Voice  in  the  Dark  j  his  Hand-writing  can  fpeak 
for  him  though  abfcnt,    and  be  his  Witnefs,  and 
fecure  his  Contracts  in  future  Generations.     A  ma- 
nifeft,   as  well  as  admirable  Indication  of  the  di- 
vine Super- intendence  and  Management  {e). 


quafi  ipfufn  Regem  Agrum  collocavh.  Adm'tjfamq^,  univerfum 
fopulum,  cj/  fermcne  ejus  c  -vultu  coKfimih  fefellit :  credide- 
runtque  homines  ab  Antiocho  monente  Laodtcen  C7  natos  ejut 
[ib't  commendari.     Valer.  Max.  ib. 

(d)  Sluid  TrebeUius  Calca .'  qtiam  affevtranter  fefe  Clodutm 
fuUt !  er  quidem  dum  de  bojih  ejus  contetidit,  in  centumvirale 
judicium  adeo  favorahilis  defcendit,  ut  vix  juftts  O'  Aquis  fen- 
tentiis  confiematio  pcpuli  ullum  relinqueret  locum.  Itt  ilia  ta- 
tnen  quajiione  neque  calumnia  pet  it  or  is,  neque  violentid  flebis 
judicantium  religio  cejfit.     Val.  Max.  ib.  c.  15. 

(e)  To  the  foregoing  Initances  of  divine  Management, 
with  relation  to  the  political  State  of  Man,  I  fiiall  add  ano- 
ther Thing,  that  1  confefs  hath  always  feem'd  to  me  fome- 
what  odd,  but  very  providential;  and  that  is,  the  Value  that 

,  Mankind,  at  leaft  the  civiliz'd  Pare  of  them,  have  in  all  A- 
ges  put  upon  Gems,  and  the  purer  finer  Metals,  Gold  and 
Silver;  fo  as  to  think  them  equivalent  unto,  and  exchange 
them  for  Things  of  the  greateft  Ufe  for  Food,  Cloathing, 
and  all  other  Neceffaries  and  Conveniences  of  Life.  Where- 
as thofe  Things  themfelves  are  of  very  little,  if  any  Ul'e  in 
Phyfick,  Food,  Building  or  Cloathing,  otherwife  than  for 
Ornament,  or  to  miniiler  to  Luxury ;    as  Suetonius  tells  us 

of 


Chap.  IX.  The  Variety  of  Men's  Faces,  &c.  3 1 1 

of  Ntro,  who  filh'd  with  a  Net  gilt  with  Gold,  and  lliod  his 
Mules  with  Silver;  but  his  VVite  Poppta,  iViod  her  Horfcs 
with  Gold.  I'it.  Ner.  c.  30.  Plin.  N.  H.  L.  33.  c.  1 1.  So  the 
fame  Suetonius  tells  US,  3ul.  C4far  hy  in  a  Bed  of  Gold,  and 
rode  in  a  lilver  Chariot.  But  Heliogabalus  rode  in  one  of 
Gold,  and  had  his  Clofeftool  Pans  of  the  fame  Metal,  And 
Pitny  faith,  Vafa  Coquinaria  ex  argento  Calvtu  Orator  fieri 
queritur.  ibid.  Neither  are  fhofe  precious  Things  of  grea- 
ter Ule  to  the  making  of  Vedcls,  and  Utenfils,  (unlefs  feme 
little  Niceties  and  Curiofities>)  by  Means  of  their  Beauty, 
Imperdibility,  and  Du(5tility.  Of  which  lall,  the  great  Mr. 
Bo'^le  hath  among  others,  ihefe  two  Inllance?,  in  his  I'fJ'ay 
Mbout  the  Subtilry  of  Effluviums.  Chap  1.  Silver,  whofc 
Du^fility,  And  Tra^ility,  are  very  much  inferior  to  thofe  oj 
Cold,   was,  by  my  procuring,  draivn  out  to  fo  /lender  a  Hire, 

that a  fingte  Grain  of  it  atnonmed  to  ttventy  feven  Veet, 

As  to  Gold,  he  demonftrates  it  poflible  to  extend  an  Ounce 
thereof,  to  reach  to  ']~-]Cqo  Feet,  or  155  Miles  and  an  half, 
yea,  to  an  incredibly  greater  I^ength. 

And  as  to  Gems,  the  very  Stories  that  are  told  of  their 
prodigious  Virtues,  are  an  Argument,  that  they  have  very 
little,  or  none  more  than  other  hard  Stones.  That  a  Uta- 
mond  (liould  difcover  whether  a  Woman  be  true  or  falfe  to 
her  Hufband's  Bed;  caufe  Love  between  Man  and  Wife; 
fccure  agajnrt  Witchcraft,  Plague  and  Poifons;  that  the  Ru- 
by fliould  difpofe  to  Cheerfulnefs,  caufe  pleafant  Dreams, 
change  its  Colour  againft  a  Misfortune  befalling,  c^r.  that 
the  Sapphire  ftiould  grow  foul,  and  lofe  its  Beauty,  when 
vv'orn  by  one  that  is  Leacherous;  that  the  Emerald  fliould 
fly  to  pieces,  if  it  touch  the  Skin  of  any  unchaftc  Perfon 
in  the  Aft  of  Uncleannefs :  That  the  Chryfolite  fliould  lofe 
its  Colour,  if  Poyfon  be  on  the  Table,  and  recover  it  again 
when  the  Poyfon  is  off:  And  to  name  no  more,  that  the 
Turcoife,  (and  the  fame  is  faid  of  a  gold  Ring,)  ftiould  ftrike 
the  Hour  when  hung  over  a  drinking  Glafs,  and  much  more 
to  the  fame  Purpofe :  All  thefe,  and  many  other  fuch  fabulous 
Stories,  I  fay,  of  Gems,  arc  no  great  Arguments,  that  their 
Virtue  is  equivalent  to  their  Value.  Of  thefe,  and  other  Vir- 
tues, confult  Worm  in  his  Mufeum,  L.  r.  §.  1.  c.  17,  c^c. 

But  as  to  Gems  changing  their  Colour,  there  may  be  fumc- 
what  of  Truth  in  that,  particularly  in  the  Turcoife  iait  men- 
tion'd.  Mr.  Boyle  obferv'c^  the  Spots  in  a  Turcoife,  to  fl;i:t 
their  Place  from  one  Part  to  another,  by  gentle  Degrees. 
So  did  the  Cloud  in  an  Agate-\\7in<\\t  of  a  Knife.  A  r>;<i- 
mond  he  wore  on  his  Finger,  he  obferv'd  to  be  more  iliu- 
flrious  at  fome  Times  than  others:  Which  a  curious  I^ady 
told  him  (he  had  alfo  obferv'd  in  hers.  So  likewife  a  rich 
Bifby  did  the  fame.     Boyle  of  Abjol.  Rejl  in  Bodies. 

X  4  CHAP, 


$1%  BookV. 

CHAP.    X. 

T/je  Conclufion  of  the  Survey  of  Mas, 

AND  now  having  taken  a  View  of  Man^  and 
finding  every  Part  of  him,  every  Thing  rela- 
ting to  him  contriv'd,  and  made  in  the  very  beft 
Manner;  his  Body  fitted  up  with  the  utmoll  Fore- 
fight,  Art  and  Care  -,  and  this  Body,  (to  the  great 
Honour,  Privilege,  and  Benefit  of  Man,)  pofiefs'd 
by  a  divine  Part,  the  Soul^  a  Subftance  made  as 
'twere  on  Purpofe  to  contemplate  the  Works  of 
God,  and  glorify  the  great  Creator  j  and  fince  this 
Soul  can  difcern,  think,  reafon,  and  fpeak  ;  What 
can  we  conclude  upon  the  whole  Matter,  but  that 
we  lie  under  all  the  Obligations  of  Duty  and  Grati- 
tude, to  be  thankful  and  obedient  to,  and  to  fet  forth 
the  Glories  of  our  great  Creator,  and  noble  Benefa- 
£l:or?  And  what  ungrateful  Wretches  are  we,  how 
JTiuch  worfe  than  the  poor  Irrationals,  if  we  do 
notxmploy  the  utmoft  Power  of  our  Tongue,  and 
all  our  Members,  and  all  the  Faculties  of  our  Souls 
m  the  Praifes  of  God!  But  above  all,  fiiould 
wc,  who  have  the  Benefit  of  thofe  glorious  A6l:s 
and  Contrivances  of  the  Creator,  be  fuch  wick- 
ed, fuch  bafe,  fuch  worfe  than  brutal  Fools,  to 
deny  the  Creator  (a),   in  fome  of  his   nobleft 

Works  ? 


(r)  It  was  a  pious,  as  well  as  juft  Conclufion,  the  ingeni- 
ous Laurence  Bellini  makes  of  his  Opufculum  de  Motu  Cordis, 
in  thefe  Words  :  De  Motu  Cordis  ifthic.  §iu&  equidem  omnia, 
fi  a  rudi  intelUgentia  Hominis  tantum  conjilii,  tantum  ratioci- 
nii,  tantum  periti&  mille  rerum,  tantum  fcientiarum  (xigunt, 
ad  hoc,  ut  inveniantur,  feu  ad  hoc,  ut  percifiantur  pofiquam 
Jafi(^funt;  ilium,  cujhs  opera,  fabrtfa6la  funt  hAcfwgula,  tarn 

v^ni 


Chap.X.  The  Conch fm.  313 

Works  ?  Should  \vc  fo  abulb  our  Rcnfon,  yea, 
our  very  Senfcs  j  fhould  we  be  To  bclottcd  by  the 
Devil,  and  blinded  by  our  Lulls,  as  to  attribute 
one  of  the  bell  contrived  Pieces  oF  VVorkmanihip 
to  blind  Chance,  or  unguidcd  Matter  and  Moti- 
on, or  any  other  luch  fottifh,  wretched,  aihcilH- 
cal  Sfuffj  which  we  never  law,  nor  ever  heard 
made  any  one  Being  {h)  in  any  Age  lince  the  Cre- 
ation? No,  No!  But  like  wife  and  unprejudic'd 
Men,  let  us  with  David  fay,  Pfalm  cxxxix.   14. 


'van'i  er'imui  atc^ue  wanes.,  ut  exijlimtmus  effe  confdii  impotem, 
rationis  expertem,  impentum,  ant  ignarnm  omnium  rerum .' 
^luantum  ad  tne  atttnet,  nolim  ejje  Rationis  compos,  Ji  taniujn 
tnjuilandum  mihi  ejjet  ad  confequcndam  intclitgentiam  earum 
rerurn,  qua^  fabrefaceret  nefcio  qu£  Vis,  que  nihil  intelltgerct 
eorum  qui  fabrefaceret  ;  mihi  ttenun  viderer  eJJ'c  vile  quiddam., 
atque  ndiculum,  qui  vellem  tot  am  Atatem  meam,  fanitatem, 
cr  quicquid  humanum  efi  deterere,  nihil  curare  quicquid  eft  ju- 
(unditaiumy  quicquid  Uritiarum,  quicquid  cotnmodorum  ;  non 
diviticif,  non  dignitates ;  non  pcvnat  etiam,  c/  viiam,  ipfam, 
ut  glonari  pojjhn  poftremo  tnvenijj'e  unum^  aut  alierum,  crjot- 
taffe  me  inveniffe  quidem  ex  lis  innumerisy  qui  produxiffet,  i.ef- 
iio  quis  ille,  qui  fine  labure,  fine  turd,  nihil  cogitans,  nihil  cog- 
nofcem,  ngn  unam  aut  alteram  rem,  neque  dulii',  fed  certo  pro- 
duxiffet  innumerM  innumcrabilitaies  rerum  in  hoc  tarn  imnien- 
fo  fpatio  corporum,  ex  quibu^  totu-s  Mundt^  compmgitur.  Ah 
Deum  immortalem  /  Video  pr^fens  numen  tuum  m  hifce  tarn 
prodigtofis  Gencrationis  initiis,  c  in  altiffima  eorum  contempla- 
tione  defixusy  nefcio  quo  ocftro  admirationis  concitcr,  cr  quafi 
divine  furens  cohiberi  me  mintme  pojjiim  qum  exclamem 

Magnus  Dominm  !  Magnus  Fabricator  Hcminum  Deus  I  Mag' 
tius  atque  Admirabilis  !  Conditor  rerum  Deus  qukm  Magnus  es ! 
Bellin.  de  Mot.  Cord.  fin. 

{b)  Hoc  [i.  e.  mundiim  effici  ornatilTimuin,  &  pukherri- 
mum  ex  concurfione  fortuita)  qui  exiftimat  fitn  potuifje,  non 
fntelligo  cur  non  idem  puiet,  fi  innumerabiles  unius,  c  viginti 
form&  literarumy  vel  aurei,  vel  qualeflibet,  aiiquo  cofijiciantur, 
poJJ'e  ex  his  in  terram  exctiffts  annates  Hnnii  ut  deinceps  Itgi  pof- 
fint,  effici,  Scc.  •  -  <§luod  fi  Mundum  efjicere  potefi  concurjus 
jitomorum,  cur  porticum,  cur  templum,  cur  domum^  cur  «r- 
iem  non  potefi  f  &ua  funt  minus  operofa,  cr  multo  quidem  fam 
(iliora.    Cicero  dc  Nat.  Deor,  L.  z.  c.  37. 

(with 


314  ^he  ConcluJiQtu  BookV, 

(with  which  I  conclude,)  /  ijoill  praife  thee^  for  I 
am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made ;  marvellous  are 
thy  WorkSf  and  that  my  Soul  knoweth  right  well. 

Having  thus  made  what  (confidering  the  Copi- 
oufnefs  and  Excellence  of  the  Subjed,)  may  be  cal- 
led a  very  brief  Survey  of  Man^  and  feen  fuch  ad- 
mirable Marks  of  the  divine  Defign  and  Art  >  let 
us  next  take  a  tranfient  View  of  the  other  inferiour 
Creatures  >  and  begin  with  Quadrupeds. 


BOOK 


Chap.  I. 


315 


I^Si 


BOOK  VL 

/f  Survey  of  CLuadrupeds. 

C  H  A  p.   I. 

Of  their  Trone  Pofture. 

taking  a  View  of  this  Part  of  the  A- 
nimal  World,  fo  far  as  the  Scrudure  of 
their  Bodies  is  conformable  to  that  of 
,,^^,^„  Man,  1  Ihall  pafs  them  by,  and  only 
take"noti'ce  of  fome  Peculiarities  in  them,  which 
are  plain  Indications  of  Dcfign,  and  the  Divine 
Super>intendence  and  Management.  And,  i.  The 
mod  vifible  apparent  Variation  is  the  Prone  Pofture 
of  their  Body  :  Concerning  which,  I  Ihall  take 
notice  only  of  two  Things,  the  Parts  miniftring 
thereto,  and  tfte  Ufe  and  Benefit  thereof. 

I.  As  for  the  Parts,  'tis  obfcrvable,  that  in  all 
thefe  Creatures,  the  Legs  are  made  cxadly  confor- 
mable to  this  Pofture,  as  thofe  in  Man  are  to  his 
cre6b  Pofture  :  And  what  is  farther  oblervablc  alfo, 
is,  that  the  Legs  and  Feet  arc  always  admirably 
fuited  to  the  Motion  and  Excrcifcs  of  each  Ani- 
mal :  In  fomc  they  arc  made  for  Strength  only, 

to 


3i6    The  Tojiure  of  Q^2idtupcds.  Book  VI. 

to  fupport  a  vaft,  unwieldy  Body  (a)  >  in  others 
they  are  made  for  Agility  and  Svvifcnefs  (^),  infome 
they  are  made  for  only  Walking  and  Running,  in 
Others  for  that,  and  Swimming  too  (c)  j  in  others 
for  Walking  and  Digging  {d}-,  and  in  others  for 
Walking  and  Flying  (e) :  In  fome  they  are  made 
more  lax  and  weak,  for  the  plainer  Lands }  in  o- 
thers  rigid,  ftiff,  and  lefs  flexible  (/),  for  traverf- 

ing 


(a)  The  Elephant  being  a  Creature  of  prodigious  Weight, 
the  largeft  of  all  Animals;  Pliny  faith,  hath  its  Legs  accor- 
<Iingly  made  of  an  immenfe  Strength,  like  Pillars,  rather 
than  Legs. 

(h)  Deer,  Hares,  and  other  Creatures,  remarkable  for 
Swiftnefs,  have  their  Legs  accordingly  flender,  but  withal 
ftrong,  and  every  w^ay  adapted  to  their  Sv^^iftnefs. 

(c)  Thus  the  Feet  of  the  Otter  are  made,  the  Toes  being 
all  conjoined  with  Membranes,  as  the  Feet  of  Geefe  and 
Ducks  are.  And  in  Swimming,  it  is  obfervable,  that  when 
the  Foot  goes  forward  in  the  Water,  the  Toes  are  clofe ; 
but  when  backward,  they  are  fpread  out,  whereby  they 
more  forcibly  Itrike  the  Water,  and  drive  themfelves  for- 
ward.   The  fame  may  be  obferved  alfo  i»  Ducks  and  Geefe, 

U'C. 

Of  the  Cajior  or  Beaver,  the  French  Academifts  fay,  The 

StruBure  of  the  Feet  was  very  extraordinary,  and  fufficiently 

demonjlrated,  that  Nature  hath  defigned  this  Animal   to  live 

in  the  Water,  asxvell  as  upon  Land.     For  although  it  had  four 

Jeet,  like  Terrefirial  Animals,  yet  the  hindmofi  feemed  more 

proper  to  fivim  than  walk  with,  the  Five  Toes  of  which  they 

were  compos' d,  being  joined  together  like  thofe  of  a  Goofe  by  a 

Membrane,  which  ferves  this  Animal  to  fwim  with.     But  the 

fore  ones  were  made  otherwife  ;  for  there  9vas   no  Membrane 

■which  held  thofe  Toes  joined  together :   And  this  zvas  requifite 

for  the  Conveniency  of   this   Animal,    which  ufeth    them  as 

Hands  like  a  Squirrel,  ivhen  he  eats.     Memoirs  for  a  Nat. 

Hift.  of  Animals,  pag.  84. 

{d)  The  Moles  Feet  are  a  remarkable  Inftance. 

(f)  The  Wings  of  the  Bat  are  a  prodigious  Deviation  from 

Nature's  ordinary  Way.     So  'tis  in  the  Virginian  Squirrel, 

whofeSkinis  extended  between  the  Fore-Legs  and  its  Body. 

(/)  Of  the  Legs  of  the  Elk,  the  French  Academifts  fay. 

Although  fome  Authors  report,  that  there  are  Elks  in  Mofco- 

via. 


Chap.  I.  TheToJiureof  Qnadnxpcds.        317 

ing  the  Ice,  and  dangerous  Precipices  of  the  high 
Moutains  (g) ;  in  fome  they  arc  fhod  with  tough 
and  hard  Hoofs,  fome  whole,  fome  cleft  j  in  others 
with  only  a  callous  Skin.  In  which  latter,  'tisob- 
fcrvable  that  the  Feet  are  compofed  of  Toes,  fome 
fhort  for  bare-going  •,  fome  long  to  fupply  the 
Place  of  a  Hand  (h)  j  fome  armed  with  long  and 
llrong  Talons,  to  catch,  hold,  and  tear  the  Prey  > 
fome  fenced  only  with  fhort  Nails,  to  confirm  the 
Steps  in  Running  and  Walking. 

II.  As  the  Pofture  of  Man's  Body  is  the  fitted 
for  a  rational  Animal,  fo  is  the  Prone  Pofture  of 
^adrupeds  the  moft  ufeful  and  beneficial  tothem- 
felves,  as  alfo  moll  ferviceable  to  Man.  For  they 
arc  hereby  better  made  for  their  gathering  their 
Food,  to  purfue  their  Prey,  to  leap,  to  climb,  to 
fwim,  to  guard  themfelves  againil  their  Enemies, 
and  in  a  word,  to  do  whatever  may  be  of  principal 
Ufc  to  themfelves  j  as  alfo  they  are  hereby  render- 
ed more  ufeful  and  ferviceable  to  Man,  for  carry- 
ing his  Burdens,  for  tilling  his  Ground,  yea,  even 
for  his  Sports  and  Diverfions. 


via,  whofe  Legs  are  jointUfs  ;  there  is  great  Probability,  that 
this  Ofiinion  is  founded  on  what  is  reported  of  thofe  tlks  of 
Mufcovia,  as  well  as  of  Caefar'f  Alee,  and  Fliny'j  Machlis, 
that  they  have  Legs  fo  ftiff" and  inflexible,  that  they  do  run  en 
Ice  without  flipping  ;  zvhich  is  a  Way  that  is  reported  that  they 
have  to  fave  themfelves  from  the  Wolves,  &c.  ibid.  p.  Io8, 

{g)  The  common  tame  G(?.jr  (whofe  Habitation  is  general- 
ly on  Mountains  and  Rocks,  and  who  delighteth  to  walk  on 
the  tops  of  Pales,  Houfcs,  crc  and  to  take  great  and  feem- 
ingly  dangerous  Leaps)  I  have  obfcrv'd,  hath  the  Joints  of 
the  Legs  very  ftift'  and  ftrong,  the  Hoof  hollow  underneath, 
and  its  Edges  ftiarp.  The  like,  I  doubt  not,  is  to  be  found 
in  the  Wild  Goat,  confuiering  what  Ur.  Scheuchzer  hath  laid 
of  its  climbing  the  moft  dangerous  Craggsof  the  jilps,  and 
the  Manner  of  their  hunting  it.     Vid.  Iter.  Alptn.  3.  p.  9. 

{h)  Thus  in  Apes  and  Monkeys,  in  the  Beaver  before,  and 
divers  others. 

And 
3 


3iB       TheToftiireofCinidixn^tds.  Book  VI. 

And  now  I  might  here  add  a  Survey  of  the  excel- 
lent Contrivances  of  the  Parts  miniflring  to  this 
•Pofture  of  the  four-footed  Animals,  the  admirable 
Structure  of  the  Bones  (/),  the  Joints  and  Mufclesj 
their  various  Sizes  and  Strength  j  their  commodi- 
ous Lodgment  and  Situation^  the  nice  j^Equipoife 
of  the  Body,  with  a  great  deal  more  to  the  fame 
purpofe.  But  I  fhould  be  tedious  to  infill  minute- 
ly upon  fuch  Particulars,  and  befides,  I  have  given 
a  Touch  upon  thefe  Kinds  of  Things,  when  I 
ipake  of  Man. 

Faffing  by  thei'efore  many  Things  of  this  Kind, 
that  might  dcferve  Remark,  I  fhall  only  confider 
(bme  of  the  Parts  of  ^adrupeds^  differing  from 
what  is  found  in  Man  (^),  and  which  are  manifeft 
Works  of  Defign, 


(i)  It  is  a  flngular  Provifion  Nature  hath  made  for  the 
Strength  of  the  Lion,  if  that  be  true,  which  Galen  faith  is 
■reported  of  its  Bones  being  not  hollow  (as  in  other  Animals) 
but  folid:  Which  Report  he  thus  far  confirms,  that  moft  of 
the  Bones  arefo;  and  that  thofe  in  the  Legs,  and  feme  other  . 
Parts,  have  only  a  fmall  and  obfcure  Cavity  in  them.  Vli. 
Galen,  de  Uf.  Part.  L.  ii.  c.  i8. 

{k)  Thefe  Sorts  of  Differences  in  the  Mechanifm   of  Animalsy 
upon  the  Score  of  the   Pofttion  of  their  Bodies,  occur  fo  often, 

that  it  would  be  no  mean  Service  to   Anatomy if  any 

one  would  give  us  a  Hiftory  of  thofe  Variations  of  the  Parts  of 
Animals,  which  fpring  from  the  different  Pojlnres  of  their  Bo- 
dies.    Drake  Anat.  V.  i.  B,  i,  c.  17. 


CHAP. 


Chap.  n.  319 

CHAP.    II. 

O/^^^  Heads  ^/QuARDUPEDS. 

IT  is  remarkable,  that  in  Man,  the  Head  is  of 
one  Angular  Formj  in  the  four-footed  Race, 
as  various  as  their  Species.  In  fome  I'quare  and 
large,  fuitable  to  their  flow  Motion,  Food,  and 
Abode  j  in  others  lefs,  flender,  and  fliarp,  agreea- 
ble to  their  fwifter  Motion,  or  to  make  their  Way 
to  their  Food  (j),  or  Habitation  under  Ground  (^). 
But  palling  by  a  great  many  Obfervations  that 
might  be  made  of  this  Kind,  I  fhall  Hop  a  little  at 
the  Brain,  a«  the  moft  confiderable  Part  of  this 
part  of  the  Body,  being  the  great  Inftrument  of 
Life  and  Motion  in  ^adruped:^  as  'tis  in  Man  of 
that,  as  alfo  in  all  Probability  the  chief  Seat  of  his 
immortal  Soul.  And  accordingly  it  is  a  remark- 
able Difference,  that  in  Man  the  Brain  i$  large,  af- 
fording Sublfance  and  Room  for  fo  noble  a  Gueltj 
whereas  in  §uadrupeds^  it  is  but  frnall.  And  ano- 
ther Thing  no  lefs  remarkable,  is  the  Situation  of 
the  Cerebrum  and  Cerebellum^  or  the  greater  or  lef- 
fer  Brain,  which  I  fhall  give  in  the  Words  of  one 
of  the  moft  cxad  Anatomifts  we  have  of   that 


(*i)  Thus  Swine,  for  Inftance,  who  dig  in  the  Eafth  for 
Roots  and  other  Food,  have  their  Neck,  and  all  Parts  of 
their  Head  very  well  adapted  to  that  Service.  Their  Neck 
lliort,  brawny,  and  ftrong;  their  Eyes  fet  pretty  high  out  of 
the  Way;  their  Snout  long  ;  their  Nofe  callous  and  Ihong ; 
and  their  Senfe  of  Smelling  very  accurate,  to  hunt  out  and 
diftinguifh  their  Food  in  Mud,  under  Ground,  and  other  the 
like  Places  where  it  lies  concealed. 

{b)  What  hath  been  faid  of  Swine  is  no  lefs,  rather  more 
remarkable  in  the  Aiy/«,  whole  Neck,  Nofe,  Eyes  and  f'.ars, 
are  all  fitted  in  the  nicett  Manner  to  its  fubterranqous  Way 
of  Luti. 

i  Part 


3^o        The  Heads  of  Qusidrupcds.  hookVt 

Part  (c)  :  "  Since,  faith  he,  God  hath  given 
"  to  Man  a  lofty  Countenance,  to  behold  the 
"  Heavens,  and  hath  alio  feated  an  immortal  Soul 
"  in  the  Brain,  capable  of  the  Contemplation  of 
"  heavenly  Things}  therefore,  as  his  Face  is  ere6V, 
"  fo  the  Brain  is  fee  in  an  higher  Place,  namely, 
*'  above  the  Cerebelhim  and  all  the  Senfories.  But 
"  in  Brutes,  whofe  Face  is  prone  towards  the 
"  Earth,  and  whofe  Brain  is  capable  of  Specula- 
"  tion,  the  Cerebellum^  (whofe  Bufinefs  it  is  to 
"  minifter  to  the  Adions  and  Fun6tions  of  the 
"  Pracordia^  the  principal  Office  in  thofe  Crea- 
"  tures)  in  them  is  fltuated  in  the  higher  Place, 
"  and  the  Cerebrum  lower.  Alfo  fome  of  the  Or- 
*'  gans  oF  Senfe,  as  the  Ears  and  Eyes,  are  placed, 
*'  if  not  above  the  Cerebrum^  yet  at  leaft  equal 
"  thereto. 

Another  Convenience  in  thisPofition  of  the  Cc 
rebrum  and  Cerebellum^  the  laft  ingenious  Anato- 
mift  {d)  tells  us  is  this,  ••'  In  the  Head  of  Man, 
"  faith  he,  x.ht'RTScoi  tht  Brain  zndCerebell^  yea, 
"  of  the  whole  Skull,  is  fet  parallel  to  the  Hori- 
"  zon  5  by  which  Means  there  is  the  lefs  Danger  of 
"  the  two  Brains  joggling,  or  flipping  out  of  their 
"  Place.  But  in  ^uadrupeds^  whofe  Head  hangs 
*'  down,  the  Bafe  of  the  Skull  makes  a  right  An- 
"  gle  with  the  Horizon,  by  which  Means  the  Brain 
"  IS  undermoll:,  and  the  Cerebell  upperraoft ;  fo 
*'  that  one  would  be  apt  to  imagine  the  Cerebell 
"  fliould  not  be  ftcady,  but  joggle  out  of  its 
"  Place.  To  remedy  which  Inconvenience  he 
"  tells  us.  And  lell  the  frequent  Concuffions  of 
"  the  Cerebell  fhould  caufe  a  Fainting,  or  diforder- 


(c)  IVilits  Cereb.  Anat.  <;ap.  6.  Cumc[ue  huic  Deus  os  fublime 
dcderit,  &c. 

{d)  Id.  paulo  poll.  In  ca^ite  hftmano  Cerebri  V  Cerebelli,  &c. 

.  «  ly 


Chap.  II.    The  Heads  of  Qiiadrupeds.         3  i i 

"  ly  Motion  of  the  Spirits  about  the  Pracordia^ 
*'  therefore,  by  the  Artifice  of  Nature,  fufficient 
*'  Provifion  is  made  in  all,  by  the  dura  Mcninx 
"  clofely  cncompafling  the  Cerebellum  j  befides 
*'  which,  it  is  (in  fome)  guarded  with  a  llrong 
"  bony  Fence;  and  in  others,  as  the  Hare,  the 
"  the  Coney,  and  fuch  lefl'er  ^tadrupeds^  a  pare 
"  of  the  Cerebell  is  on  each  Side  fenced  with  the 
*'  Os  Petrofum:  So  that  by  this  double  Stay,  its 
"  whole  Mafs  is  firmly  contained  within  the  Skull. 
Befides  thefe  Peculiarities,  I  might  take  notice 
of  divers  other  Things  no  lefs  remarkable,  as  the 
Nictitating  Membrane  of  the  Eye  (^),  the  different 
Paflages  of  the  Carotid  Arteries  \f)  through  the 


(«)  Sec  Book  IV.  Ch.  z.  Note  {kk). 

(/)  Arter'ta  Carotis  jiliquanto  pofterlus  in  tjomine  qttam  in 
alto  c^uovii  antmaii,  Calvanam  ingreditur,  fcil.  juxta  illud  fo- 
ramen, per  quod  finus  lateralis  in  Venam  jiigularem  defiturut 
cranio  elabitur ;  nafh  in  ceteris  hic  artcrta  juhextretnitate,  fed 
frocejfu  acuta  ojfis  petroft,  inter  cranium  einergtt :  verUm  inca- 
pife  humano,  cadem,  ambage  longiori  circuntduHa  ( ut  fangui- 
ni$  totrens,  ptiufquam  ad  cerebri  or  am  appellit,  fYacto  impetu^ 
leniii!  cr  placidiits  jiuAt )  prope  fpecum  ab  ingnjfu  finUs  lateral 

Us  factum,  CalvariA  ba/tn  atttngit ;  —  w  in   majorerri 

cautclam,  tunica  injuper  afcititid  crajfure  in%ejlitur.  And  lo 
he  goes  on  to  ftiew  the  Convciiiency  of  this  Guard  the  Ar- 
tery hath,  and  its  Paflage  to  the  Brain,  and  then  faiih,  5/  hii- 
jufmodi  confonnationis  ratio  inqiiiritur,  facile  occurrit,  in  ta- 
pite  hutnanoy  ubi  generofi  affettus  O"  inagni  animorum  impe- 
tus ac  ardores  excttantur,  fanguinis  in  Cerebri  oras  apfulfunt 
debere  ejfe  Itberum  v  txpediturn.  Sec.  Atque  hoc  quidem  re- 
fpeilu  diffcrt  Homo  li  plerifque  Brutis,  qutbus,  Arceria  in  milt* 
jurculos  divifd,  ne  fanguinem  pleniore  alveo,  aut  citation, 
quam  par  efl,  curfu,  ad  cerebrum  evehat.  Plexus  Kstiformts 
Conflituit,  quibt'.s  nempe  tfjicitur,  ut  fanguis  tarda  admodurH, 
Unique  v  £qf4ab:li  fere  JiiUici/iso,  in  cerebrum  tUabatur.  And 
then  he  goes  on  to  give  a  farther  Account  of  this  Ar- 
tery, and  the  Aett  mirabili  m  divers  Creatuies,  WiUis,  ibid, 
cap.  8, 


t  Skully 


321         The  Necks  of  QusidTupQds.  BookVl. 

Skull,  their  Branching  into  the  Refe  Alirabile  (g)^ 
the  different  Magnitude  of  the  Nates,  and  fome 
other  Parts  of  the  Brain  in  Beails,  quite  different 
from  what  it  is  in  Man  ;  But  the  Touches  already 
given,  may  be  Intlances  fufficient  to  prevent  my 
being  tedious  in  inlarging  upon  thefe  admirable 
Works  of  God. 


(g)  Galen  thinks  the  Rete  mirahUe  is  for  conceding  and 
elaborating  the  Animal  Spirits,  as  the  Epididymides,  [the 
Convolutions  »/^c-««<5»5  fAix®-]  are  for  elaborating  the  Seed. 
JDe  Uf.  Part.  L.  9.  c.  4.  This  Rete  is  much  more  confpicu- 
ous  in  Beatls  than  Man;  and  as  Dr.  JF;//;;  well  judges,  ferves, 

1.  To  bridle  the  too  rapid  Incurfion  of  the  Blood  into 
the  m-ain  of  thofe  Creatures,  whofe  Heads  hang  down  much. 

2.  To  feparate  fome  of  the  fuperfluoas  ferous  Parts  of  the 
Blood,  and  fend  them  to  the  Salival  Glands,  before  the  Blood 
enters  the  Brain  of  thofe  Animals,  whole  Blood  is  naturally 
of  a  watery  Conltitution.  3.  To  obvjate  any  Obftruflions 
that  may  happen  in  the  Arteries,  by  giving  a  free  Paffage 
through  other  Veffels,  when  fome  are  flopped. 

In  <§luadrupeds,  as  the  Carotid  Arteries  are  branched  into 
t:hc  Rete  Mirabile,  for  the  bridling  the  too  rapid  Current  of 
Blood  into  the  Brain;  fo  the  Vertebral  Arteries,  are,  near 
their  Entrance  into  the  Skull,  bent  into  an  acuter  Angle 
than  in  Man,  which  is  a  wife  Provifion  for  the  fame  Pur- 
pofe. 


CHAP.    III. 

O//^^  Necks  ^/Q^UADRUPEDS. 

FROM  the  Head  pafs  we  to  the  Neck,  no  prin- 
cipal Part  of  the  Body,  but  yet  a  good  In- 
ftance  of  the  Creator's  Wifdom  and  Defign,  in- 
afmuch  as  in  Man  it  is  Ihort,  agreable  to  the 
Ereftion  of  his  Bodyj  but  in  the  Four-footed 
Tribe  it  is  long,  anfwerable  to  the  Length  of  the 

Legs 


Chip. III.    The  Necks  of  Quadrupeds.        s'i-^ 

Legs  (li),  anditifomeof  thcfclong,  and  hTs  ftrong, 
ferving  to  cany  the  Mouth  to  the  Ground  >  in  o- 
thers  ihortcr,  brawny  and  itrong,  fcr.ving  to  dig, 
and  heave  up  great  Burdens  {b). 

But  that  which  deferves  efpecial  Remark,  is  that 
peculiar  Provifion  rriade  in  the  Necks  oFall,  or  molt 
granivorous  ^iadrupeds^  for  the  perpetual  holding 
down  their  Head  in  gathering  their  Food,  by  that 
flrong,  tendinous  and  infcnfible  Aponeurofis^  or  Li- 
gament {c)  braced  from  the  Head  to  the  middle  of 
the  Back.  By  which  means  the  Head,  although 
heavy,  may  be  long  held  down  without  any  La- 
bour, Pain,  or  Uneafincfs  to  the  Mufclcs  of  the 


{a)  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  in  all  the  Species  of  <S)ua- 
drupeds,  tliis  Equality  holds,  except  only  the  Elephant;  and 
that  there  fliould  be  a  fiifficient  fpecial  I'rovifion  made  for 
that  Creature,  by  its  Probofcis  or  Trunk.  A  Member  fo  ad- 
mirably contrived,  lb  curiouily  wrought,  and  n'lth  lb  great 
Agihty  and  Readinefs,  applied  by  that  unwcildy  Creature  to 
all  Its  feveral  Occalions,  that  1  take  it  to  be  a  manifelt  In- 
(lance  of  the  Creator's  Workmanfliip.  See  its  Anatomy  in 
Dr.  A.  Aloulen's  Anat.  of  the  Elephvtnt,  p.  33.  As  alio  in 
Mr.  Blair's  Account  in  Phil.  Tranf.  N".  316. 

Aliorum  ea  eft  humilitas  ut  cibum  terreftrem  rcftris  facilt 
continuant.  ^£  autem  dltiora  'funt,  ut  Anferes,  ut  Cygni^ 
ut  Grues,  ut  Cameli,  adjuvantur  proceritate  collorum  Ma- 
ntM  etiam  data  Elephantii,  qtti  propter  magnitHdinem  corporit 
difficiles  aditui habebant  adpaftu7n.     Cic.  de  N.  D.  L.  1.  c.47. 

(^od  iis  aniwalibus  quA  pedes  haber.t  fijfos  in  digitos^  Collum 
brevius  Jit  fadum,  quam  ut  per  ipjuTn  Cibum  ori  admovert 
queant :  its  verb  qnd  ungulas  habent  fclidas,  aut  bi/ida>,  ton- 
gius,  ut  prona  atque  inclmantia  pafci  queant.  Glul  ,d  e:iatn 
opui  non  fit  Arcificis  utilitatis  memoris  ?  Ad  hic  quod  Grues 
ac  Ciconia,  cum  crura  haherent  longiora,  ob  earn  caufam  Ro- 
Jlrum  etiam  magnum  ,  ^  Collum  longius  habucrint.  Pifcts 
autem  neque  Collum  penitus  habuere,  utpote  qui  neque  Crura, 
habent.  (^0  pai'to  non  id  etiam  eft  admirandum ?  Galen,  dc 
Uf.  part.  L.  IT.  c. 8. 

(b)  As  in  Moles  and  Swine,  in  Ch.  1,  ^ote  {a). 

(c)  Called  the  Whitdtather,  Packwax^  Taxwax^  and  "BtX' 
fax. 


Y  z  Neck, 


3^4    1"^^^  Stomachs  of  Quadrupeds.  Book  Vf . 

Neck,  that  would  otherwife  be  wearied  by  being 
lb  long  put  upon  the  Stretch. 


CHAP.    IV. 

0///j^ Stomachs  <?/ Quadrupeds. 

FROM  the  Neck,  let  us  defcend  to  the  Sto- 
machy a  Part  as  of  abfolate  Neceffity  to  the 
Being  and  Well-being  of  Animals,  fo  is  in  the  fe- 
veral  Species  of  ^adrupeds^  lized,  contrived,  and 
made  with  the  utmoft  Variety  and  Art.  {a)  What 
Artift,  what  Being,  but  the  infinite  Confervator 
of  the  World,  could  fo  well  adapt  every  Food  to 
all  the  feveral  Kinds  of  thofe  grand  Devourers  of 
i: !  Who  could  fo  well  fute  their  Stomachs  to  the 
Reception  and  Digeftion  thereof  j  one  kind  of  Sto- 
mach to  the  Carnivorous,  another  ta  the  Herba- 
ceous Animab  >  one  fitted  to  digeft  by  bare  Mafti- 
cationi  and  a  whole  fet  of  Stomachs  in  others,, 
to  digeft  with  the  Help  of  Rumination  I  Which 
kft  Ad:,  together  with  the  Apparatus  for  that  Ser- 
vice, is  fo  peculiar,  and  withal  fo  curious  an  Arti- 
fite  of  Nature,  that  ic  might  juftly  deferve  a  more 


{a)  The  peculiar  Contrivance  and  Malie  of  the  Tyromeda- 
r^/'s  or  Camel's  Stomach,  is  very  remarkable,  which  I  will 
give  from  the  Parifian  Anatomifis:  At  the  top  of  the  Second 
[of  the  4  Ventricles]  there  were  feveral  fquare  Holes.,  which 
were  the  Orificei  of  about  30  Caziities,  made  like  Sacks  placed 
between  the  tvjo  Membranes,  which  da  compofe  the  Sub/lance 
of  this  Ventricle.  The  View  of  thefe  Sacks  made  tis  to  think 
that  the'j  might  well  be  the  Refervatories,  where  ?\\x\y  faith, 
that  Camels  do  a  long  Time  keep  the  Water,  which  they  drink  in 
great  Abundance  -  -  to  fupply  the  Wants  thereof  in  the 

dry  Defarts,  Sec.     Vid.  Memoirs,  c^c.  Anat.  of  Dromedary, 
p.  39.     See  alfo  Peyer,  Merycol.   L.  i.  c.  3. 

particular 


Chap.  V.    The  Hearts  of  Quadrupeds.        3 1  f 

particular  Enquiry  J  but  having  formerly  mcntion- 
d  it  (/^),  and  kail  1  fhould  be  too  tedious,  1  fhal! 
pals  it  by. 

{b)  Book  IV.  ch.  II. 


CHAP.    V. 
Of  the  Hearts?/  Qu  a  d  r  u  p  e  d  s. 

IN  this  Part  there  is  a  notable  Difference  fonnd 
between  the  Heart  of  Man  and  that  of  Bcalh, 
Concerning  the  latter,  of  which  I  might  take  no- 
tice of  the  remarkable  Confirmation  of  the  Hearts 
of  Amphibious  ^adrupeds^  and  their  Difference 
from  thofe  of  Land-Animals,  fome  having  but  one 
Ventricle  {a)^  fome  three  (^),  and  fome  but  two 
(like  Land-Animals)  but  then  the  Fora-men  Oiah 
therewith  {c).     All  which  may  be  jullly  ellecmed 

as 


{a)  Frogs  are  generally  thought  to  have  but  one  Ventricle 
in  their  Hearts. 

{b)  The  Tortoife  hath  three  Ventricles,  as  the  Pariftan  A- 
cademifts  in  their  Memoirs  affirm.  Befides  thefe  two  I'entri- 
cles  [before  fpoken  of]  which  were  in  the  hinder  Part  of  thti 
Heart,  xvhtch  faceth  the  Spine;  there  was,  fiy  they,  ^  thtr/i 
in  the  Fore-fart,  inclining  a  little  towards  the  Right-fide,  ^c. 
Memoirs,  crc.  p  2S9-  ^^^  ^'^'"  B«///cr(r  charges  this  as  a  Mi- 
rtake  in  thofe  ingenious  Gentlemen,  and  aflerts  there  is  bur 
one  Ventricle  in  the  Tortoife's  Heart.  See  his  DcfcnpHon 
of  the  Heart  of  the  Land  Tor tot/e,  in  Philof.  Tranfatl.  N*^. 
3x8. 

(c)  The  Sea-Calf  is  faid  by  the  French  Academift;,  to  have 
this  Provifion,  and  their  Account  of  it  is  this:  its  Heart  iva< 
round  and  fiat.      Its  Ventricles  appeared  very  large,  and  its  Am- 

rides  fmall.  — Underneath   the  great  Aperture,   through 

■which  the  Trunk  of  the  Vena  Cava  convey td  the  Blood  into 
^hf  right  VtfltTtclt  V  the  Heart,  there  ivm  afifthtr,  ivhtch pt- 

Y    3  fi<t*at%i 


3i6     The  Hearts  of  Cin^idm^Qds.    Book  VI. 

as  wonderful,  as  they  are  excellent  Provifions  for 
the  Manner  of  thofe  Animals  living.  But  I  fhall 
content  my  felf  with  bare  Hints  of  thefe  Things, 
and  fpeak  only  of  two  Peculiars  more,  and  that  but 
briefly. 

One  is  the  Situation  of  the  Heart,  which  in  Beads 
is  near  the  middle  of  the  whole  Bodyj  in  Man, 
nearer  the  Head  (d).     The  Reafons   of  which  I 
fhcill  give  from  one  of  the  moft  curious  Anatomifts 
of  that  Part  (<?).     "  Seeing,  faith  he,  theTrajec- 
"  tionand  Diftributionof  the  Blood  depends  whol- 
"  iy  on  the  Syftole  of  the  Heart,  and  that  its  Li- 
"  quor  is  nor  driven  of  its  own  Nature  fo  readily 
*'  into  the  upper  Parts  as  mto  Veflels  even  with  it, 
"  or  dov/nwards  into  thofe  under  it :  If  the  Situa- 
"  tion  of  the  Heart  had  been  further  from  the  Head, 
"  it  muft  needs  either  have  been  made  ftronger  to 
"  caft  out  its  Liquor  with  greater  Force  j  or  elfe 
"  the  Head   would   want  its  due  Proportion  of 
"  Blood.     But  in  Anmials  that  have  a  longer  Neck, 
"  and  which  is  extended  towards  their  Food  as  it 
"  were,  the  Heart  is  fcated  as  far  from  the  other 
Parts  J  and  they  find  no  Inconvenience  from  it, 
becaufe  they  feed  with  their  Head  for  the  moft 
part  hanging  down  5  and  fo  the  Blood,  as  it  hath 
farther  to  go  to  their  Head  than  in  others,  fo  it; 
goes  a  plainer  and  often  a  lleep  Way  (/). 

The 


cc 

cc 
cc 


netrated  into  the  Arteria  Venofa,  and  from  thence  into  the 
left  Ventricle,  and  afterwards  into  the  Aorta.  This  Hole  called 
the  Foramen  Ovale  in  the  Foetus,  makes  the  Anaftomofis,  iy 
the  Means  of  which,  the  Blood  goes  from  the  Cava  into  the 
Aorta,  ivithout  faffing  through  the  Lungs.  French  Anato- 
mifts, p.  124. 

{d)   T^Ts  Kec^Siuv  'Z^  li  (Jiia-ov  tsxIw  cv  'A',(^a7Fa>t^Z.    Arift. 

Hift.  An.  L.  2.  c.  17. 

(c)  Dr.. Lower,  de  Corde,   c.  I. 

(/)  1  might  have  mentioned  another  wife  Provifion  from 
the  fame  Author,  which  take  in  his  own  Words :  in  vmlis 


Chap.  V.  The  Hearts  of  Qi\2ii}im^cdiS.        317 

The  other  peculiar  Mutter  is,  the  Fallning  (I 
formerly  mentioned)  which  the  Cone  of  the  Peri' 
car  (Hum  hath  in  Man  to  the  Diaphragm  (^),  where- 
as in  all  ^fadrupcds  it  is  loofe.  By  which  Means 
the  Motion  of  the  Midriff  in  that  neccfUiry  Aft 
of  Rcfpiration,  is  aililted  both  in  the  upright  Po- 
Iturc  of  Man,  as  alfo  in  the  prone  Pollurc  o['  ^la- 
drupeds  (b),  which  would  be  hindred,  or  rcndrej. 
more  difficult,  if  the  Cafe  was  otherwife ;  "  Which 
"  mull  needs  be  the  Effect  of  Wifdom  and  Dclign, 
^  and  that  Man  was  intended  by  Nature  to  walk 
''  ere^l,  and  not  upon  all-lour,  as  ^ladrupeds  do: 
To  exprefs  it  in  the  Words  of  a  great  Judge  in 
fuch  Matters  (;'). 


CT*  Fquis,  imo  plerique  al'tii  ani>?ialiiiis  majoribus,  non  fol.tt 
propagints  a  Nervo  j'exri  parti  tit  in  Homine,  fed  etiam  pLuri- 
mtu  a  Nervo  intercoftalt,  ubi  refla  cor  tran/it,  cor  accedere, 
Wio  in  parenchyma  ejm  dimitti :  cr  hoc  idea  a  Natura  nuafi 
fubfidium  Brutis  comparatiim,  ne  capita  qu&  tcrram  pronti  fpe- 
^ant,  non  fat  if  facile  aut  copiose  Spiritus  Animales  impertirent, 
Blafii  An:\t.  Animal.  Par.  r.  c.  4.  ex  Lowero,  dc  Corde. 

(j)  Diaphragmatu  circulo  nerveo  firmiter adhtret  [Pericardi- 
um] quod  Homini  fngiilare ;  nam  ab  eo  in  Canibus  cy  Simiis 
di/lat,  item  in  aim  animaUbta  omnibus.  Bartholin,  Anar. 
L.  z.  c.  5. 

(h)   Ftnalem  canfam  quod  atrinet, chmfre-^ttufit  Uotni- 

n'u  incelftnatque  figura,eoque  faciliiis  abdominis  vifcc a  fuo pon- 
dere  defcendant,  minore  Diaphragtnatls  nixu  arque  Syjiole  ad 
Infptrationem  optii  ejl :  porro,  cum  in  lixfpiratione  pariter  necef- 

fanum  (it  Diaphragma  relaxari, cum  capfula  cordis  om- 

nino  conneHendum  Juit,  in  Ho/nine,  ne  forte,  quatndiu  ereSltti 
incedit,  ab  Hepatis  aliorumque  vijcerum  appenforiim  pondere  de- 
ar um  adeo  deprimsretur^  ut  neque  Pulmo  fatis  concidere,  neque 
Exfpiratio  debito  modo  peragi  potuerit.  &uocirca  in  o^jadrMpe- 
dibui,  ubi  abdominis  vifcera  in  ipfum  Diaphragma  incumbunt^ 
ip,t4mque  inpeHorls  cavitatem  fuo pondere  impellunt,  iftapuni- 
um  accretio  Exfpirationi  qutdem  tnutiits,  Jn/piraiioni  auterft 
debitam  Diaphragmatis  tenfionemitnpcdundo,  prorfiu  incoinmo- 
4a  fuij]'et. Low QT,  ib.  p.  8. 

(i)  Dr.  Tylbn'f  ^nat.  of  the  Orang-Outang  in  Ray'i  IVifd, 
if  God,  p.  161. 


Y4  CHAR 


3i8  Book  VI 


CHAP.    VI. 

Of  the  difference  between  Man  and  Qua- 
drupeds in  the  Nervous  Kind. 

THere  is  only  one  Difference  more  between 
Man  and  ^adrupeds  that  I  fliall  take  notice 
ofj  and  that  is  the  Nervous  Kind  :  And  becaufe  it 
Would  be  tedious  to  infift  upon  many  Particulars  (^), 
1  fhall,  for  a  Sample,  infill  chiefly  upon  one,  anq 
that  is,  of  Nature's  prodigious  Care  for  a  dueCom- 
piunication  and  Correfpondence  between  the  Head 
and  Heart  of  Man,  more  than  what  is  in  the  four- 
footed  Tribe.  For  this  Purpofc,  befides  the  Cor- 
refpondence thofe  Parts  have  by  Means  of  the 
]>Jerves  of  the  Par  Vagum  (common  both  to  Man 
and  Beaft)  there  is  a  farther  and  more  fpecialCom- 
municatjon  and  Correfpondence  occafioned  by  the 
Branches)  {h)  of  the  intercQftal  Pair  fent  from  the 
Cervical  Plexus  to  the  Heart,  and  Pracordia.  By 
which  Means  the  Heart  and  Brain  of  Man  have  a 


{a)  Amongft  thefe,  I  might  name  the  Site  of  the  Nerves 
proceeding  from  the  Medulla  Spinalis,  which  Dr.  Lower  ukes 
notice  of.  In  Beafts,  whole  Spine  is  above  the  reft  of  the 
Body,  the  >?erves  ter\d  diredly  downwards ;  but  in  Man,  it 
being  ereift,  the  Nerves  fpring  out  of  the  Spine,  not  at  Right, 
but  m  Obhque  Angles do\Ynwards,  and  pafs  alfo  in  the  Body 
the  fame  Way.     ibid.  p.  i6. 

(b)  Inplerifq;  Brutis  tantitm  hac  via  (i.  e.  by  the  Parva- 
fum)  €/  "i^'ix  omnino  per  ullos  Paris  Intercofialis  nervos,  aditits 
ad  cor  aut  Appendices  ejrts  patefcit.  Verittn  in  Homtne,  Ner- 
•vus  Inter co/lalis,  prater  nfficia  ejus  in  imo  ventre  huic  cum  c&~ 
tfris  animalibui  communia,  etiam  ante  peSieris  claufira  inter- 
nuneii  fpecialis  loco  efi,  qui  Cerebri  c^  Cordis  fenfa  mutua  ultr^ 
^itraquf^  referf.     Wilhs  Nervor.  defer.  &  ufus,  Cap.  i6. 

piutua) 


Chap.  VI.  //r  Quadrupeds.  319 

mutual  and  very  intimate  Corrcfpondcnceand  Con- 
cern with  each  other,  more  than  is  in  other  Crea- 
tures; or  as  one  of  the  moft  curious  Anitomifls 
and  Obfervers  of  thefe  Things  faith  (c),  "  Brutes 
"  are  as  'twere  Machines  made  with  a  fimplcr, 
"  and  lefs  opero(e  y^pparatus^  and  endowed  thcre- 
"  fore  "with  only  one  and  the  fame  Kind  of  Mo- 
"  tion,  or  determined  to  do  the  fame  Thing  ; 
f  Whereas  in  Man,  there  is  a  great  Variety  of 
"  Motions  and  A6liops.  For  by  the  Commerce 
f  of  the  aforcfaid  Cervical  Plexus  (d)  he  faith, 
<'  The  Conceptions  of  the  Brain  prefcntly  affedt 
"  the  Heart,  and  agitate  its  Veffels  and  whole 
"  Appendage,  together  with  the Z)/^/>/?7r^^7».  From 
<'  whence  the  Alteration  in  the  Motion  of  the 
'*  Blood,  the  Pulfe  and  Refpiration.  So  alfo  on 
"  the  contrary,  when  any  Thing  affefts  or  alters 
*'  the  Heart,  thofe  Impreflions  are  not  only  rc- 
^  torted  to  ^hc  Brain  by  the  fame  Du£fc  of  the 
"  Nerves,  but  alfo  the  Blood  it  fclf  (its  Courfe 
''  being  once  changed)  flies  to  the  Brain  with  9 
"  different  and  unufual  Courfe,  and  there  agita- 
"  ting  the  animal  Spirits  with  divers  Impulfcs, 
"  produceth  various  Conceptions  and  Thoughts 
"  in  the  Mind.  And  he  tells  us,  "  That  hence 
^  it  was  that  the  ancient  Divines  and  Philofophcrs 
"  too,  made  the  Heart  the  Seat  of  Wifdom ;  and 


(c)  Id.  ib.  Dum  hanc  utriufque  fpeciei  differentiam  perpendc , 
fuccurrit  animo,   Bruta  ejfe  velut  tTj/ichimu,  &c. 

(_d)  That  our  great  Man  was  not  millaken,  there  is  great 
Reafon  to  imagine,  from  whnt  he  obferved  in  dilTccflmg  a 
Fool.  Befides,  the  Brain  being  but  fmall,  he  faith,  Pnapua 
auicm  difcnminis  neta  quam  inter  tlltm  CT"  viri  cordati  panes 
advertimm,  htccc  erat ;  ne:rjpt  quod  pr£di6ltis  Nervi  Interca- 
co/lalii  Plextti,  qucm  Cerebri  cr  Cordis  internuncmm  z/  Horn:- 
TJti  proprium  diximin,  in  Stulto  hoc  valde  txiliSf  tr  minor$ 
ii(rvoi:Hm  fatellitio  Jitpatus  fuerit.     I  bid. 

'^  certainly 
0  4 


330         The  Nervous  Kmd^Scc.     Book  VI. 

«  certainly  (faith  he)  the  Works  of  Wifdom  and 
''  Virtue  do  very  much  depend  upon  this  Com- 
"  merce  which  is  between  the  Heart  and  Brain  : 
"  And  fo  he  goeth  on  with  more  to  the  fame  pur^ 
pofe.     Upon  the  Account  of  this  Intercojlal  Com- 
merce with  the  Heart,  being  wanting  in  Brutes, 
there  is  another  fingularly  careful  and  wif&  Pro- 
vifion   the  infinite   Creator  hath   made  in  them , 
and  that  is.  That  by  Reafon  both  the  Par  Vagum 
and  the  Intercojlal  too,  do  not  fend  their  Branches 
to  the  Heart,  and  its  Appendage  in  Brutes,  there- 
fore, left  their  Heart  fhould  want  a  due  Propor- 
tion of  Nervous  VefTels,   the  Par  Vagum  fends 
more  Branches  to   their   Heart  than  to    that  of 
Man.     This  as  it  is  a  remarkable  Difference  be- 
tween Rational  and  Irrational  Creatures  j  fo  it  is 
as  remarkable  an  Argument  of  the  Creator's  Art 
and  Carcj  who  altho'  he  hath  denied  Brute- Ani- 
mals Reafon,  and  the  Nerves  miniftring  thereto, 
yet  hath  another  Way  fupplied  what  is  neceflary 
to  their  Life  and  State.    But  let  us  hear  the  fame 
great  Author's  Defcant  upon  the  Point  {e)  j  "  In- 
"  afmuch,  faith  he,  as  Beafts  are  void  of  Difcre- 
'^  tion,  land  but  little  fubjed  to  various  and  diffe- 
*'  rent  Paflions,  therefore  there  was  no  need  that 
"  the  Spirits  that  were  to  be  convey'd  from  the 
"  Brain  to.the  Pracordm^  Ihould  pafs  two  different 
«  Ways,  namely,  one  for  the  Service  of  the  vital 
'^  Fundiohs,  and  another  for  the  reciprocal  Impref- 
"  (ions  of  the  Affedions  j  but  it  was  fufiicient  that 
"  all  their  Spirits ,  whatever  Ufe  they  were  de-= 
*'  figned  for,  fhould  be  conveyed  one  and  the  famfe 
«'  Way. 


(«)  Id.  ib.  cap.  ip.  In  quantum  Bejii*  prttdentia  careat,  c/ 
varits  diverftft^ue  ^ajftenibfts,  &C. 

Her? 


Chap.  VII.         The  Cone In/ioH,  33i 

Here  now  in  the  Ner'uous  Kind  we  have  mnni- 
feft  Afts  of  the  Creator's  Dcfipn  and  WifJom,  in 
this  lb  manifelt  and  diflin6t  a  Provifion  tor  Ratio- 
nal and  Irrational  Crcaiiircs  5  and  that  Man  was 
evidently  intended  to  be  the  one,  as  the  Genus  of 
(Quadrupeds  was  the  other. 


CHAP.    VII, 

T/je  Conclusion. 


AND  now  'tis  Time-topaufe  3  while,  and 
ref]c6t  upon  the  whole.     And  as  from  the 
Confidcrations  in  the  preceding  Book,   we  have 
efpccKil  Reafon  to  be   thankful  to  our  infinitely 
merciful  Maker,  for  his  no  lefs  kind  than  wonder- 
ful Contrivances  of  our  Body  >  fo  v.'e  have  Reafon 
from  this  brief  View  I  have  taken  of  this  lall  Tribe 
of  the  Creation,   to  acknowledge  and  admird  the 
fame  Creator's  Work  and  Contrivances  in  them. 
For  we  have  here  a  large  Family  of  Animals,  in 
every  particular  Refpccft,  curioufly  cfintrived  and 
made,  for  that  efpecial  Pollute,  Place,  Food,  and 
Office  or  Bufinefs  which  they  obtain  in  the  World. 
So  that  if  we  confider  their  own.  particular  Hap- 
pinels  and  Good,  or  ^ian's  Ule  and  Service  j  or  if 
we  view  them  throughout,  and  confider  the  Parts 
wherein  they  agree  with  Man,  or  thofc  cfpccially 
wherein  they  differ,  we  fliall  find  all  to  be  io  far 
from  being  Things  fortuitous,  undcfigncd,  or  a- 
ny  way  accidental,  that  every  Thing  is  done  for 
the  bell  i  a^l  wifely  contrived,  and  incomparably 
fitted  up,  and  every  way  worthy  of  the  great  Cre- 
ator.    And  he  that  will  fhut  his  E-ycs,  and  not  fee 

God 


33V  The  Conclujion.  BookVL 

God  {a)  in  thefe  his  Works ,  even  of  the  poor 
Beafts  of  the  Earth,  that  will  not  fay  (as  Elihu. 
hath  it,  Job  XXXV.  lo,  1 1.)  Where  is  God  my  Maker  ^ 
lahoteacheth  us  more  than  the  Beajis  of  the  Earthy 
and  maketh  us  wifer  than  the  Fowls  of  the  Heaven  ? 
Of  fuch  an  one  we  may  ufe  the  Pfalmift's  Expref- 
fion,  P/^/.  xlxix.  12.  That  he  is  like  the  Beafis  {b) 
that  per ijh. 


^^^  I.  Deum  namque  ire  per  omnes 

Terra/que  traCiufque  Maris,  Coelumque  profundum. 
Hinc  Pe^udes,  Armenia,  viros,  genus  emne  Ferarum. 

Virgil  Georg.  L.  4. 

{h)  llloi  qui  nullum  omnino  Deum  ejfe  d^xerunt,  non  moda 

non  Philofophos,  fed  ne  homines  quidem  fuijfe  dixerim  ;   qui, 

mutts  fimilitmi,  ex  fob  corpore  cenfliterunt,  nihil  videntes  an'p- 

Pftt.    Ladant.  L.  7.  c.  9. 


BOOK 


Chap.L 


333 


BOOK    Vll. 

A  Survey  ^/  Birds. 

AV I N  G  briefly,  as  well  as  I  could^ 
dilpatch'd  the  Tribe  oi  ^adrupeds^ 
I  fhall  next  take  as  ferief  and  tranfi- 
cnc  a  View  of  the  feathered  'tribe. 
And  here  we  have  another  large 
Province  to  expatiate  in,  if  we  fhould  defccnd  to 
every  Thing  wherein  the  Workmanfhip  of  the  Al- 
mighty appears.  But  I  muft  contract  my  Survey 
as  much  as  may  be  j  and  fhall  therefore  give  only 
fuch  Hints  and  Touches  upon  this  curious  Family 
of  Animals,  as  may  ferve  for  Samples  of  the  rcll 
of  what  might  be  obferv'd. 

CHAP.    L 

Of  the  Motion  of  Birds ^  and  the  Parts 
m'tnijiring  thereto. 

AS  this  Tribe  hath  a  different  Motion  from 
that  of  other  Animals,  and  an  amphibious 
Way  of  Lifej  partly  in  the  Air,  and  partly  on 
the  Land  and  Waters  j  fo  is  their  Body  according- 
ly {hap'd,  and  all  their  Parts  incomparably  fitted 
for  that  Way  of  Life  and  Motion  j  as  will  be  found 
by  a  curfdry  View  of  fome  of  the  Particulars. 
And  the 

I.  And 


334    Motion  and  Tarts  of  Birds.  BookVIL 

I.  And  mofl  vifible  Thing,  is  the  Shape  and 
Make  of  their  Body,  hot  thick  and  clumfy,  but 
JnGomparably  adapted  to  their  Flight ;  Sharp  be- 
fore, to  pierce  and  make  Way  through  the  Air, 
and  then  by  gentle  Degrees  riling  to  its  full  Bulk. 
To  which  we  may  add, 

II.  The  neat  Pofition  of  the  Feathers  throughout 
the  Body  J  not  ruffled,  or  difcompds'd,  or  plac'd 
fome  this,  fome  a  contrary  Way,  according  to  the 
Method  of  Chance  J  but  all  artificially  plac'd  {d)^ 
for  facilitating  the  Motion  of  the  Body,  and  its  Se- 
curity at  the  fame  Time,  by  way  of  Cloathing  : 
And  for  that  End,  mod  of  the  Feathers  tend  back- 
ward, and  are  laid  over  one  another  in  exadt  and  re- 
gular Method,  armed  with  warm  and  foft  Down 
next  the  Body,  and  more  ftrongly  made,  and  curi- 
oufly  clos'd  next  the  Air  and  Weather,  to  fence 
•olf  the  Injuries  thereof.  To  which  Purpofe,  as 
aUb  for  the  more  eafy  and  nimble  gliding  of  the 
Body  through  the  Air,  the  Provifion  Nature  hath 
made,  and  the  Inftin6b  of  thefe  Animals  to  peen 
and  drefs  their  Feathers,  is  admirable ;  both  in  ref- 
pe6t  of  their  Art  and  Curiofity  in  doing  it,  and 
the  Oyl-bag  (^),  Glands,  and  whole  Apparatus  for 
that  Service. 


(a)  -See  before  Book  IV.  Chap.  ii.  Note  (I). 

(^)  Mr.  WlUiighb'j  faith,  there  are  two  Glands  for  the  Se- 
cretion of  the  unctuous  Matter  in  the  Oyl-bag,  And  fo  they 
appear  to  be  in  Geefe.  But  upon  Examination,  I  find,  that 
in  moll  other  Birds,  (fuch  at  leaft  as  I  have  enquir'd  into,) 
there  is  only  one  Gland :  In  which  are  divers  little  Cells, 
ending  in  two  or  three  larger  Cells,  lying  under  the  Nip- 
ple of  the  Oyl-l>ag.  This  Nipple  is  perforated,  and  being  pref- 
led,  or  drawn  by  the  Bird's  Bill,  or  Head,  emits  the  liquid 
Oyl,  as  it  is  in  fome  Birds,  or  thicker  unftuous  Greafe,  as  it 
is  in  others-  The  whole  Oyl-bag  is  in  its  itrudure  fomewhat 
conformable  to  the  Breafts  of  fuch  Animals  as  afford  Milk. 


III.  And 


ChAp.I.        7 he.  Wings  of  Birds.  335- 

III.  And  now  having  (aid  thus  much  relating  to 
the  Body's  Motion^  let  us  Ibivey  the  grand  Inllru- 
mcnt  thereof,  i\\zlVings.  Which  as  they  arc  prin- 
cipal Parts,  fo  arc  made  with  great  Skill,  and  plac'd 
in  the  mod  commodious  Point  oF  the  Body  (V),  to 
give  it  an  exa^  Equipoife  in  that  fubtile  Medium, 
the  Air. 

And  here  it  is  obfervable,  with  what  incompa- 
rable Curiofity  every  Feather  is  madcj  the  Shaft 
exceeding  Ibong,  but  hollow  below,  for  Strength 
and  Lightnefs  fake  j  and  above,  not  much  Icfs 
Urong,  and  fill'd  with  a  Parenchyma  or  Pith^  both 
ftrong  and  light  too.  The  V^anes  as  nicely  gaug'd 
on  each  Side  as  made  ;  broad  on  one  Side,  and  nar- 
rower on  the  other  j  both  which  incomparably  mi- 
nifter  to  the  progrcllive  Motion  of  the  Bird,  as  alio 
to  the  Union  and  Clofenefs  of  the  Wing  {d). 

And 


(c)  In  all  Birds  that  fly  much,  or  that  have  the  moft  oc- 
cafion  for  their  Wings,  it  is  manitefl  that  their  Wings  are 
plac'd  in  the  very  bed  Fart,  to  balance  their  Body  in  the  Air, 
and  to  give  as  fwift  a  ProgrefTion,  as  their  Wings  and  Body 
are  capable  of:  For  otherwife  we  fliould  perceive  them  to 
reel,  and  fly  unlleadily;  as. we  fee  them  to  do,  if  we  alter 
their  yEqiiipoife,  by  catting  the  End  of  one  of  the  Wings» 
or  hanging  a  Weigiit  at  any  of  the  extreme  Parts  of  the  Body. 
But  as  for  fuch  Birds  as  have  as  much  occaiion  for  Swiinniing 
as  Flying,  and  whofe  Wings  arc  there  lore  fet  a  little  out  of  the 
Center  of  the  Bodies  Gravity,  See  Book  IV.  Cha^.  8.  Kott  ^q). 
And  for  fuch  as  have  more  occafiun  for  Diving  than  l*"iying, 
and  whofe  Legs  are  for  that  Reafon  fet  more  backward,  and 
their  Wings  more  forward.     Chap.\\.  Noie(^k)  of  this  Boch. 

{{{)  The  wife  Author  of  Nature  h.uh  afforded  an  [•'.x- 
ample  of  the  great  Nicety  in  the  Formation  of  Buds,  by  the 
Nicety  obferv'd  in  a  Part  no  more  confiderable  than  the 
Vanes  of  the  Flag-feathers  of  the  Wing.  Among  others, 
thefe  two  Things  are  obfervable:  i.  The  Edges  of  the  ex- 
terior or  narrow  Vanes  bend  downwards,  but  of  the  interi- 
or wider  Vanes  upwards;  by  which  Means  they  catch,  hold, 
and  lie  clofc  to  one  another,  when  the  Wing  is  Ipread;  fo 
that  not  one  Feather  may  mifs  its  full  Force  and  Impulfc 

upon 


336  The  Wings  of  Birds.    BookViL 

And  no  lefs  exquifite  is  the  textrine  Art  of  the 
Plumage  (e)  alfo  5  which  is  fo  curioufly  wrought j 


upon  the  Air.  2.  A  yet  leffer  Nicety  is  obferv'd,  and  that 
is,  in  the  very  iloping  the  Tips  of  the  Flag- feathers :  The 
interiour  Vanes  being  neatly  flop'd  away  to  a  Point,  to- 
wards the  outward  Part  of  the  Wing;  and  the  exterioiir 
Vanes  flop'd  towards  the  Body,  at  leaft  in  many  Birds;  and 
in  the  Middle  of  the  Wing,  the  Vanes  being  equal,  are  but 
little  flop'd.  So  that  the  Wing,  whether  esjtended  or  (Kut, 
is  as  neatly  flop'd  and  form'd,  as  if  conftantly  trimm'd  with 
a  Pair  of  Sciffors. 

(e)  Since  no  exa<fl  Account  that  I  know  of,  hath  been  gi- 
ven of  the  Mechanifm  of  the  Vanes,  or  Weh  of  the  Feathers, 
luy  Obfervations  may  not  be  unacceptable.  The  Vane  confifts 
not  of  one  continu'd  Membrane;  becaufe  if  one  broken,  it 
would  hardly  be  reparable :  But  of  many  Lamim,  which 
are  thin,  ftifF,  and  fomewhat  of  the  Nature  of  a  thin  Quill. 
Towards  the  Shaft  of  the  Feather,  (efpecially  in  the  Flag- 
feathers  of  the  Wing,)  thofe  Lamina  are  broad,  crc.  of  a 
femicircular  Form ;  which  ferve  for  Strength,  and  for  the 
clofer  fhutting  of  the  Lamina  to  one  another,  when  Impul- 
fes  are  made  upon  the  Air.  Towards  the  outer  Part  of  the 
Vane,  thefe  Lamim  grow  flender  and  taper:  On  their  un- 
der Side  they  are  thin  and  fmooth,  but  their  upper  outer 
Edge  is  parted  into  two  hairy  Edges,  each  Side  having  a 
different  Sort  of  Hairs,  laminated  or  broad  at  Bottom,  and 
flender  and  bearded  above  the  other  half.  I  have,  as  well 
as  I  could,  reprefented  the  uppermoft  Edge  of  one  of  thefe 
Lamina  in  Fig.  18.  with  fome  of  the  Hairs  on  each  Side, 
inagnify'd  with  a  Microfcope.  Thefe  bearded  Briftles,  or 
Hairs,  on  one  Side  the  Lamina,  have  (trait  Beards,  as  in  Fig. 
39.  thofe  on  the  other  Side,  have  hoo'k'd  Beards  on  one 
iide  the  flender  Part  of  the  Briftle,  and  ftrait  ones  oh  the  o- 
ther,  as  ia  Fig.  20.  Both  thefe  Sorts  of  Briftles  magnify'd, 
(only  fcattering,  and  not  dofe,)  are  reprefented  as  they  grow 
upon  the  upper  Edge  of  the  Lamina  f.  t.  in  Fig.  18.  And 
in  the  Vane,  the  hook'd  Beards  of  one  Lamina,  always  He 
next  the  ftrait  Beards  of  the  next  Lamina;  and  by  that  Means 
lock  and  hold  each  other;  and  by  a  pretty  Mechanifm,  brace 
the  Lamina  clofe  to  one  another.  And  if  at  any  Time  the 
Vane  happens  to  be  ruffled  and  difcompes'd,  it  can  by  this 
pretty  eafy  Mechanifm,  be  reduc'd  and  repair'd.  Vid.  Book 
IV.  Chap.  xz.  Hou  (m). 


a; 


hi 


Chap.  I.         The  Tails  of  Birds.  3  3  7 

and  fo  artificially  interwoven,  that  it  cannot  be 
viewed  without  Admiration,  efpccially  when  the 
Eye  is  anilled  with  GlafTes. 

And  as  curioully  made,  fo  no  lefs  curioufly  are 
the  Feathers  placed  in  the  Wing,  exactly  accord- 
ing to  their  feveral  Lengths  and  Strength  :  The 
Principals  fet  for  Stay  and  Strength,  and  thefc  a- 
gain  well  lined,  faced,  and  guarded  with  the  Co" 
*vert  and  Secondary  Feathers^  to  keep  the  Air  from 
pafling  through,  whereby  the  ftronger  Impulfes 
are  made  thereupon. 

And  laftly,  To  fay  no  more  of  this  Part,  that 
deferves  more  to  be  faid  of  it,  what  an  admirable 
jipparatus  is  there  of  Bones^  very  ftrong,  but  with- 
al light  and  incomparably  wrought?  of  Joynts^ 
which  open,  fhut,  and  every  way  move,  accord- 
ing to  the  Occafions  either  of  extending  it  in 
Flight,  or  withdrawing  the  Wing  again  to  the 
Body  ?  And  of  various  Mufcles;  among  which  the 
peculiar  Strength  of  the  Peroral  Mufcles  deferves 
efpecial  Remark,  by  Reafon  they  are  much  Wron- 
ger (/)  in  Birds  than  in  Man,  or  any  other  Ani- 
mal, not  made  for  Flying. 

IV.  Next  the  Wings,  the  Tail  is  in  Flight  con- 
Cdcrable  j  greatly  aflilting  in  all  Afcents  and  De- 


(/)  PedoraUs  Mufcuki  Hom'mh  fieSlentes  humeros,  farvi 
KT  parum  carnofi  funt ;  non  /cquant  ^oam  aut  -joam  partem 
omnium  Mufculorum  Hominis.  E  contra  in  Avibusy  Petlora- 
les  Mufculi  vaftijftmi  funt,  c:' iquant,  imo  excedtint,  a"  ma- 
gii  pendent,  quam  reitqui  omnes  Mufculi  ejufdem  Avis  jimul 
fumptt.     BorcU.  de  Mot.  Animal.  Vol.  I.  I'rop.  184. 

Mr.  Wtllu^hby  having  made  the  like  Obfervation,  hath  this 
Refledion  on  it,  whence,  if  it  be  poffible  for  Man  to  fly,  tt  n 
thought  by  them  who  have  curtoufly  weighed  and  confidcred  the 
matter,  that  he  that  would  attempt  fuch  a  Thing  with  Hopes 
ef  Succefs,  mufi  fo  contrive  and  adapt  his  Wings,  that  he  may 
make  ufe  of  his  Legs,  and  not  his  Arms  tn  managing  them  : 
(becaufe  the  Mufcles  of  the  Legs  arc  ftronger,  as  he  ob- 
Icrvcs)    Willugh.  Ornitb.  L.  i-  c.  i.  §.  19. 

2"  kents 


338  The  Tails  of  Birds.       Book  VH. 

fcenrs  in  the  Air,  as  alfo  ferving  to  fteady  {g) 
Flight,  by  keeping  the  Body  upright  in  that  fub- 
tile  and  yielding  Medium^  by  its  readily  turning 
and  anfwering  every  Vacillation  of  the  Body. 

And  now  to  the  Parts  ferving  to  Flight,  let  us  add 
the  nice  and  compleat  Manner  of  its  Performance} 
all  done  according  to  the  ftrifteft  Rules  of  Mecha- 
nifm  (-6).  What  Rower  on  the  Waters,  whatAr- 
tifl  on  the  Land,  what  acuteft  Mathematician 
could  give  a  more  agreeable  and  exaft  Motion  to 
the  Wings,  than  thefe  untaught  flying  Artifts  do 
theirs !  Serving  not  only  to  bear  their  Bodies  up  in 
the  Air,  but  alfo  to  waft  them  along  therein,  with 
a  fpeedy  progreflive  Motion,  as  alfo  to  fteer  and 
turn  them  this  Way  and  that  Way,  up  and  down, 
falter  or  flower,  as  their  Occafions  require,  or  their 
Pleafure  leads  them. 

V.  Next  to  the  Parts  for  Flight,  let  us  view  the 
Feet  and  Legs  miniftering  to  their  other  Motion : 
Both  made  light,  for  eafier  Tranf^ortation  through 
the  Airj  and  the  former  fpread,  fome  with  Mem- 
branes for  Swimming  (?),  fome  without,  for  Heady 

Going, 


(g)  Mr.  Wlllughby,  Ray,  and  many  others,  imagine  the 
principal  ufe  of  tae  Tail  to  be  to  fteer,  and  turn  the  Body  in 
the  Air,  as  a  Rudder.  But  Borellt  hath  put  it  beyond  all 
doubr,  that  this  is  the  leall  ufe  of  it,  and  that  it  is  chiefly  to 
alM  the  Bird  in  its  Alcents  and  Defcents  in  the  Air,  and  to 
obviate  the  Vacillations  of  the  Body  and  Wings.  For  as  for 
turning  to  this  or  that  Side,  it  is  performed  by  the  Wings 
and  Inclination  of  the  Body,  and  but  very  little  by  the  help 
of  the  Tail, 

(h)  Szt  Borellt  ubi  fupr.  Prop.  iSi.crc. 

{t)  It  IS  coniiderable  in  all  VVater-Fowl,  how  exac?)ly  their 
Legs  and  Feet  correfpond  to  that  way  of  Life.  For  either 
their  Legs  are  long,  to  enable  them  to  wade  in  the  Waters: 
In  which  cafe,  their  Legs  are  bare  of  Feathers  a  good  way 
above  the  Knees,  the  more  conveniently  for  this  Purpofc. 
Their  Toes  alfo  are  all  abroad ;  and  in  fucb  as  bear  the 

Name 


Chap.  t.        The  Legs  of  Birdf.  339 

Going,  for  Perching,  for  Catching  and  Holding 
of  Prey  (^),  or  for  Hanging  by  the  Heels  to  ga- 
ther their  Food  (/),  or  to  fix  themfclvcs  in  their 
Places  of  Retreat  and  Safety.  And  the  latter,  name- 
ly the  Legs ^  all  curved  for  their  cafy  Perching, 
Roolting,  and  Red,  as  alfo  to  help  them  upoa 
their  Wings  in  taking  their  Flight,  and  to  b^ 
therein  commodiouHy  tucked  up  to  the  Body,  fo 
as  not  to  obltru6b  their  Flight.  In  fomc  long,  for 
Wading  and  Searching  the  Waters  j  in  fonae  of  a 
moderate  Length,  anfwcrable  to  their  vulgar  Oc- 
cafionsj  and  in  others  as  remarkably  fliorr,  to  an- 
fwer  their  efpecialOccafions  and  Manner  of  Life  (»»)» 
To  all  which  let  ug  add  the  placing  thefe  laft  men* 

tioned 


Name  of  Mudfuckers,  two  of  the  Toes  are  fomewhat  join* 
ed,  that  they  may  not  calily  fink  in  walking  upon  boggy 
Places.  And  as  for  fuch  as  arc  whole- footed,  or  whofe 
Toes  are  webbed  together  (excepting  fome  few)  their  Legs 
are  generally  fhort,  which  is  the  molt  convenient  Size  for 
Swimming.  And  'tis  pretty  enough  to  fee  how  artificraliy 
they  gather  up  their  Toes  and  Feet  when  they  withdravr 
their  Legs,  or  go  to  take  their  Stroke  ;  and  as  artificially  a- 
gain  extend  or  open  their  whole  Foot,  when  they  prefs  up- 
on, or  drive  themfelves  forward  in  the  Waters. 

(k)  Some  of  the  Charaderifticks  of  Rapacious  Birds,  are, 
to  have  hooked,  ftrong,  and  jharp-pointed  Beaks  and  Talotu, 
fitted  for  P.apine,  and  tearing  of  Flefh  ;  and  firong  and  brawny 
Thighs,  for  flriking  down  their  Prey.  Willughby  Ornith. 
L.  1.  c.  r.    Raii  Synopf.  Av.  Method,  p.  i. 

(/)  Such  Birds  as  climb,  particularly  thofe  of  the  Wood  peck- 
er Kind,  have  for  this  Purpofe  {'xs'iAx.\vHlughby  oblcrves,  L.  i. 
c.  4.)  I.  Strong  and  mufculous  Thighs.  2.  Short  Legs  and 
very  ftrong.  3.  Toes  ftanding  two  forwards  and  two  back- 
wards. Their  Toes  alfo  are  clofe  joined  together,  that  they 
may  more  ftrongly  and  firmly  lay  hold  on  the  Tree  they 
elimb  upon.  ^.  All  of  them have  a  hard  ftifFTail  bend- 
ing alfo  downwards,  on  which  they  lean,  and  fo  bear  up 
themfelves  in  chmbing. 

{m)  Swifts  and  Swallows  have  reinatkably  ihort  Legs,  efpc- 
tially  the  former,  and  their  Toes  graCp  any  Thing  very 
^'  Z  1  ftrongly. 


340  The  Heads  of  Birds.     Book  VII. 

tioned  Parts  in  the  Body.  In  all  fomewhat  out  of 
the  Center  of  the  Body's  Gravity  («),  but  in  fuch 
as  fwim,  more  than  in  others,  for  the  better  row- 
ing their  Bodies  through  the  Waters,  or  to  help 
them  in  that  Diving  (o)  too. 


llrongly.  All  which  is  ufeful  to  them  in  building  their  Nefls, 
and  other  /uch  Occafions  as  neceflitate  them  to  hang  fre- 
quently by  their  Heels.  But  there  is  far  greater  ufe  of  this 
Strudure  of  their  Legs  and  Feet,  if  the  Reports  be  true  of 
their  hanging  by  the  Heels  in  great  Clufters  (after  the  man- 
ner of  Bees)  in  Mines  and  Grotto's,  and  on  the  Rocks  by 
the  Sea,  all  the  Winter.  Of  which  latter,  I  remember  the 
late  learned  Dr.  Fry  told  this  Story  at  the  Univerlicy,  and 
confirmed  it  to  me  fince,  "vh.  That  an  ancient  Fiflierinan, 
accounted  an  honeft  Man,  being  near  fome  Rocks  on  the 
Coaft  of  Cornwal,  faw  at  a  very  low  Ebb,  a  black  Lift  of 
fomething  adhering  to  the  Rock,  which  when  he  came  to 
examine,  he  found  it  was  a  great  Number  of  Szvallotus,  and, 
if  Imifremember  not,  of  Swifts  Mo,  hanging  by  the  Feet  to 
one  another,  as  Bees  do;  which  were  covered  commonly 
by  the  Sea- Waters,  but  revived  in  his  warm  Hand,  and  by 
the  Fire.  All  this  the  Fiftierman  himfelf  afTured  the  Dodor 
of.     Of  this,  fee  more.   Chap.  3.  Note  {d)  of  this  Book. 

(»)  In  Birds  that  frequent  not  the  Waters,  the  Wings  are 
in  the  Center  of  Gravity,  when  the  Bird  lies  along,  as  in 
Flying;  but  when  it  ftands  or  walks,  the  Eredlion  of  the 
Body  throws  the  Center  of  Gravity  upon  the  Thighs  and 
Feet. 

(0)  See  Chap.  4.    Note  (/;). 


CHAP.    II. 

Of  the  Head,  Stomach,  and  other 
^arts  of  Birds. 

THus  having  difpatched  the  Par^  principally 
concerned  in  the  Motion  of  the   Feathered 
Trihy  let  us  proceed  to  Tome  other  Parts  not  yet 

ani- 


Chap.  II.       The  Heads  of  Birds.  3  41 

animadverted  upon.  And  we  will  begin  with  the 
Head.,  concerning  which  I  have  already  taken  no- 
tice of  its  Shape  for  making  way  through  the  Air ; 
of  the  m.ikc  of  the  Bill^  forgathering  Food,  and 
other  Ufes  j  the  commodious  Situation  of  the  Eye  j 
and  I  might  add  that  of  the  Ear  too,  which  would 
be  in  the  way,  and  obfl:ru6l  Flight,  if  'twas  like 
that  of  moll  other  Animals :  Alfo  I  might  fay  a 
great  deal  of  the  Conformation  of  the  Rrain^  and 
of  the  Parts  therein  wanting,  and  of  others  added, 
like  to  what  is  obfervable  in  Fifhes;  whofcPoffurc 
in  the  Waters  refembles  thatof  Birds  in  the  Air  (^), 
and  both  very  different  from  Man  and  Beafts  j 
and  lallly,  to  hint  at  no  more,  I  might  furvcy 
the  peculiar   Stru6lure  of  the  Laryn>i   (^),  the 

7'ongue 


{a)  Cerebra  Hcminum  v  ^tadrupedtim  in  plerifque  fimil'ta 

txiftunt.  Capltibus    Volucrum  cr  Pifcium  contenta,  ab 

utrtfque  prionbus  longe  divcrfa,  t amen  inter  fc,  quoad  pr£Ci- 
puas  iyxtfiixti  partes,  Symbola  reperiuntur.  The  Particulars 
wherein  the  Brains  of  Birds  and  Fidies  agree  with  one  ano- 
ther, and  wlierein  they  differ  from  the  Brain  of  Man  and 
Beafts,  fee  in  the  fame  juftiy  famous  Author,  Willis  Cereb. 
Anat.  c.  5. 

{h)  Circa  bifurcationem  Afpert  Arterii,  tle^ans  Artificis  li- 
here  agentis  indicium  detegitur  ex  Avium  comparatione  cum 
Gluadrupedibus  :  cum  Vocts  gratia  in  diverjis  Avibus  dtverfam 
mufculorum  fabricam  bifurcationi  Afpert.  Arteri&  dederit,  quo- 
rum nullum  vefiigium  extat  in  Homtne  zsr  §luadrupedibus  mihi 
vi/is,  ubi  omnes  vocis  mufculos  capiti  Arterii  junxit.  In  A- 
quila,  &c.  fupra  bifurcationem,  8cc.  Steno  in  Blaf.  Anar. 
Animal.  P.  i.  c.  4. 

Tiie  Afpera  Arteria  is  very  remarkable  in  the  Szvan,  which 
is  thus  defcribed  by  T.  Bartholin,  viz.  Afpera  Arteria  admi- 
randi  fatts  flruclurt..  Nam  pro  Colli  longitudine  deorfum  Oe- 
fophagi  comes  protenditur  donee  ad  Jiernum  perveniat,  in  cujus 
capfulam  fe  incurvo  flexu  inftnuat  CT*  recondit,  velut  in  luto 
loco  CT*  t/?eca,  mixque  ad  fundum  ejufdem  cdvitatis  delata  fur- 
fum  refieditur,  egrcditurque  angujlias  Srerni,  u-  Claviculis  me- 
dtir  ccncenfis,  quibus  ut  fulcro  nititur,  ad  Thoracemfe  fletlit 
-     —  Miranda  hcrcle  tnodit  omnibus   con  flit  utia  c  Refpirariani 

Z  3  infer  vit 


34X  ^be  Heads  of  Birds,     Book  VIl, 

7'ongue  (c)y  the  inner  Ear  (d)^  and  many  Matters 

he  fides  J 


infervit  o"  Voci.  Nam  cum  in  flagnorum  fundo  edttlia  pro 
•viSiu  qaxrat,  longijfimo  indiguit  collo,  ne  longa  mora  fujfocati- 
en'ts  incurreret  periculum.  Et  certe  dum  dimidiam  fere  horam 
toto  Capite  ^  Coll$  pron'ts  vctdo  immergitur,  pedibus  in  altum 
elatis  eoeloque  chverfis,  ex  ea,  ArteriA  q»£  pe^oris  diSid,  vagina 
reclufa  efi  portioned  tanquam  ex  condo  promo  fpiritum  haunt, 
Blaf.  ib.  CIO.  • 

(c)  The  StruAure  of  the  Tongue  of  the  Wood- Pecker  is -verj 
lingular  and  remarkable,  whether  we  look  at  its  great  Length, 
its  Bones  and  Mufcles,  its  encompaffing  part  of  the  Neck 
and  Head,  the  better  to  exert  it  felf  in  Length  ;  and  again, 
to  retradl  it  into  its  Cell ;  and  laftly,  whether  we  look  at 
its  (harp,  horny,  bearded  Point,  and  the  glevvy  Matter  at 
the  end  of  it,  the  better  to  ftab,  to  ftidc  unto,  and  draw 
out  little  Maggots  out  of  Wood.  Uiilis  en'im  Picis  (faith 
Cotter )  ad  Vermiculos,  Formicas,  aliaque  InfeSia  venanda  ta- 
lis Lingua  for  et.  Siquidem  Picusy  innata  fua  fagacitate  cum  de- 
frehendtt  alibi  in  arboribusy  -vel  carte,  vel  alia  de  cauia  cava- 
tis.  Vermes  infe£laque  delitefcere,  ad  illas  volitat,  fefeque  dir 
ptis,  ungulifque  poflerioribus  robuftijfimis,  ^  Cauda  pennis  ri- 
gidifftmis  fufientaty  donee  valtdo  ac  per  acuta  Rofiro  arboremper- 
tundat  ;  arbore  pertusd,  foramini  rojirum  immittit,  ac  quo  a- 
nimacula  flridore  excitet  percellatque,  magnam  in  arboris  cava 
emittit  vocem,  infedia  vociferatione  hac  cencitata  hue  illucque. 
repuiit ;  Picus  v.  linguam  fuam  exerit,  atque  aculeis,  hamif- 
que  animalia  infgit,  tnfixa  attrahit  v"  devorat.  Vid.  Blafii  U' 
bi  fupra.  P.i.  c.  14, 

{d)  I  have  before,  in  Book  IV.  Chap.  3.  Note  («),  takea 
iiotice  of  what  others  have  obferved  concerning  the  inner 
Bar  of  Birds,  referving  my  own  Obfervations  for  this  Place: 
Which  I  hope  may  be  acceptable,  not  only  for  being  fome 
of  them  new,  but  alfo  fhcwing  the  Mechanifm  of  Hearing 
in  general. 

In  this  Organ  of  Birds,  I  fhall  take  notice  only  of  three 
Parts,  the  Membranes  and  Cartilages ;  the  Columella  ;  and 
the  Conclave:  The  Drum,  as  fome  call  it,  or  Membrana 
Tympani,  as  Others,  confifts  of  two  Membranes,  the  Outer, 
which  covers  the  whole  Meatus,  Bafon  or  Drum,  (as  fome 
call  it)  and  the  inner  Membrane,  To  fupport,  diftend  and 
relax  the  outcrmoft,  there  is  one  fingle  Cartilage,  reaching 
from  the  Side  of  the  Meatus,  to  near  the  middle  of  the 
Membrane.  On  the  top  of  the  Columella  is  another  Carti- 
lage, confining  of  three  Branches,  a.  b.  c  in  Fig   13.  The 

longelt 


Chap.  II.       The  Heads  of  Birds.  343 

Jongeft  middle  Branch  a.  is  joined  to  the  top  of  the  fingl« 
tipper  Cartilage  before  fpoken  of,  and  adllh  it  to  bear  up 
the  upper  outer  Membrane  :  The  two  Branches,  h.  e.  arc 
joined  to  the  Os  Pttrofum,  at  fome  diftancc  from  the  outer 
Membrane:  Upon  this  inner  CartUagc,  is  the  inner  Mem- 
brane fixed,  the  two  outer  Sides  of  which,  a.  b.  and  a.  t. 
are  joined  to  the  outer  Membrane,  and  make  a  kind  of 
threc-fquare  Bag.  The  Defign  of  the  two  Branches  or  Legs 
of  the  Cartilage,  h.  c.  are  I  conceive  to  keep  the  CariiUge 
and  ColumelU  from  wavering  fide-ways,  and  to  binder  them 
.from  flying  too  much  back:  There  is  a  very  fine  (lender  Li- 
gament extended  from  the  oppofite  fide,  quite  crofs  x\\c  Me- 
atus or  Bafon,  to  the  Bottom  of  the  Cartilage,  near  its  join- 
ing to  the  ColumelU.  Thus  much  for  the  Membrarnt  Tyni' 
fani,  and  their  Cartilages. 

The  next  Part  is  the  Columella  (as  Schelhammer  calls  it.) 
This  is  a  very  fine,  thin,  light,  bony  Tube  ;  the  Bottom  of 
which  fpreads  about,  and  gives  it  the  Rclemblance  of  a 
wooden  Pot-lid,  fuch  as  I  have  feen  in  Country-Houfes.  It 
cxaftly  fliuts  into,  and  covers  a  Foramen  of  the  Conclave^ 
to  which  it  is  braced  all  round,  with  a  fine  fubtile  Mem- 
brane, compofed  of  the  tender  Auditory  Nerve.  This  Bot- 
tom or  Bafe  of  the  Columella,  I  call  the  Operculum. 

The  laft  Part,  which  fome  call  the  Labyrinth  and  Cochlea, 
confifting  of  Branches  more  like  the  Canales  Semicircularet 
in  Man,  than  the  Cochlea,  I  call  the  Conclave  Audit/is.  It 
is  (as  in  moft  other  Animals)  made  of  hard  context  Bone. 
In  moft  of  the  Birds  I  have  opened,  there  are  f/rc«/4rC<i»<i/;, 
fome  larger,  fome  lefier,  croffing  one  another  at  right  An- 
gles, which  open  into  the  Conclave.  But  in  the  Coo/e  it  is 
otherwife,  there  being  cochleous  Canals,  but  not  like  thofe 
of  other  Birds.  In  the  Conclave,  at  the  Side  oppofite  to  the 
Operculum,  the  tender  Part  of  the  Auditory  Nerve  enters,  and 
lineth  all  thofe  inner  retired  Parts,  vi^;..  the  Conclave  and  Cn- 
nals. 

As  to  the  Pajfages,  Column*,  and  other  Parts  obfcrvable  in 
the  Ear  of  Birds,  I  (hall  pafs  them  by,  it  being  fuiricient  to 
my  Purpofe,  to  have  defcribed  the  Parts  principally  concer- 
ned in  the  Adl  of  Hearing.  And  as  the  Ear  is  in  Birds  the 
moft  fimplc  and  incomplcx  of  any  Animals  Ear ;  fo  we  ma7 
from  it  make  an  eafy  and  rational  Judgment,  how  Hearicg 
is  performed,  viz.  Sound  being  a  Tremor,  or  Undulation  in 
the  Air,  caufed  by  the  Collifion  of  Bodies,  doth  as  it  moves 
along,  (!rike  upon  the  Drum,  or  Mcjnbrana  Tympani  of  the 
Ear:  Which  Motion,  whether  ftrong  or  languid,  flinll  or 
foft,  tuneful  or  not,  is  at  the  fame  Infiant  inipreflcd  upon 
the  Cartilages,  Columella,  and  Operculum,  and  fo  communi-r 
cated  to  the  Auditory  i^frve  in  the  Conclave, 

Z  4  Anci 


344  The  Heads  of  Birds.      BookVIT. 

befidesj  but  for  a  Sample,  I  fhall  only  infill  upon 
the  wonderful  Provifion  in  the  Bill  for  the  judg- 
ing of  the  Food,  and  that  is  by  peculiar  Nerves 
lodged  therein  for  that  Purpofe }  fmall  and  lefs  nu- 
merous in  fuch  as  have  the  Affiftance  of  another 
Senfe,  the  Eye  5  but  large,  more  numerous,  and 
thickly  branched  about,  to  the  very  End  of  the 
Beak,  in  fuch  as  hunt  for  their  Food  out  of  Sight 
in  the  Waters,  in  Mud,  or  under  Ground  (e). 

And 


And  now  if  we  compare  the  Organ  and  Ad  of  Hearing, 
■with  thofe  of  Sight,  we  ftiall  find,  that  the  Conclave  is  to 
Hearing,  as  the  Retina  is  to  Sight ;  thatfonorous  Bodies  make 
their  Impreffions  thereby  on  the  Brain,  as  vifible  Objeds  do 
by  the  Retina.  AL'b,  that  as  there  is  an  Apparatus  in  the  Eye, 
by  the  opening  and  (liutting  of  the  Pupil,  to  make  it  corre- 
fpond  to  all  the  Degrees  of  Light,  fo  there  is  in  the  Ear  to  make 
it  conformable  to  all  the  Degrees  of  Sound,  a  noble  Train  of 
little  Bones  and  Mufcles  in  Man,  o'c.  to  ftrain  and  relax  the 
Membrane,  and  at  the  fame  Time  to  open  and  fliut  the  Ba- 
fis  of  the  Stapes  (the  fame  as  what  I  call  the  Operculum  in 
Birds:)  But  in  Birds,  there  is  a  more  fimplc,  but  fufl&cient 
Apparatus  for  this  Purpofe,  tender  Cartilages,  inftead  of 
Bones  and  Joints,  to  correfpond  to  the  various  Impreffions 
of  Sounds,  and  to  open  and  fliut  the  Operculum.  Befides 
which,  I  fufped  the  Ligament  I  mentioned,  is  only  the  Ten- 
don of  a  Mufcle,  reaching  to  the  inner  Membrana  Tympanic 
and  joined 'thereto  (as  I  find  by  a  ftrider  Scrutiny)  and  not 
to  the  Cartilage,  as  I  imagined.  By  this  Mufcle,  the  inner 
Membrane,  and  by  Means  of  that  the  Outer  alfo  can  be  di- 
ftended  or  relaxed,  as  it  is  in  Man,  by  the  Malleus  and  its 
Mufcle,  vc 

(e)  Flat- hilled  Birds,  that  grope  for  their  Meat,  have  three 
Pair  of  Nerves,  that  come  into  their  Btlls,  whereby  they  have 
that  Accuracy  to  dijiingtiijl}  tvhat  is  proper  for  Food,  and  what 
to  be  rejedledtby  their  Tafle,  when  they  do  not  fee  it.  This 
ivas  mofi  evident  in  a  Duck's  bill  and  Head;  a  Duck  having 
larger  Nerves  that  ccme  into  their  Bills  than  Ceefe,  or  any 
other  Bird  that  I  have  fecn  ;  and  therefore  quajfer  and  grope 
out  their  Meat  the  mofi.  But  than  I  difcovered  none  of  thefe 
Nerves  in  round  lill'd  Birds.  But  fince,  in  my  Anatomies  in. 
the  Country,  t7i  a  Rock,  1  firfi  obferved  two  Nerves  that  came 
down  betwixt  the  Eyes  into  the  upper  Bill,  but  confiderably 

;  fmaller 


Chap.  II.      The  Stomach  of  Birds.  34^ 

And  now  from  the  Head  and  Mouth,  pafs  wc 
to  its  near  Ally,  the  Stomach,  another  no  Icfs  not- 
able than  ufeful  Part  j  whether  we  confider  the 
Elegancy  of  its  Fibres  and  Mufclcs,  or  its  Multi- 
plicity ;  one  to  foften  and  macerate,  another  to  di- 
gcft  i  or  its  Variety,  fuited  to  various  Foods,  fomc 
membraneous,  agreeable  to  the  frugivorous,  or  car- 
nivorous Kind  5  Ibme  mufculous  and  ftrong  (/),  fui- 
ted to  the  Comminution,  and  grinding  of  Corn 
and  Grain,  and  fo  to  fupply  the  Defed:  of  Teeth. 

And  now  to  this  Specimen  of  the  Parts,  I 
might  add  many  other  Things,  no  Icfs  curioufly 
contriv'd,  made  and  fuited  to  the  Occafions  of  ihefe 
Volatilesj  as  particularly  the  Strufture  and  Lodg- 


fmalUr  than  any  of  the  three  Pair  of  Nerves,  in  the  Bills  of 
Ducks,  but  larger  than  the  Nerves  in  any  other  round-bill' J> 
Birds.  And  'tis  remarkable  that  thefe  Birds,  more  than  any 
other  round- bill' d  Birds,  feem  to  grope  for  their  Meat  in  CoU" 
'dung,  &c.     Mr.  J.  Clayton,  in  Fhilof.  Tranlaa.  N".  io6. 

lobferv'd  three  Pair  of  Nerves  in  all  the  broad-bill'd  Birds 
that  1  could  meet  with,  and  in  all  fuch  ns  feel  for  their  Food 
out  of  Sight,  oi  Snipes,  Woodcocks,  Curleivs,  Geefe,  Ducks,  Teals, 
Widgeons,  &c.     Jhefe  Nerves  are  very  large,  equalling  aim cfi 

the  Optic  Nerve  in  Thicknefs. Tivo  are  diflnbuted  nigh  the 

End  cf  the  upper  Bill,  and  are  there  very  much  expanded,  paf- 
fing  through  the  Bone  into  the  Membrane,  lining  the  Roof  of  the 
Mouth.  Dr.  A.  Moulcn.  Ibid.  N".  199.  Or  both  in  Mr. 
Lcuthorp's  Abridg.  V.  i.  p.  JJ61,  S61. 

(/)  The  Gizzard  is  not  only  made  very  ftrong,  erpccial- 
ly  in  the  Granivorous;  but  hath  alfo  a  Faculty  ot  Grinding 
what  IS  therein.  For  which  Purpofe,  the  Bird  fwalloweth 
rough  Stones  down,  which,  when  grown  fmooth,  are  reje- 
aed  and  caft  out  of  the  Stomach,  as  ufelels.  This  Grindmg 
may  be  heard  in  Falcons,  Eagles,  a-c.  by  laying  the  Ear  dbfc 
to  them,  when  their  Stomachs  are  empty,  as  the  famous  Dr. 
Harvey  faith.      De  Generat.  F.xer.  7. 

As  to  the  Strength  of  the  Gizzard,  and  the  ure  of  Stones 
to  the  Digeftion  of  Fowls,  divers  curious  Experiments  may 
be  met  with,  try'd  by  Seigneur  Redi,  with  gl^il's  Bubbles,  lolid 
Glafs.  Diamonds,  and  other  hard  Bodies,     bee  hii  £.%/>.  Nat. 

t 

mcnt 


54^  l^f^s  Lungs  of  Birds.     Book  VIL 

ment  of  the  Lungs  {g)-,  the  Configuration  of  the 
Breafl^  and  its  Bone,  made  like  a  Keel,  for  com- 
modious Paflage  through  the  Air,  to  bear  the  large 
and  ftrong  Mufcles,  which  move  the  Wings,  and 
to  countcrpoife  the  Body,  and  fupport  and  reft  it 
ppon  at  rooft.  The  Neck  alfo  might  deferve  our 
Notice,  always  cither  exadly  proportion'd  to  the 
Length  of  the  Legs,  or  elfe  longer,  to  hunt  out 
Food,  to  fearch  in  the  Waters  {h)  j  as  alfo  to 
^ounterpoife  the  Body  in  Flight  (/).     And  laftly, 

I  might 


{g)  It  is  no  lefs  remarkable  in  Birds,  that  their  Lungs  ad- 
here to  the  Thorax,  and  have  but  httle  play,  than  that  in  o- 
ther  Animals  they  are  loofe,  and  play  much,  which  is  a  good 
ProvifiOn  for  their  ftcady  Flight.  Alfo  they  want  the  Dia- 
phragm, and  inftead  thereof,  have  divers  large  Bladders  made 
of  thin  tranfparcnt  Membranes,  with  pretty  large  Holes  out 
of  one  into  the  other.  Thefe  Membranes  feem  to  me  to  ferve 
for  LigamentSy  or  Braces  to  the  Vi/cera,  as  well  as  to  contain 
Air.  Towards  the  upper  Part,  each  Lobe  of  the  Lungs  is 
perforated  in  two  Places,  with  large  Perforations;  whereof 
one  is  towards  the  outer,  the  other  towards  the  inner  Part 
Of  the  Lobe.  Through  thefe  Perforations,  the  Air  hath  » 
Paffage  into  the  Belly,  (as  in  Book  I.  Chap.  i.  Note  (/?);)  that 
is,  into  the  foremention'd  Bladders;  fo  that  by  blowing  into 
the  afpera  Arteria,  the  Lungs  will  be  a  little  rais'd,  and  the 
whole  Belly  blown  up,  fo  as  to  be  very  turgid.  Which  doubt- 
lefs  is  a  Means  to  make  their  Bodies  more  or  lefs  buoyant,  ac- 
cording as  they  take  in  more  or  lefs  Air,  to  facihtate  there- 
by, their  Afcents,  and  Defcents:  Like  as  it  is  in  the  Air- 
iladdsrs  of  Fiflies,  in  the  laft  cited  Place.     Note  (i). 

(^)  Such  Birds  as  have  long  Legs,  have  alfo  a  long  Neck  ;  for 
that  otherwife  they  could  not  commodioujly  gather  up  their  Food, 
either  on  Land,  or  in  the  Water:  But  on  the  other  Side,  thofe 
which  have  long  Necks,  have  not  ahvays  long  Legs,  as  in  Swam 

•  "Zvhtift  Necks  ferve  them  to  reach  to  the  Bottom  of  Rivers^ 
&c.     Willughby'j  Ornithol.  L.  i.  c.  i.  §.  7. 

(i)  We  have  fufficient  Inftances  of  this  in  Geefe,  Ducks,  &c. 
whofc  Wings,  (their  Bodies  being  made  for  the  Convenience 
of  Swimming,)  are  plac'd  out  of  the  Center  of  Gravity, 
nearer  the  Head.  But  the  extending  the  Neck  and  Head  ia 
iplight,  caufeth  a  due  ^quipoife  and  Libration  of  the  Body 
upon  the  Wings,    Which  is  another  excellent  Ufe  of  the 

^OD^ 


Chap.  III.     Migration  of  Birds.  347 

I  might  here  take  Notice  of  the  Dcfed  of  the  Di- 
aphragm, fo  neccflary  in  other  Animals  to  Rtfpira- 
tion  ;  and  alfo  of  divers  other  Parts  redundant,  dc- 
fedlive,  or  varying  from  other  Animals.  But  ic 
would  be  tedious  to  infift  upon  all  -,  and  therefore  to 
the  Examples  already  given,  1  would  rather  recom- 
mend a  nice  Infpc£lion  (-^),  of  thofc  curious  Workj 
of  God,  which  would  be  manifell  Dcmonllrations 
of  the  admirable  Contrivance  and  Oeconomy  of  the 
Bodies  of  thofe  Creatures. 

From  the  Fabrick  therefore  of  their  Bodies,  I 
(hall  pafs  to  a  Glance  of  one  or  two  I'hings,  rela- 
ting to  their  State  \  and  fo  conclude  this  Genus  ot 
the  animal  World. 


long  Necks  of  thefc  Birds,  befides  that  of  reaching  and  fearch- 
ing  in  ihc  Waters  for  their  Food. 

But  in  the  Heron,  whofe  Head  and  long  Neck,  (although 
tuck'd  up  in  Flight,)  over-balance  the  hinder  Fart  of  the  Bo- 
dy; the  long  Legs  are  extended  in  Flight,  to  countcrpoifc 
the  Body,  as  well  as  to  fupply  what  is  wanting  in  the  Tail, 
from  the  Shortnefs  of  it, 

(k)  Steno  thus  concludes  his  Myology  of  the  Eagle,  Imper* 
feita  hic  Mujculorutn  dejcrif>tio,  non  minus  arida  ejl  Legenti- 
hus,  quiim  Infpe^lantibus  futrit  jucunda  eoru7idtm  prAparatio, 
F.UgantiJftma  enim  Mechanlces  artificia,  creberrime  in  Hits  ob~ 
•oifiy  verbis  non  nifi  obfcure  exprirnHntur,  carnitim  auftm  du' 
Huy  tendinum  colore,  tnfertionum  proportione,  CT*  trochlearutn 
diftributione  oculis  eipofeta  omnem  fuperattt  admirationem.  StC* 
no  in  Blaf.  Anat.  Animal.  V.  i.  c.  4. 


CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  Migration  of  Birds. 

Concerning  the  State  of  this  Tribe  of  jfni' 
mals^  the  firfl  Thing  I  fhall  fpeak  of,  (by 
Reafon  God  himfclf  inftanccth  in  it,)  fhall  be 
their  Migration,  mention'd,  Jer.  viii.  7.  2>a,  tht 
Stork  in  the  Hea'ven  knoweth  her  appointed  Timesy 

and 


348  Migration  of  Birds.      Book  VII. 

and  the  'Turtle.^  and  the  Crane,  and  the  Swallow  oh' 
fewe  the  lime  of  their  Coming  j  but  my  People,  &c. 

In  which  A6t  of  Migration,  there  are  two 
Things  to  me,  exceedingly  notable.  One  is  what 
the  Text  fpeaks  of,  their  knowing  their  proper 
Times  for  their  PaJJage,  when  to  come  {a),  when 
to  go;  as  alfo  that  fome  fhould  come  when  others 
go  J  and  fome  others  go  when  thefe  come.  There 
is  no  doubt  but  the  Temperature  of  the  Air,  as  to 
Heat  and  Cold,  and  their  natural  Propenfity  to 
breed  their  Young;  may  be  great  Incentives  to  thofe 
Creatures  to  change  their  Habitation :  But  yet  it  is 
a  very  odd  Inftind,  that  they  fhould  at  all  fhifc 
their  Habitation :  That  fome  certain  Place  is  not 
to  be  found  in  all  the  terraqueous  Globe,  affording 
them  convenient  Food  and  Habitation  all  the  Year, 
cither  in  the  colder  Climes,  for  fuch  as  Delight  in 
the  colder  Regions,  or  the  hotter,  for  fuch  Birdi 
cf  Pajfage  as  fly  to  us  in  Summer. 

Alfo  it  is  fomewhat  Grange,  that  thofe  untaught, 
unthinking  Creatures,  fhould  fo  exa6tly  know  the 
befl  and  only  proper  Seafons  to  go  and  come. 
This  gives  us  good  Reafon  to  interpret  the  rv-^y\a 
appointed  'Times  {b),  in  the  Text,  to  be  fuch  Times 
as  the  Creator  hath  appointed  thofe  i.'\nimals,  and 
hath  accordingly,  for  this  End,  imprinted  upon 
their  Natures  fuch    an  Inftin6t,   as  exciteth  and 


(4)  Curio/a  res  eji,  fcire,  quam  exaEVe  hoc  genus  avium 
[Gruiim]  quotannis  obfervet  tem^ora  fui  redltus  ad  nos.  Anna 
1667.  prim£  Grues  ccrmparuertint  in  cawpefiribus  Pif&  20  Feb. 
&c.     F.  Redi  Exp.  Nat.  p.  100.  ubi  plura. 

(6)  ¥\0Vit'y9'^  indixit,  conflituit,  fcil.  locum,  veltempus,  ubi 
vet  quando  aliquid  fieri  debet.      Biixt.  in  verb. 

He  volnntate  fua  certtorem  reddidit.  Con.  Kircher  concor- 
dant. Pars.  I.  Col.  1846.  lyiD  Generaltter  pro  re  aliqua  cer- 
tcty  attefiatA,  CT*  definita  accipitur.  i.  Pro  tempore  certo  <0' 
conftituto.  2.  Deinde  pro  fcfio  fe:i  Solennitate,  qui  certo  ^  Jla- 
<o  tempore  celebratur.  3.  Pro  loco  certo  conjlituto.  Id.  ibid. 
CpI.  1847. 

moveth 


Chap.  III.      Migration  of  Birds.  349 

moveth  them  thus,  at  proper  Times,  to  fly  from 
a  Place  that  would  obllruft  their  Generation,  or 
not  afford  convenient  F'ood  for  them,  and  their 
Young,  and  betake  thcmfclvcs  to  another  Place,  af- 
fording all  that  is  wanting  for  Food  or  Incubation. 

And  this  leads  me  to  another  Thing  remarkable 
in  this  A61:  of  Migration}  and  that  is.  That  thofe 
unthinking  Creatures  Ihould  know  what  Way  to 
fteer  their  Courfe  {c)  and  whither  to  go.  Whac 
but  the  great  Creator's  Inftind:  fhould  ever  move  a 
poor  foolifli  Bird,  to  venture  over  vail  Trails  of 
Land,  but  efpecially  over  large  Seas  ?  If  it  fhould 
be  faid.  That  by  their  high  Afcents  up  into  the  Air, 
they  can  fee  crofs  the  Seas  j  yet  what  fhould  teach 
or  perfuade  them,  that  that  Land  is  more  proper 
for  their  Purpofc,  than  this?  That  Britain^  (for 
Inllance,)  fhould  afford  them  better  Accommoda- 
tions than  /Egypt  {cl)^  than  the  Canaries^  than  Spain, 


or 


(c)  gw/i  non  cum  admiratlone  videat  ordinem  o'  politiam  pe- 
regrinantium  jivium,  in  innere,  turmatim  volantium,  per  Ion- 

gos  terrarum  o"  maris  traclui  abfque  Acu  marina? ^btis 

eas  ctrtum  iter  in  aeris  mutabili  regione  docuit  ?  S^jjis  pntentA 
figna,  CT*  futurs.  vis.  indicia ;  quis  eas  ducit,  nutrit,  o^  vit^t 
necejjaria  minifirat !  &uis  infulas  v  hofpitia,  ilia,  in  quibus 
vii'lum  reperiant,  indicavit ;  modumque  ejufmodi  Icca  in  pere- 
grinationibus  fuis  inveniendi  ?  Hic  fane  fuper ant  hominum  cap- 
turn  zjr  indtiflriam,  qui  non  nifi  longis  experientiis,  multis  iii- 

nerariis,    chartis  geographies, cr  actis  magnesia  benef.cio, 

'ejufmodi  marium  o"  terrarum  tradlus  confcsre  tentant  qj- 
audent.     Lud.  de  Beaufort.  Cofmop.  divina  Sect.  ^.  c.  r. 

{d)  I  inftance  particularly  in  JEgypt,  becaufe  Mr.  Willugh- 
hy  thinks  Swallows  fly  thither,  and  into  M:hinpta,  &c.  ami 
that  they  do  not  lurk  in  Holes,  oi  under  Water,  as  Olaus 
Magnus  Reports.  Vid.  Omith.  L.  2.  c.  3.  But  Ftmullcr  puts 
the  Matter  out  of  doubt;  who  faith,  Meminime plures,  quam 
quas  Medimnus  caperit,  Hirundines  ar6ie  coacervatas  intra  Pif- 
cin&  cannas,  fiib  glacie  prorfus  ad  fenfum  exanimes  pulfanttt 
tamen,  reperiijfe.  Etmuller  Differt.  z.  c.  10.  §.  5.  This  as 
it  is  hkc  what  Ol.  Magnus' Uiih,  fo  is  a  Confirmation  of  it. 
The  Archbifhop's  Account  is,  In  Septtntrtonalibus  aquis  fapi- 
us  cafu  Pifcatoris  txtrahuntur  Hirundines,  in  tnodmn  conglt- 

•     mtrat* 


3  5*0  Migration  of  Birds.     BookVIL 

or  any  of  thofe  many   intermediate   Places  over 
which  feme  of  them  probably  fly. 

And  laftly,  to  all  this,  let  us  briefly  add  the  Ac- 
commodations thefe  Birds  of  Pajfage  have^  to  en- 
able them  to  take  fuch  long  Flights,  wz.  the 
Length  of  their  Wings,  or  their  more  than  ordi- 
nary Strength  {e)  for  Flight. 


wiratA  majji,  quA  ore  ad  os,  cr  ala  ad  alam,  a'  pede  ad  pedetn 
pofi  principmm  auttimni  feft  inter  cunnai  defcenfurd.  coLliga.runt, 
■  ■  ■  'MajJ'a  autem  ilU  per  imperifos  adolefcentes  ~  ~  ■  ~  extra^a, 
atque  in  &ftuaria  portata,  caloris  acceJJ'u  Hirundinei  refolutA, 
■volar e  quidem  incipiunt,  Jed  exiguo  tempore  durant,  Ol.  Mag. 
Hift.  L.  19.  c.  20. 

Since  my  penning  this  Note,  we  had,  at  a  Meeting  of  the 
Royal-Society,  leh.  it.  1711-13.  a  farther  Confirmation  of 
Swallows  retiring  under  Water  in  Winter,  from  Dr.  Colas,  a 
Perfon  very  curious  in  thefe  Matters ;  who  fpeakiiig  of  their 
Way  of  Fifliing  in  the  northern  Parts,  by  breaking  Holes, 
and  drawing  their  Nets  under  the  Ice,  faith,  that  he  faw  fix- 
teen  Swallows  fo  drawn  out  of  the  Lake  of  Samrodt,  and  a- 
bout  Thirty  out  of  the  King's  great  Pond  in  Rofineden ;  and 
that  at  Schlebttten,  near  an  Houfe  of  the  Earl  of  Dolma,  he 
faw  two  Swallows  juft  come  out  of  the  Waters,  that  could 
fcarce  ftand,  being  very  wet  and  weak,  with  their  Wings 
hanging  on  the  Ground  :  And  that  he  hath  obferv'd  the  Swak 
lows  to  be  often  weak  for  fome  Days  after  their  Appearance. 

(<)  As  Swallows  are  well  accommodated  for  long  Flights, 
by  their  long  Wings,  fo  are  §lHails  by  the  Strength  of  their 
feSloral  Alufcles,  by  the  Breadth  of  their  Wings,  o'c  For 
Quails  have  but  fhort  Wings  for  the  Weight  of  their  Body  j 
and  yet  they  fly  from  us  into  warmer  Parts,  againft  Winter, 
and  to  us  in  Spring,  crofTing  our  Seas.  So  divers  Travellers 
tell  us  they  crofs  the  Mediterranean  twice  a  Year,  flying  from 
Europe  to  Africa,  and  back  again  :  Thus  Bellonius  in  Mr. 
Williighby,  faith,  When  we  fail'd  from  Rhodes  to  Alexandria 
of  ^gypt,  many  Quails  flying  from  the  North  towards  the 
South,  where  taken  in  our  Ship;  whence  1  am  verily perfua- 
ded,  that  they  fnft  Places:  For  formerly  alfo,  when  I  fail'd 
out  of  the  Ifle  of  Zzni  to  Morea,  or  Negropont,  in  the  Spring 
Time,  I  had  obfervd  Quails  flying  the  contrary  Way,  from 
South  to  North,  that  they  might  abide  there  all  Summer.  At 
which  Time  alfo,  there  ivert  a  great  many  taken  in  our  Ship, 
Ornith.  p.  170. 

CHAP. 


Chap.  IV.  3jr 

CHAP.    IV. 
Of  the  Incubation  of  Birds. 


ANother  Thing  relating  to  the  State  of  this 
Tribe  of  Animals,  is  their  Incubation. 
And  firft,  the  E^  it  fclf  deferves  our  Notice. 
Its  Parts  within,  and  its  crufty  Coat  without,  arc 
admirably  well  fitted  for  the  Bufinefs  of  Incuba- 
tion. That  there  fhould  be  one  Part  provided  for 
the  Formation  of  the  Body  ((?),  before  its  Exit  in- 
to the  World,  and  another  for  its  Nourifhmcnt, 
after  it  is  come  into  the  World,  till  the  Bird  is  a- 
ble  to  fliift  for,  and  help  it  felf  j  and  that  thefc 
Parts  ihould  be  fo  accurately  brac'd,  and  kept  in 
due  Place  (^),  is  certainly  a  defign'd,  as  well  as 
curious  Piece  of  Workmanlhip. 

And 


{a)  The  Chicken  is  form  d  out  of,  and  nourijh'd  by  the  Whitt 
alone,  till  it  be  grown  great.  The  Tolk  ferves  for  the  Chicken's 
Nourifl}ment,  after  it  is  well  grown,  and  partly  alfo  after  it  is 
hatch'd.  For  a  good  Part  of  the  lolk  remains  after  Exclufiov^ 
being  received  into  the  Chicken  s  Belly  ;  and  being  there  reftrvd^ 
as  in  a  Store-houfe,  it  by  the  [Appendicula,  or  Dudus  intcfti- 
nalis,]  M  by  a  tunnel,  convey'd  into  the  Guts,  and  ferves  itt' 
flead  of  Milk,  &c.  Willugh.  Ornich.  L.  i.  c.  3.  Ipfum  ani- 
mal ex  albo  liquore  Ovi  ctrporatur.  Cibus  ejus  in  lutco  ejl, 
Plin.  L.  10.  c.  53. 

Arijlotle  faith,  The  long  fltarp  Eggs  bring  Temales ;  the  round 
ones,  with  a  larger  Compafs  at  the  fljarptr  End,  Males.  Hilt. 
An.  L.  6,  c.  X.  After  which,  he  tells  of  a  Sort  at  Syraeuje, 
that  fate  drinking  fo  long,  till  Eggs  were  hatch'd;  as  alfo  o£ 
the  Cuftom  of  A^gypt,  of  hatching  Eggs  in  Dunghills. 

{b)  As  the  Shell  and  Skin  keep  the  Yolk  and  two  White* 
together;  fo  each  of  the  Paris,  (the  Yolk  and  inner  White 
at  leaft,)  are  fcparated  by  Membranes,  involving  them.  At 
each  End  of  the  Egg  is  a  Treddle,  fo  cajl'd,  becaufe  it  was 

J  formerly 


35'2.  Incubation  of  Birds.     Book  V 11. 

And  then  as  to  the  A£l  it  felf,  of  Incubation^ 
What  a  prodigious  Inftinft  is  it  in  all,  or  almoft 
all  the  feveral  Species  of  Birds,  that  they,  and  only 
they,  of  all  Creatures,  fhould  betake  themfelves  to 
this  very  Way  of  Generation  ?  How  fhould  they 
be  aware  that  their  Eggs  contain  their  Young,  and 
that  their  Production  is  in  their  Power  (<r)?  What 
fhould  move  them  to  betake  themfelves  to  their 
Nefts,  and  there  with  Delight  and  Patience  to  a- 
bidc  the  due  Number  of  Days  ?  And  when  their 
Young  are  gotten  into  the  World,  I  have  already 
(hewn  how  admirable  their  Art,  their  Care,  and 
^•xo^yn  is  in  bringing  them  up  until,  and  only  until, 
they  are  able  to  ihift  for  themfelves. 


formerly  thought  to  be  the  Sperm  of  the  Cock.  But  the 
Vfe  of  thefe,  (faith  Dr.  Harvey  in  Willugh.  Ornith.  c.  3.)  i$  to 
he  as  'twere,  the  Poles  of  this  Mkrocofm,  and  the,  Connetl'tons 
of  all  the  Membranes  twified  and  knit  together,  by  which  the 
Liquors  are  not  only  conferv'd,  each  in  its  Place,  but  do  alfo  re- 
tain their  due  Pofition  one  to  another.  This,  ahhough  in  a 
great  Meafure  true,  yet  doth  not  come  up  to  what  I  have 
my  felf  obferv'd ;  for  I  find,  that  thefe  Chalaz£,  or  TreddleSf 
ferve  not  barely  to  keep  the  Liquors  in  their  Place,  and  Po- 
rtion to  one  another;  but  alfo  to  keep  one  and  the  fame 
Part  of  the  Yo^k  uppermoft,  let  the  Egg  be  turn'd  nearly 
which  way  it  will ;  which  is  done  by  this  Mechanifm  :  The 
ChalazA  are  fpecifically  lighter  than  the  Whites,  in  which 
they  fwim ;  and  bemg  brac'd  to  the  Membrane  of  the  Yolk, 
rot  exacftly  in  the  Axis  of  the  Yolk,  but  fomewhat  out  of 
it,  caufeih  one  Side  of  the  Yolk  to  be  heavier  than  the  o- 
ther;  fo  that  the  Yolk  being  by  the  Chalaz&mz^c  buoyant,', 
and  kept  fwimraing  in  the  Midit  of  two  Whites,  is  by  its 
own  heavy  Side  kept  with  the  fame  Side  always  uppermoft  ; 
which  uppermoil  Side  I  have  fome  Reafon  to  think,  is  that, 
on  which  the  Cicatncula  lies;  that  being  commonly  upper- 
moil  in  the  Shell,  efpecially  in  fome  Species  of  Eggs  more  I 
think  than  others. 

(c)  All  Birds  lay  a  certain  Number  of  Eggs,  or  nearly  that 
Number,  and  then  betake  themfelves  to  their  Incubation; 
but  if  their  Eggs  be  withdrawn,  they  will  lay  more.  Of 
which,  fee  Mr.  Rays  Wif.  of  God,  p.  137. 

And 


Chap.  IV.       Incubation  of  Birds.  15*3 

And  lartly,  when  almofl  the  whole  Tribe  of 
Birds,  do  thus  by  Incubation,  produce  their  Young, 
it  is  a  wonderful  Deviation,  that  fomc  few  Fami- 
lies only,  fhould  do  it  in  a  more  novercal  Way  (^), 
without  any  Care  or  Trouble  at  all,  only  by  lay- 
ing their  Eggs  in  the  Sand,  expofcd  to  the  Heat 
and  Incubation  of  the  Sun.  Of  this  the  Holy 
Scripture  it  felf  gives  us  an  Inftancc  in  the  O- 
ftrich :  Of  which  we  have  an  Hint,  Lam.  iv.  5. 
The  Daughter  of  my  People  is  become  cruel^  like  the 
Ofiriches  in  the  IVildernefs.  This  is  more  plainly 
exprcflcd  in  'job  xxxix.  14,  if,  16,  17.  [The  O- 
llrich]  leavcth  her  Eggs  in  the  Earthy  and  ivarmetb 
them  in  the  Duft^  and  forgetteth  that  the  F'cot  may 
crujh  them,  or  that  the  Wild- Be  aft  may  break  them. 
She  is  hardened  againjl  her  Toung  ones,  as  though  they 
•were  not  hers  :  Her  Labour  is  in  'vain^  ivithout  Fear, 
Becaufe  God  hath  deprived  her  of  IVifdom,  neither 
hath  he  imparted  unto  her  Underfianding.  In  which 
Words  I  (hall  take  notice  of  three  Things,  i .  Of 
this  anomalous  Way  of  Generation.  It  is  not  ve- 
ry ftrange,  that  no  other  Incubation  but  that  of 


(i)  The  Jahon  is  a  Bird  no  bigger  than  a  Chicken,  but  is 
faid  to  lay  an  Egg  larger  than  a  Goofe's  Egg,  and  bigger 
than  the  Bird  it  lelf.  Thefe  they  lay  a  Yard  deep  in  the 
Sand,  where  they  are  hatch'd  by  the  Warmth  of  the  Sun; 
after  which  they  creep  out,  and  get  to  Sea  for  Provifions. 
Navarett's  Account  of  China  in  Colleil.  of  Voyages,  Vol.  r. 
This  Account  is  in  all  Probabihty  borrow'd  from  Nieremherg, 
or  Hernandez,  (that  copy'd  from  him,)  who  call  this  Bird  by 
the  Name  of  Daie,  and  its  Eggs  Tapun,  not  the  Bird  it 
felf,  as  Navareite  doth.  But  my  Friend  Mr.  Ray  faith  of 
it,  Hijlorta  ifihtc  proculdubio  fabulofa  o"  falfa  ejl.  ffljamvii 
entm  Aves  nonnulU  maxima  ova  parium,  ut  v.  g.  Alkae, 
LomwidE,  Anates,  Ardicae,  arc.  hujufmodi  tamen  unum  dun- 
taxat,  non  plura  ova  ponunt  antequam  mcubent :  nee  ullam  in 
reruTH  natura  avem  dari  exifltmo  cujfts  ova  albumme  cartanr. 
Cum  Albumen  pncipua  ovi  pan  fit,  quodque  primnm  foetui  4- 
limcntHTn [ukminifirat.    Rah  Synop.  Av.  Method,  p.  iss- 

A  a  the 


354  Incidation  of  Birds.      BookVll. 

the  Sun,  (hould  produce  the  Young  j  but  'tis  ve- 
ry odd  and  wonderful  that  any  one  Species  fhould 
vary  from  all  the  rert  of  the  Tribe.     But  above  all, 
2.  The  fingular  Care  of  the  Creator,  in  this  Cafe, 
is  very  remarkable,,  in  fupplying  fome  other  Way 
the  Want  of  the    Parent-Animals  Care  and  Xto^- 
yvi  {e)y  fo  that  the  "Young  fhould  notwithllanding 
be  bred  up  in  thofe  large  and  barren  Dcfarts  of  A- 
rabia^Lud  Africa^  and  fuch  like  Places  wh-ere  thofe 
Birds  dwell,  the  mofl  unlikely  and  unfitting  (in 
all  human  Opinion)  to  afford  Suftenance  to  young 
helplefs  Creatures  i  but  the  fitteft  therefore  to  give 
Demonitrations  of  the  Wifdom,  Care,  and  efpe- 
cial  Providence  of  the  infinite  Creator  and  Confer- 
vator  of  the  World.     3.  The  laft  Thing  I  fhall  re- 
mark is.  That  the  Inffmds  of  Irrational  Animals, 
at  leaft  of  this  fpecified  in  the  Text,  is  attribut- 
ed to  G  o  D.     For  the  Reafon  the  Text  gives  why 
the  Ofirich  is  hardened  againfi  her  Toung  Ones^  as 
thougjj  they  nvere  not  hers^  is,  Becaufe  GOD  hath 
deprived  her  .of  tVifdom^  and  not  imparted  Under' 
ftanding  to  her ;  /.  e.  he  hath  denied  her  that  Wif- 
dom, he  hath  not  imparted  that  Underflanding, 
that   Sto^^v),  that  natural  Inilin6t  to  provide  for, 
and  nurle  up  her  Young,  that  moft  other  Crea- 
tures of  the  fame,  and  other  Tribes  aie  endowed 
with. 


{e)  Ihe  Eggs  of  the  Oftrich  being  buried  in  the  Sand,  are 
chenjJicd  only  by  the  Heat  of  the  Sun,  till  the  Toung  he  exclpi' 
ded.  For  the  Writers  of  Natural  Hifiory  do  generally  agree^ 
that  the  old  Birds,  after  they  have  laid  and  covered  their  Eggs 
in  the  Sand,  forjake  them,  and  take  no  more  Care  of  them. 
Willugh.Ornith.  L.  2,.  c.  8.  §.  r. 

But  there  is  another  Oftrich  [of  America']  which  Acaret 
tells  us  of,  that  takes  more  Care  of  her  Young,  by  carrying 
four  of  her  Eggs,  a  little  before  (lie  hatcheth,  to  four  Parrs 
©f  her  Neft,  there  to  breed  Worms  for  Food  for  her  Young. 
Afaret'i  Difc,  in  Philof  Tranf  N^.  89. 

Thus 


Chap.  IV.  N'tdiJication,3cc.  of  Birds.         ^Sy 

Thus  I  have  difparchcd  what  I  intend  no  inlilt 
upon  concerning  the  State  of  this  Set  of  Animals  ; 
of  which,  as  alfo  of  their  admirable  Inilin6Vs,  a 
great  deal  more  might  delerve  our  cfpecial  Obfcr- 
vationi  particularly  the  admirable  Curiolity,  Art, 
and  Variety  of  Nidification  (/),  ufcd  among  the 
the  various  Species  of  Birds ;  the  great  Sagacity, 
and  many  Artifices  ufcd  by  them  in  the  Invelliga- 
tion  and  Capture  of  their  Prey  (g)^  the  due  Pro- 
portion of  the  more  and  lei's  ufeful,  the  Scarcity 
of  the  Voracious  and  Pernicious,  and  the  Plenty 
of  the  Manfuete  and  Ufeful  {b).  /\lfo  the  Variety 
of  their  Motion  and  Flight  might  dcferve  Confi- 
deration,  the  Swiftnefs  of  fuch  whofe  Food  is  to 
be  fought  in  far  dillant  Places,  and  different  Sea- 
fons  (i)  f  the  flower  Motion  and  ihort  Flights  of 
others  more  domeftick  j  and  even  the  Aukward- 
nefs  of  fome  others  to  Flight,  whbfe  Food  is  near 
at  hand,  and  to  be  gotten  without  any  great  Oc- 
cafion  of  Flight  (k).  Thefe  and  divers  other  fuch 
like  Things  as  thefe,  I  Hiy,  I  might  have  fpoken 
more  largely  unto  j  but  1  Ihall  pafs  them  by  with 
only  a  bare  Mention,  having  already  taken  notice 
of  them  in  the  Company  of  other  Matters  of  the 
like  Nature,  and  manifclted  them  to  be  A€ts  of  ex- 
cellent Defign,  Wifdom,  and  Providence,  in  the 
great  Creator. 


(/)  See  Book  IV.  ch.  13. 

(g)  See  Bookl\'.  ch.  11.  and  14. 

{h)  See  Book  IV.  ch.  10.  beginn. 

(1)  See  Book  IV.  ch.  8. 

{k)  The  ColyfhOi,  or  Douckers,  having  their  Food  near  at 
hand  in  the  Waters,  are  remarkably  made  tor  Diving  there- 
in. Their  Hcadi  are  Imall ,  Bills  flvarp  pointed ,  Wings 
finall,  Legs  flat  and  broad,  and  placed  backward,  and  nearer 
the  Tail  than  in  other  Birds;  and  laftly,-  their  Feet;  feme 
are  whole  footed,  iame  cloven- footed,  but  withal  fin-toed. 
Vfd.  WillHgh,  Ornith,  L.  3.  §,  5. 

A  a  1  CHAP. 


Ss6  Book  VII. 

CHAP.    V. 
The  Conclusion. 

AN  D  now,  if  we  refle6t  upon  the  whole  Mat- 
ter, we  fhall  here  find  another  large  Tribe 
of  the  Creation,  abundantly  fetting  forth  theWif* 
dom  and  G4ory  of  their  great  Creator.     We  praife 
the  Ingenuity  and  Invention  of  Man,  for  the  Con- 
trivance of  various  pneumatick  Engines  >  we  think 
them  witty,  even  for  their  unfuccefsful  Attempts 
^o  fwim  in,  and  fail  through  that  fubtle  Element 
the  Air  j  and  the  curious  Mechanifm  of  that  Ar- 
tift  is  had  in  Remembrance,   and  praifed  to  this 
Day,  who  made  a  Dove,  or  an  Eagle  (a)  to  fly 
but  a  {hort  Space.     And  is  not  therefore  all  imagi- 
nable Honour  and  Praife  due  to  that  infinite  Ar- 
tiit,  that  hath  fo  admirably  contrived  and  made, 
all  the  noble  Variety  of  Birds  j    that  hath  with 
fueh  incomparable  Curiofity  and  Art,  formed  their 
Bodies  from  Head  to  Tail,    without  and  within, 
that  not  fo  much  as  any  Mufcle,  or  Bone,  no,  not 
even  a  Feather  {b)  is  unartificially  made,   mifpla- 
ced,  redundant,  or  defcdlive,  in  all  the  feveral  Fa- 
milies of  this  large  Tribe?  But  every  Thing  is  fo 
incomparably  performed,   fo  nicely  fitted  up  for 
Flight,  as  to  furpafs  even  the  Imitation  of  the  moll 
ingenious  Artificer  among  mortal  rational  Beings.   . 


(a)  Vid.  Book  V.  ch   I.  Note  {aa). 

(b)  Dens  non  folum  Angelum^  o'  Hominem,  [ejcL  ntc  exlgui 
cr  conteinptibtlis  antmantis  vifcera,  ntc  Avis  pennulam,  nee 
Herbii  fiofculum,  nu  Arboris  Joltutn  fine  fttarum  parlhim  con- 
ysnientia  dereliquit*    Augultin.  de  Civ,  Dei,  L.  5.  c.  11. 

BOOK 


Chap.  I.  3f7 


BOOK  VIII. 

0/ Insects  ariri  Reptiles. 

CHAP.    I. 

Of  Insects  hi  general. 

AVING  difpatch'J  that  Part  of  the  a- 
nimal  World,  which  ufed  to  be  account- 
ed the  more  perfed,  thofe  Anifn#lsllyled 
lefs  perfect  or  imperfed,  will  next  dc- 
fcrve  a  Place  in  our  Survey,  bccaufe  when  ftridly 
enquired  into,  we  fhall  find  them  to  be  fo  far  froni 
dcfcrvingto  be  accounted  mean  and  dcTpicable  Parts 
of  the  Creation,  owing  their  Original  and  Produc- 
tion to  Putrefactions,  (3c.  as  fome  have  thought, 
that  we  fhall  find  them,  I  fay,  noble,  and  moft 
admirable  Works  of  God.  For,  as  the  famous 
Natural  Hiftorian,  Pliny  (<«),  prefaceth  his  Trea- 
tifeof  Infects^  to  prevent  the  Reproach  of  conde- 
fcending  (as  might  be  thought)  to  fo  mean  a  Sub- 
je61::  In  great  Bodies^  faith  he,  Nature  bad  a  large 
and  eafy  Shop  to  work  upon  obfequious  Matter.  Where- 
as^ faith  he,  in  i he fe  fo  finally  and  as  it  "were  no  Bo' 
dies,  -what  Footfteps  of  Reafon,  -uhat  Power,  what 


(a)   In  magnls  fiquidcm   corporilus,  fee.     Plin.   Nat.   Hid. 
L.  ir.  c.  z, 

Aa  5  great 


S^B  Of  Infers.  Book  VIIL 

great  Perfe6lion  is  there  ?  Of  this  having  given  an 
Inftance  or  two  of  the  exquifite  Senfes,  and  curi- 
ous Make  of  feme  Infeds  (^),  he  then  goes  on, 
PFe  admire^  faith  he,  tiirrigerous  Shoulders  of  Ele- 
phants^ the  lofty  Necks  and  Crejis  of  others-,  hut^ 
faith  he,  the  Nature  of  'Things  is  never  more  com- 
pleat  than  in  the  leafl  'Things.  For  which  Reafon 
he  intreats  his  Readers  (as  I  do  mine)  that  becaufe 
they  flighted  many  of  the  7'hings  themfelves  which 
he  took  notice  of^  they  would  not  therefore  difdainfully 
condemn  his  Accoimts  of  them^  fince^  faith  he,  in 
the  Contemplation  of  Nature^  nothing  ought  to  feem 
fuperfiuous. 

Thus  that  .'eminent  Naturalift  hath  made  his 
own,  and  my  Excufe  too  j  the  Force  and  Verity 
whereof  will  farther  appear,  by  what  1  (hall  fay 
of  thefe  Animals  which  (as  defpicable  as  they  have 
been,  or  perhaps  may  be  thought)  we  fhall  find 
as  e^quifitely  contrived ,  and  curioufly  made  for 
that  PM:e  and  Station  they  bear  in  the  World,  as 
as  any  other  Part  of  the  Animal  World.  For  if 
we  confider  the  innumerable  Variety  of  their  Spe- 
cies, the  prodigious  Numbers  of  Individuals,  the 
Shape  and  Make  of  their  little  Bodies,  and  every 


(^)  Vb'i  tot  fenfus  collocavit  in  Cultce?  Et  funt  alia,  di£lu 
minora.  Sed  ubi  Vifum  in  eo  pr*tendit :  Ubi  Gu/latum  applt- 
cavit  ?  Ubi  Odoratum  inferuit  ?  Ubi  vera  truculentam  illam  e?* 
portione  maximam  iiocem  ingeneravit  ?  Ojua,  fubtilitate  Pennas 
adnexuit  ?  prAlongavit  Pedum  crura  f  Difpofuit  jejunatn  Cave- 
am,  utl  Atvum  ?  Avidafn  Sanguinis,  z^  potilfimum  humanly 
fitim,  accendit  ?  Telptm  vera  perfodiendo  tergori,  quo  fpicula-vit 
ingenio  ?  Atque  ut  in  capaci,  citm  cerni  nan  pojjftt  exilitas,  ita 
reciproca  geminavit  arte,  ut  fodlendo  acuminatum  par  iter  for- 
bendoque  fifiulofum  ejjet.  Sjues  Teredini  ad  perforanda  Rolora 
cum  fono  teftc  denies  a/fixit  f  Potijfimumque  f  ligno  cibatum  fe- 
cit :  Sed  ttirrigeros  Elephantcrutn  tniramur  humeros,  Taurq- 
rumque  colla,  Cf  truces  in  fubitme  jaSlus,  Tigrium  rapinas, 
Ltonum  jubas,  cum  rerum  natura  nufquam  magis  quam  in  mi" 
nimis,  tota  Jit.    Piin.  ibid. 

Part 


Chap.  II.     The  Shape  of  htfcCls,  3^9 

Part  thereof,  their  Motion,  their  In(lin<5ls,  their 
regular  Generation  and  Produftion ;  and,  to  name 
no  more,  the  incomparable  Beauty  and  Lullrc  of 
the  Colours  of  many  of  them,  what  more  admi- 
rable and  more  manifefl  Dcmonltration  of  the  in- 
finite Creator,  than  even  this  little  coniemned 
Branch  of  the  Animal  World?  But  let  us  take  a 
Ihort  View  of  Particulars. 


CHAP.    II. 

Of  the  Shape  ^7«^Stru6ture  i>/ 1  n  s  e  c  t  s. 


L 


ET  us  begin  with  the  Shape  and  Fabrick  of 

their  Bodies.     Which  although  it  be  fome- 

what  different  from  that  of  Birds,  being  particu- 
larly, for  the  mod:  part,  not  fo  fliarp  before,  to  cut 
and  make  way  through  the  Air,  yet  is  better  a- 
dapted  to  their  manner  of  Life.     For  confidering 
that  there  is  little  NecefTity  of  long  Flights,  and 
that  the  Strength  and  Aftivity  of  their  Wings  doth 
much  furpafs   the  Refiftance   their   Bodies  meet 
with  from  the  Air,  there  was  no  great  Occafion 
their  Bodies  fhould  be  fo  fliarpened  before.     But 
the  Condition  of  their  Food,  and  the  Manner  of 
gathering  it,  together  with  the  great  Neceflity  of 
accurate  Vifion  by  that  admirable  Provifion  made 
for  them  by  the  reticulated  Cornea  of  their  Eyes ; 
thefe  Things,    I  fay,   as  they  required  a    larger 
Room,  fo  were  a  good  Occafion  for  the  Large- 
nefs  of  the  Head,  and  its  Amplitude  before.     But 
for  tht  reft  of  rheir  Body,  all  is  well  made,  and 
nicely  poifed  for  their  Flight,  and  every  other  of 
their  Qccafions. 

A  a  4  And 


36o  The  Shape  of  InfeHs.  Book  VIII. 

And  as  their  Shap ;  fo  the  Fabrick  and  Make  of 
their  Bodies  is  no  lefs  accurate,  admirable,  and 
fingularj  not  built  throughout  with  Bones,  and 
cover'd  with  Flefh  and  Skin,  as  in  mod  other 
Animals ;  but  cover'd  with  a  curious  Mail  of  a 
middle  Nature  (^),  ferving  both  as  Skin  and  Bone 
too,  for  the  Shape,  as  well  as  Strength  and  Guard 
of  the  Body,  and  as  it  were  on  Purpofe  to  fhew 
that  the  great  Contriver  of  Nature  is  not  bound 
up  to  one  Way  only. 


{a)  Infe5la  non  videntur  Nervos  habere,  nee  Ojfa,  nee  Spinas ^ 
tiec  Carttlaglnetn,  nee  Pinguia,  nee  Carves,  ne  cruftam  quidem 
fragilem,  ut  qn^dam  marina,  nee  qu&  jure  dicatur  Cutis :  fed 
mediA  cujufdam  inter  omnia  h&c  natur&  corpus^  &c.  Plin.  N. 
H.  L.  II.  c.  4. 


CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  Eyes  and  Antennse  of  Insects. 

TO  this  lafl-mention'd  Guard,  we  may  add, 
that  farther  Guard  provided  in  the  Eyes  and 
Antenna.  The  Structure  of  the  Eye,  is,  in  all 
Creatures,  an  admirable  Piece  of  Mechanifm  5  but 
that  obfervable  in  the  Eyes  of  Infects  fo  peculiar, 
that  it  rauft  needs  excite  our  Admiration;  Fenced 
with  its  own  Hardnefs,  yea,  even  its  own  accurate 
Vifion,  is  a  good  Guard  againft  external  Injuries; 
and  its  Cornea^  or  outward  Coat,  all  over  befet 
with  curious,  tranfparenr,  lenticular  {a)  Inlets,  en- 
abling 

-*  * 

(«)  The  Cornea  of  Flies,  Wafps,  zsre.  are  fo  common  an 
Entertainment  with  the  Microfcope,  that  every  body  knows 
it  is  a  curious  Piece  of  Lattice-work.     In  which  this  \%  re- 
markable. 


Chap.  III.  Eyes  and  Antenna  of  In fc6ts.     i6t 

abling  thofe  Creatures  to  fee,  (no  doubt,)  very  ac- 
curately every  Way,  without  any  Interval  of  Time 
or  Trouble  to  move  the  Eye  towards  Objc6ts. 

And  as  for  the  other  Part,  the  ylntennx^  or 
Feelers^  whatever  their  Ufe  may  be  in  cleaning 
rlic  Eyes,  or  other  fuch  like  Ufej  they  are,  in 
all  Probability,  a  good  Guard  to  the  Eyes  and 
Head,  in  their  Walk  and  Flight,  enabling  them, 
by  the  Senfe  of  Feeling,  to  difcover  fuch  Annoy- 
ances, which  by  their  Proximity  may  perhaps  ef- 
cape  the  Reach  of  the  Eyes  and  Sight  {b).     Bc- 

(ides 


markable,  that  every  Foramen  is  of  a  lenticular  Nature;  fo 
that  we  fee  Objct'ts  through  them  topfcy-turvey,  as  through 
fo  many  convex  Glafles:  Yea,  they  become  a  fmall  Telef- 
cope,  when  there  is  st  due  focal  Diftance  between  them  and 
the  Lens  of  the  Microfcope. 

This  lenticular  Power  of  the  Cornea,  fupplies,  (as  I  ima- 
gine,) the  Place  of  the  Cryftalline,  if  not  of  the  vitreous 
Humour  too,  there  being  neither  of  thofe  Humours  that  I 
could  ever  find,  (although  for  Truth  Sake,  I  confefs  I  have 
not  been  fo  diligent  as  I  might  in  this  Enquiry;)  but  inftead 
of  Humours  and  Tunichs,  I  imagine  that  every  Lens  of  the 
Cornea,  hath  a  diftincfl  Branch  ot  the  opiich  Nerve  miniftring 
to  it,  and  rendring  it  as  fo  many  diftin(ft  Eyes.  So  that  as 
iTioft  Animals  are  binocular,  Spiders  for  the  moft  Part  o<fto- 
rocular,  and  feme,  (as  Mr.  WHlNghby  thought.  Rait  Hiji.  In- 
fccl.  p.  II.)  fenocular;  fo  Flies,  crc.  are  multocular,  having 
as  many  Eyes  as  there  are  Perforations  in  their  Corned,  By 
which  Means,  as  oth^r  Creatures  are  ohlig'd  to  turn  their 
Eyes  to  Objeds,  thefe  have  fome  or  other  of  tlieir  Eyes 
ready  plac'd  towards  Objeds,  nearly  all  round  them  :  Thus 
particularly  it  is  m  the  Dragon-Fly,  (Libella,)  the  greateft 
Part  of  whofe  Head  is  pofTefs'd  by  its  Eyes :  VVhich  is  of  ex- 
cellent Ufe  to  that  predarious  Infed,  for  the  ready  feeing 
and  darting  at  fmall  Flies  all  round  it,  on  which  it  prcjrs. 

(b)  It  is  manifed,  that  Infe(fts  clean  their  Eyes  with  their 
Fore-legs,  as  well  as  Jntennt.  And  confidering,  that  as  they 
walk  along,  they  are  perpetually  feehng,  and  ftarching  be- 
fore thera,  with  their  Feelers,  or  Antenm;  therefore  1  am 
apt  to  think,  that  befides  wiping  and  cleanuij;  the  Eyes,  the- 
Ufes  here  nam'd  may  be  admitted.    For  as  their  Eyes  are 

immove- 


3^2,  Eyes  and  Antenna  of  InfeBs.  Book  VIII. 

fides  which,  they  are  a  curious  Piece  of  Work- 
manfhip,  and  in  many,  a  very  beautiful  Piece  of 
{c)  Garniture  to  the  Body. 


immoveable,  fo  that  no  Time  is  requir'd  for  the  turning 
their  Eyes  to  Objedls;  fo  there  is  no  Neieffity  of  the  Retina, 
or  optick  Nerve  being  brought  nigher  unto,  or  fet  farther  off 
from  the  Cornea,  (which  would  require  Time,)  as  it  is  in  o- 
ther  Animals:  But  their  Cor?;^^  and  optkk  Nerve,  being  al- 
ways at  one  and  the  fame  Diftance,  are  fitted  only  to  fee  di- 
ftantial  Objedls,  but  not  fuch  as  are  very  nigh :  Which  In- 
convenience the  Feelers  obviate,  left  it  ftiould  be  prejudicial, 
in  occafioning  the  Infed  to  run  its  Head  againft  any  Thing. 

And  that  this,  rather  than  the  wiping  the  Eyes,  is  the 
chief  Ufe  of  the  Feelers,  is  farther  manifeft  from  the  Anten- 
n£  of  the  Flejij-Fly,  and  many  other  Infedls,  which  are  (liort, 
and  ftrait,  and  incapable  of  being  bent  unto,  or  extended  o- 
ver  the  Eyes :  As  alfo  from  others  enormoufly  long,  fuch  as 
tho^e  oi  the  Capricorni,  ox  Goat-chifers,  thii.Cjtdew- Fly ^  and 
divers  others,  both  Beetles  and  Flies.         ... 

(c)  The  lamellated  Antenna  of  fome,  the  clavellated  of  o- 
thers,  the  neatly  articulated  of  others,  the  feathcr'd  and  di^ 
vers  other  Forms  of  others,  of  the  Scarab,  Papilionaceous 
Gnat,  and  other  Kinds;  are  furprizingly  beautiful,  when 
view'd  through  a  Microfcope.  And  in  fome,  thofe  Antenm 
diftinguifli  the  Sexes :  As  in  the  Gnat-kind,  all  thole  with 
Tufts,  Feathers,  and  Brufli-horns,  are  Males ;  thofe  with, 
fhort,  fingle  (liafted  Antenm,  are  Females. 


CHAP.    IV. 

Of  the  Parts  and  Motion  of  Insects. 

FROM  the  Head,  pafs  we  to  the  Members, 
concern'd  in  their  Motion.  And  here  we 
have  a  copious  Subjeft,  if  I  was  minded  to  expa- 
tiate. I  might  take  Notice  of  the  admirable  Me- 
chanifm  in  thofe  that  creep  j   the  curious  Oars  iq 

thofe 


Chap.  IV.  Tarts  and  Motion  of  bife&s.     3  63 

thofe  amphibious  Infcfts  that  fwim  and  walk  (rt)} 
the  incomparable  Provifion  made  in  the  Feet  of 
inch  as  walk,  or  hang  upon  Iniooth  Surfaces  {b)  ; 
the  great  Strcngih  and  Spring  in  the  Legs  of  fuch 
as  leap  {c),  the  lliong  and  well-made  Feet  and 
Talons  of  fuch  as  dig  {d):  And  to  name  no  more, 
the  admirable  Faculty  of  fuch  as  cannot  fly,  to 
convey  themfelves  with  Speed  and  Safety,  by  the 
Help  of  their  Webs  (c),  or  fome  other  Artifice  to 

make 


{d)  All  the  Famiiies  of  Hydrocanthari,  Notonedi,  dec.  have 
their  hindmoft  Legs  made  very  nicely,, with  commodious 
Joyius  flat,  and  Brillles  on  each  Sides  towards  the  Lnd,  fer- 
ving  for  Oars  to  fwim  ;  and  then,  nearer  ihe  Body,  are  two 
ftifF  Spikes,  to  enable  them  to  walk  when  Occafion  is. 

(^)  I  might  here  name  divers  Flies,  and  other  Infeifts,  who, 
belides  their  ftiarp  hook"d  Nails,  have  alfo  skinny  Palms  to 
their  Feet,  to  enable  them  to  Hick  on  Glafs,  and  other  fmooth 
Bodies,  by  Mpans  ot"  the  Prefl'urc  of  the  Atmofphcre.  But 
becaufe  the  Example  will  illui^rate  another  Work  of  Nature, 
as  well  as  this,  I  fhal!  chufe  a  fmgular  Piece  of  Mechanifm, 
ill  one  of  the  largelt  Sorts  of  Hydrocanthari.  Of  thele  large 
ones  chere  are  two  horts,  one  largeft,  all  black,  with  Ariten- 
m  handfomely  emhofs'd  at  the  Ends.  The  other  fomewhat 
lefler,  hardly  lb  black,  with  capillary  Antenru;  the  Fore- 
head, Edges  of  the  VapnA,  and  two  Rings  on  the  Thorax, 
of  a  tawncy  Colour.  The  Female  hath  I'agim  prettily  fur- 
row'd,  the  Male  fmooth.  But  that  which  is  moil  to  our  Pur- 
pofe  in  this  Male,  is  a  Flap,  or  hollowifh  Cap  near  the  mid- 
dle Joynt  of  the  Forelegs ;  which  when  clap'd  on  the  Shoul- 
ders of  the  Female  in  Coitit,  fticks  firmly  thereon  :  After  the 
Manner  as  I  have  fcen  Boys  carry  heavy  Stones,  with  only  a 
wet  Piece  of  Leather  clap'd  on  the  Top  of  the  Stone. 

(c)  Thus  Crafiwppers  and  Crickets  liave  brawny  flrong 
Thighs,  with  tong,  (lender,  but  fttong  Legs,  which  enable 
them  to  leap  with  great  Agility  and  Strength. 

{d)  I  have  wonder'd  to  fee  with  wh.u  great  Quicknef?, 
Art  and  Strength,  many  Vrfp£- Ichneumons,  Wild  Bees,  and 
Beetles,  perforate  the  Earth;  yea,  even  Wood  it  felf:  Bur 
the  moll  remarkable  Aniirial  in  this  Way,  is  the  Mole-Cnckct 
in  Book  IV.  Chap.  T3.  Note  (f). 

(e)  1  have  with  Pieafuie  often  feen  Spiders  dart  out  their 
Webs,  and  fail  away  by-ihe  Help  thereof.     For  the  Manner 

ox" 


3^4  ^arts  and  Motion  of  InfeBs.  Book  VIII. 

make  their  Bodies  lighter  than  the  Air  (/) :  Thefe, 
and  a  Multitude  of  other  fuch  like  Things  as  thefe, 

I  might, 

of  which,  fee  Mr.  Lczvth.  Abridg.  Vol.  i.  p  794.  from  Dr. 
Lifttr  and  Dr.  Hulfe,  who  both  claim'd  the  Difcovery  there- 
cf.  And  do  both  feem  to  have  hit  thereupon,  without 
any  Foreknowledge  of  what  each  other  hath  difcover'd,  as 
is  faid  in  the  laft  cited  Place,  and  as  I  more  particular- 
ly find  by  Mr.  Eay'%  Philof.  Letters,  Printed  Ann.  1718. 
p.  95,  vc^  -By  which  alio  I  find  the  two  ingenious  Do- 
dors  were  very  modeft  in  their  Claims,  and  very  amicable 
in  the  Matter.  In  one  of  Dr.  Li/ler's  to  Mr.  Ray,  he  thinks 
there  is  a  fair  Hint  of  the  Darting  of  Spiders  in  Ar'iftot.  Hiji. 
An.  L.  9.  c.  30.  And  in  Plmy,  L.  11,  c.  14.  But  for  their 
Sailing,  that  the  Ancients  are  filent  of,  and  he  thinks  it  was 
ieen  firil  by  him.  And  in  another  Letter,  Jan.  20,  1670, 
fpeaking  of  the  Height  Spiders  are  able  to  fly,  he  faith.  The 
lafi  Odober,  CT'f.  /  took  Notice,  that  the  Air  was  very  full 
efWebs,  I  forthwith  mounted  to  the  Top  of  the  highefl  Steeple 
»n  the  Minfter,  [in  York,]  and  could  thence  difcern  them  yet 
exceeding  high  above  me.  Some  that  fell,  and  were  intangled 
upon  the  Pinacles,  1  took  and  found  them  to  be  Lupi  ;  which 
Kind  feldom  or  never  enter  Houfes,  and  cannot  be  fuppos'd  to 
have  taken  their  flight  from  the  Steeple. 

(/)  There  are,  (I  imagine,)  divers  Animals,  as  well  as^ 
Spiders,  that  have  fome  Way  of  Conveyance,  as  little  known 
to  us,  as  that  of  Spiders  formerly  was.  Thus  the  SquilhiU, 
fulices  Arborefcente;,  and  microfcopical  Animalcules  of  the  Rzg~ 
Dating  Waters,  fo  numerous  in  them,  as  to  difcolour  fome- 
times  the  Water,  and  make  them  look  as  if  they  were  tin- 
ged Red,  Yellow  or  Green,  or  cover'd  with  a  thick  greei>. 
Scum  ;  all  which  is  nothing  but  Animalcules  of  that  Colour. 
That  thefe  Creatures  have  fome  Way  of  Conveyance,  I 
conclude;  becaufe  moft  ftagnating  Waters  are  ftock'd  with 
them ;  new  Pits  and  Ponds,  yea,  Holes  and  Gutters  on  the 
Tops  of  Houfes  and  Steeples.  That  they  are  not  bred  there 
fcy  equivocal  Generation,  every  ingenious,  conlidering  Phi- 
iofopher  will  grant;  that  they  have  not  Legs  for  travelling 
fo  far,  is  manifeft  from  Infpefiion  :  And  therefore  I  am  apt  to 
think,  that  they  have  fome  Faculty  of  inflating  their  Bodies, 
-  or  darting  out  Webs,  and  making  their  Bodies  buoyant,  and 
lighter  than  Air ;  or  their  Bodies,  when  dry,  may  be  lighu 
cr  than  Air,  and  fo  they  can  fwim  from  Place  to  Place;  or 
the  Eggs  of  fuch  as  are  oviparous,  may  be  light  enough  to 
fioat  in  the  Air.     But  then  the  Viviparous,  (as  my  late  inge- 

iiious_ 


Chap.  IV.  Tarts  and  Motion  oflnfeBs.     ^  6$^ 
I  might,   I  fiiy,  take  Notice  of,  as  great  Eviden- 
ces of  the  infinite  Creator's  Wifdom:  But  Icll  I 
ihould  be  too  tedious,    I  will  confine  my  Obfcr- 
vations  to  the  Legs  and  Wings  only.     And  thcfe, 
at  firft  View,   we  find  to  be  incomparably  fitted 
up  tor  their  intended  Service,  not  to  over-load  the 
Body,  not  in  the  kail  to  retard  it  i  but  to  give  it  the 
molt  proper  and  convenient  Motion.  What,  for  Ex- 
ample, can  be  better  contriv'd,  and  made  for  this  Ser- 
vice, than  the  Wings?   Dirtcnded  and  ftrcngthen'd 
by  the  fined  Bones,   and  thcfe  cover'd  with  the 
fineft  and  lightelt  Membranes,  fome  of  them  a- 
dorn'd  with'^neat  and  beautiful  Feathers  {g)\  and 
many  of  them  provided  with  the  finelt  Articulati- 
ons,   and  Foldings,    for  the  Wings  to  be  with- 
drawn,  and  neatly  laid  up  in  their  Vagirne^   and 
Cafes,  and  again  readily  extended  for  Flight  [jo). 

And 


nious  Friend,  Mr.  CharUi  King,  flievv'd  me  the  PHlicei  aquaf. 
arboref.  are ;  thefe  I  fay,)  can't  be  this  Way  accounted  tor* 
The  Caule  of  thefe  latter  Sufpicions  was,  that  in  the  Sum- 
mer Months,  I  have  feen  the  Puiices  arboref.  and  the  green 
Scum  on  the  Waters,  (nothmg  but  Animalcules,  as  I  laid,) 
lie  in  a  Manner  dry  on  the  Surface  of  the  Waters;  at  which 
Time,  (as  I  have  thewn  in  Book  IV.  Chap.  ri.  Note  {n),) 
thofe  Animalcules  copulate;  and  perhaps,  they  may  at  the 
fame  Time  change  their  Quarters,  and  feek  out  new  Habi- 
tations for  their  numerous  Offspring,  as  well  as  themfelves. 

{g)  It  is  well  known  to  all  Perlons  any  Way  converlant  ia 
nucrofcopical  Obfervations.  that  thefe  elegant  Colours  of 
Moths,  and  Butterfiies,  are  owing  to  neat  and  well-made  Fea- 
thers, fet  with  great  Curiofuy  and  Exadnefs  in  Rows,  and 
good  Order. 

{h)  All  that  have  Elytra,  Scarabs  (who  have  whole  Hly- 
tra,  or  rcachuig  to  the  Pcde.x,)  or  the 'H^ottfAtoT/fc^i,  hid\ 
as  harzvi^s,  and  Utaphylini  of  all  Sorts,  do,  by  a  very  curi- 
ous Mecnanilm,  extend  and  withdraw  their  membranaceous 
Wings,  (wherewith  they  chiefly  fly;)  and  it  is  very  pretty 
to  fee  them  prepare  themfelves  for  Flight,  by  thrufting  out, 
ai  d  unfolding  their  Wings ;  and  again  withdraw  thofc  Joynts, 
^ar.d  iieailv  fold  in  the  Membranes,  to  be  laid  up  lately  m 
'  tbcir 

i 


^66  Tarts  and  Motion  of  Infers.  Book  Vllf . 

And  then  for  the  Poifing  of  the  Body,  and  keep- 
ing it  upright,  and  rteady  in  Fh"ght,  it  is  an  admi- 
rable Artifice  and  Provifion  for  this  Purpofe>  in 
fome,  by  four  Wings  (/')  j  and  in  fuch  as  have  but 
two,  by  Pointels,  and  Poifes  plac'd  under  the 
Wings,  on  each  Side  the  Body. 

And  laftly.  It  is  an  amazing  Thing  to  refle£l 
upon  the  furprizing  Minutenefs,  Art,  and  Curio- 
fity  of  the  {k)  Joynts,  the  Mufcles,  the  Tendons, 
the  Nerves,  neced'ary  to  perform  all  the  Motions 
of  the  Legs,  the  Wings,  and  every  other  Part.  I 
have  already  mention'd  this  in  the  larger  Animals  5 
but  to  confider,  that  all  thefe  Things  concur  in 
minute  Animals,   even  in  the  fmallefl  Mitej  yea, 


their  Elytra,  or  Cafes.  For  which  Service  the  Bones  are 
■well  plac'd,  and  the  Joynts  miniflring  thereunto  are  accu- 
rately contriv'd,  for  the  moft  compendious,  and  commodi- 
ous folding  up  the  Wings. 

(i)  For  the  keeping  the  Body  fteady  and  upright  in  Flight, 
it  generally  holds  true,  (if  1  miftake  not,)  that  all  bipenna- 
ted  .Infeefts  have  Poi/e^  joyn'd  to  the  Body,  under  the  hinder 
Part  of  their  Wings ;  but  fuch  as  have  four  Wings,  or  Wings 
with  Elytra,  none.  If  one  of  the  Poifes,  or  one  of  the 
lelTer  auxiliary  Wings  be  cut  off,  the  Infedl  will  fly  as  if  one 
Side  overbalanc'd  the  other,  until  it  falleth  on  the  Ground; 
fo  if  both  be  cut  of,  they  will  fly  aukwardly,  and  unfteadi- 
ly,  manifefting  the  Defeft  of  fome  very  necefl'ary  Part. 
Thefe  Poifes,  or  Pointells  are,  for  the  moft  Part,  little  Balls, 
fet  at  the  Top  of  a  flender  Stalk,  v/hich  they  can  move  e- 
very  Way  at  Fleafure.  In  fome  they  ftand  alone,  in  others, 
(as  in  the  whole  Flejh-Fly  Tribe,)  they  have  little  Covers  or 
Shields,  under  which  they  lie  and  move.  The  Ufe,  no 
doubt,  oi  ihefs  Poifes,  znd  fecondary  kf^tr  Wings,  is  to  poife 
the  Body,  and  to  obviate  all  the  Vacillations  thereof  in 
Flight;  ferving  to  the  Infeft,  as  the  long  Pole,  laden  at  the 
Ends  with  Lead,  doth  the  Ropedancer. 

(k)  As  all  the  Parts  of  Animals  are  mov'd  by  the  Help  of 
thefe;  fo  there  is,  no  doubt,  but  the  minuteft  Animals  have 
fuch  like  Parts:  But  the  Mufcles  and  Tendons  of  fome  of 
the  larger  Infedts,  and  fome  of  the  lefler  too,  may  be  feen 
with  a  Microfcope. 

the 


Chap.  IV.  Tarts  and  Motion  of  Infers.     3  ^7 
the  Animalcules,  that,  (without  good  Microfcopes,) 
efcapc  our  Sight;    to  confider,    I  lay,   that  thofc 
minuteft  Animals  have  all  the  Joynts,  Bones,  Muf- 
cles,  Tendons  and  Nerves,  neccHary  to  that  brisk 
and  fwitt  Motion  that  many  of  them  have,  is  fo 
itupendous  a  Piece  of  curious  Art  (/),    as  plainly 
manifcfteth  the  Power  and  Wifdom  of  the  infinite 
Contriver  of  thofe  inimitable  Fineries.     But  having 
nam'd  thofe  minute  Animals,  Why  fliould  I  men- 
tion only  any  one  Part  of  their  Bodies,   when  wc 
have,  in  that  little  Compafs,  a  whole  and  compleat 
Body,   as  exquifitely  form'd,   and,   (as  far  as  our 
Scrutiny  can  poflibly  reach,)  as  neatly  adorn'd  as 
the  largell  Animal?   Let  us  confider,   that  there 
we  have  Eyes,  a  Brain,  a  Mouth,  a  Stomach,  En- 


(/)  The  minute  Curiofities,  and  inimitable  Fineries,  ob- 
fervable  in  thofe  leffer  Animals,  in   which  our  bell  Micro»- 
fcopes  difcover  no  Botch,  no  rude  ill-made  Work,  (contra- 
ry to  what  IS  in  all  artificial  Works  of  iMan,)  Do  they  not 
far  more  deferve  our  Admiration,  than  thofe  celebrated  Pie- 
ces of  humane  Art.-'   Such  as  the  Cup  made  of  a  Pcpper- 
Corn,  by  Ofwald  Nerlinger,  that  held  iico  ivory  Cups,  all 
gilt  on  the  Ldges,  and  having   each  of  ihem   a  Foot,   and 
yet  affording  Room  for  400  more,    in   the  Hphem.  (3eim. 
T.   I.  Addend,  ad  Obf.   13.     Such  alfo  was  Phaeton  in  a 
Ring,   which  Galen  thus  reljcifts  upon,  when  he  fpeaks  of 
the  Art  and  Wifdom  of  the  Maker  of  Animals,  particularly 
luch  as  are  fmall,  S)uanto,  faiih  he,  ipfum  minus  fuer it,  tan- 
to  majorem  adtnirationem  tibi  excitaOit ;   quod  declarant  Opiji- 
ces  cum   in  corporibus  parvis  alujuid  mfculpant :  cujus  generis 
eft  quod  nuper  quidatn  in  Annulo  Phaetonta  quatucr  equis  in- 
-vettum  fculfifit.     Omnes  enim  equi  frs.num,  os,  CT*  denies  an- 
tertores  habebant,  &c.     And  then  having  taken  Notice,  that 
the  Legs  were  no  bigger  than  thofe  of  a  Gnat,    he  fliews 
that  their  Make  did  not  come  up  to  thofe  ot  the  Gnat;  as 
alfo,  faith  he.  Major  adhuc  alia  quidam  ejje  xidetur  artis  etu, 
qui  PuUcem   condidit.   Vis  atque   Sapientia,    quod,    &c.     Cum 
tgitur  Ars  tanta  in  tarn  abjeciis  ammalibus    appareat, 
quantam  ejus  Vim  ac  Sapientiam  in  praflansionbus  inejje  puta- 
bimus?  Galen,  dc  Uf.  Fart.  L.  17.  c.  i.  tin. 

2  trails 


3^8    Tarts  and  Motion  of  InfeBs.  Book  VIII. 

trails,  and  every  other  Part  of  an  animal  Body,  as 
well  as  Legs  and  Feet;  and  that  all  thofe  Parts 
have  each  of  them  their  neceflary  ylpparatus  of 
Nerves,  of  various  Mufcles,  and  every  other  Part 
that  other  Infe£ls  have  j  and  that  all  is  cover'd  ^nd 
guarded  with  a  well-made  Tegument,  befet  with 
Briftles,  adorn'd  with  neat  Imbrications,  and  ma- 
ny other  Fineries.  And  laftly,  Let  us  confider  in 
how  little  Compafs  all  Art  and  Curiofity  may  lie, 
even  in  a  Body  many  Times  lefs  than  a  fmall  Grain 
of  Sand  [m)  j  fo  that  the  leaft  Drop  of  Water  can 
contain  many  of  them,  and  afford  them  alfo  fuffi- 
cient  Room  to  dance  and  frisk  about  in  («). 

Having  furvey'd  as  many  of  the  Parts  of  In- 
fers as  I  care  to  take  Notice  of;  I  fhall  in  the 
next  Place  fay  fomewhat  of  their  State,  and  Cir- 
cumftances  of  Life.  And  here  I  fhall  take  Notice 
only  of  two  Things,  which  have  been  only  hint- 
ed at  before;  but  will  deferve  more  particular 
Confideration  here,  as  being  Ads  of  a  wonderful 
Infi;in6t ;  namely,  Their  Security  of  themfelves  a- 
gainft  Winter;  and  their  fpecial  Care  of  prefer- 
ving  their  Species. 


(w)  It  will  in  fome  Meafure  appear,  how  wonderfully 
minute  fome  microfcopica!  Animalcules  are,  by  what  fol- 
Jows  in  the  next  Note.  But  becaufe  more  particular  Exam- 
ples would  be  endlcfs.  I  fliall  refer  to  the  Obfervations  of 
Mr.  Leuwenboeck,  and  others,  in  the  Ph'tlof.  Tranf.  and  elfe- 
where. 

(»)  It  is  almoft  impoffible,  by  Reafon  of  their  perpetual 
Motion,  and  changing  Places,  to  count  the  Number  of  the 
Animalcules,  in  only  a  Drop  of  the  green  Scum  upon  Wa- 
ter ;  but  I  gueis  I  have  fometimes  feen  not  fewer  than  loo 
frisking  about  in  a  Drop  no  bigger  than  a  Pin's  Head.  But 
in  fuch  a  Drop  of  Pepper- water,  a  far  greater  Number; 
thefc  being  much  lefs  than  thole. 


CHAP. 


Chap.  V.  Infers  Security  agatnjl  Winter .  3  6^ 


CHAP.    V. 

The  Sagacity  of  Insects  to  fee  tire  them- 
felves  aga'tnft  JVinter. 

IT  is  an  extraordinary  A6t  of  InftiniSl  arid  Saga- 
city, obfervable  in  the  generality  of  the  Infed- 
Tribe,  that  they  all  take  Care  to  fccure  themfclves, 
and   provide   againll  the    Necefllties  of   Winter. 
That  when  the  Diltrefles  of  Cold  and  Wet  force 
them,  they  fliould  retire  to  warm  and  dry  Places 
of  Safety,  is  not  ftrangei    but  it  is  a  prodigious 
A6t  of  the  infinite  Confervator's  Care  to  enable 
fome  to  live  in  a  different  Kind  of  Inlcft-State  j 
otherstolivc,  as  without  A6tion,  fo  without  Food; 
and  others  that  a6t  and  eat,  to  lay  up  in  Summer 
fufficient  Providons  againft  the  approaching  Win- 
ter.    Some,  I  fay,  live  in  a  different  State.     For 
having  fufficlently  fed ,   nourifhed ,  and  bred  up 
themlelvcs  to  the  Perfeftion  of  their  Vermicular^ 
Nympha'State,  in  the  Summer-Months,  they  then 
retire  to  Places  of  Safety,   and  there  throw  off 
their  Nympha^  and  put  on  their  y^urelia  or  Cbry- 
falls-State  for  all  the  Winter,  in  which  there  arc 
no  Occaflons  for  Food.     This  is  the  conllant  Me- 
thod of  many  Families  of  the  Infedt-Tribe  {a). 

But 


(<i)  It  would  beendlefs  to  enter  into  Particulars  here,  be- 
Caufe  all  the  Papilionaceous,  Flejh,  and  Ichneumon- Fly  Tribes, 
and  all  others  that  undergo  the  Nymf>ha  and  Aurelia-S\zic, 
between  that  of  the  Egg  and  Mature-Sute,  (which  are  very 
numerous)  appertain  to  this  Note.  For  a  Sample  therefore 
only,  I  fliall  take  what  fome  may  think  a  mean  one,  but  if 
confidered,  dcferves  our  Admiration^  and  that  is  the  Saga- 
.V  '  1^  b  i\if 


370  InfeEfs  Security  againfl  fVititer  BookVllL 

But  there  are  are  others,  and  fome  of  them  in 
their  moft  perfe6t  State  too,  that  arc  able  to  Tub- 
fid  in  a  kind  of  Torpitude  or  Sleeping  State,  with- 
out any  Food  at  all  j  by  Reafon  as  there  is  no  A6tion  ' 
fo  no  Wafte  of  Body,  no  Ex  pence  of  Spirits,  andV; 
therefore  no  need  of  Food  {b). 

But  for  others  that  move  and  a£l:,  and  need 
Food,  it  is  a  prodigious  In{lin6t:  and  Forefight  the 
Creator  hath  imprinted  on  them,  to  fay  up  fuffici- 
ent  Food  in  Summer  for  the  Winter's  {c)  Necefli- 

ticj 

-4'- 

city  of  the  White  Btttter-fiy  Caterpiller,  which  having  fed  it 
felf  its  due  Time,  then  retires  to  Places  of  Security.  I  have 
feen  great  Trains  of  them  creeping  up  the  Walls  and  Pofts 
of  the  next  Houfes,  where,  with  the  kelp  of  fome  Cob- 
web-like Filaments,  they  hang  thcmfelves  to  the  Cielings, 
and  other  commodious  Places,  and  then  become  AurelU; 
in  which  State  and  Places  tltey  hang  fecure  from  Wet  and 
Cold,  till  the  Spring  and  warmer  Months,  when  they  are 
tsanfmuted  into  Butter- Fheg, 

,  {h)  1  fliall  not  name  any  of  the  particular  Species  of  la- 
fet^s  which  Hve  in  this  State,  becaufe  they  are  very  nume- 
rous, but  only  remark  two  Things  obfervable  in  their  Sa- 
gacity in  this  Matter :   i.  That  they  are  not  driven  by  Strefs 
of  Weather  to  their  Retirement,  but  feem  as  naturally  to 
betake  themlelves  thereto,  as  other  Animals  do  to  Reft  and- 
Sleep.     For  before  the  Approach  of  cold  Weather,  towards 
the  End  of  Summer,  we  ma.y  fee  fome  Kinds  of  them  flock- 
ing together  in  great  Numbers  within  Doors  {-ni  Swallows 
do  a  little  before  tl\ey  lea-ve  us),  as  if  they  were  raaiking- 
ready  for  their  Winter's  Reft.     z.  That  every  Species  be- 
takes it  felf  to   a  proper  convenient  Receptacle  ;  fome  un- 
der the  Waters  to  the  Bottoms  of  Ponds ;  fome  under  the 
Earth,  below  the  Frofts ;.  fome  under  Timber,  Stone,  vc 
lying^on  the  Ground;  fome  into  hollow  Trees,  or  under  the 
Bark,  or  in  the  Wood ;  fome  into  warm  and  dry  Places ; 
and  fome  into  dry  alone. 

(c)  There  are  not  many  Kinds  thst  thus  provide  their 
Food  before-hand.  The  moft  remarkable,  are  the  Ant  and 
the  Bee;  concerning  the  firft  of  which,  Ortgen\\n\\  this  Re- 
mark, v'lx^  De  /olertia.  Farmicarum,  venture  hyemi  maturf! 
frpfpicientiitm,  Jtbique  invUem  fuh  oinrt  fejfts  fHuurrentium  ; 

quod^Ht 


Chap.  V.  Jnfeifs  Security  again  ft  tVinUr.  371 

ties  ;ind  Occalions.  And  ic  is  very  pretty  to  fee 
'With  what  unwearied  Diligence  all  Hantls  arc  at 
work  for  that  Purpofc,  all  the  warmer  Months. 
Of  this  xX^t  Holy  Scripture  it  felf  gives  us  an  In- 
ftancc  in  the  Ant^  calling  that  little  Animal  exceed- 
ing  mfe^  Prov.xxx.  14.  And  the  Reafon  is,  f.z^. 
The  Ms  are  a  People  not  jltorig^  yet  they  prepare 
their  Meat  in  the  Summer.  And  therefore  Solomon 
fends  the  Sluggard  to  this  little  contemptible  Crea- 
ture, to  learn  Wifdom,  Forefight,  Care  and  Dili* 
gence,  Prov.  vi.  6,7,  8.  Go  to  the  Ant^  thou  Slug- 
gard^ Confider  her  JVays.^  and  be  'wife :  which  hav- 
ing no  Guide ,  Overfcer ,  or  Rukr ,  prevideth  her 
Meat  in  the  Summer^  and  gathereth  her  Food  in  the 
Harvejl. 

To  this  Scriptural  Example,  give  me  leave  to 
anticipate,  arxf  fubjoin  an  Obfcrvation  of  the  far- 
ther great  Wifdom  of  this  little  Creature  j  and 
that  is  their  unparallelled  Zra^yij,  their  Tendernefs, 
Sagacity,  and   Diligence  about  their  Young  (d), 

'Tl3 


tjHSdqae  fritgei  arrofas  condunt,  ne  rurfut  enafcatttur,  fed  fif 
JtHHum  alimtnto  finty  noa  ratiocination  em  Formicarum  in  cau- 
sa debemus  credere,  fed  almant  matrem  Naturam  bruta  qnoqui 
fie  ornantem,  ut  etiam  yniHtmis  addat  ftia  qu*dam  inient*.  O- 
rig.  cont.  Celf.  L.  4. 

But  as  for  Wafps,  Hornets,  Humble  Bees,  and  Other  Wild- 
Bees,  Vefpi  Ichneumons,  and  divers  Others  that  carry  in  Ma- 
terials for  Nefts  and  Food  ;  this  is  only  for  the  Service  of 
their  Generation,  for  hatching  their  Kggs,  and  nourifttin^ 
their  Young,  not  for  Supplies  in  Winter;  for  they  all  for- 
fake  their  Nefts  towards  Winter,  and  retire  to  other  Quar- 
ters, living  (I  conceive)  without  Food  ail  that  Time. 

(i)  Has  vermiculos  [Formicarum  Ova  vulgo  vocatos]  in^ 
credibili  i-o^yfi  ^  cura  Vormics  edticant,  fummamque  dant  op$- 
ram,  ne  vel  tantillHm,  quod  fpeHet  eorum  vermiculorum  edu- 
(ationem  atqse  nntrttiontm,  omittant  :  quem  in  finem  fert 
femper  eofdem  ore  circHmportaHt  '  jecitm,  rn  ulla  eos  Udtt  ifP- 
j'*ria.  In  mitfco  wio  nonnnlUs  tjitm  gener'n  firmUAi,  vitrt 
'     '    "  '      '       '  '    ■      B  b  1  t$rr4 


372.  InfeBs  Security  agatnft  fFhiter. ^ookVlU. 

'Tis  very  diverting,  as  well  as  admirable  to  fee, 
with  what  Affeftion  and  Care  they  carry  about 
tbeir  Young  in  their  Mouths,  how  they  expofe 
themfelves  to  the  greatefl:  Dangers,  rather  than 
leave  their  Young  expofcd  or  forfaken  j  how  they 
remove  them  from   Place  to  Place  in  their  little 
Hills,  fometimes  to  this  Part,  fometimes  to  that, 
for  the  Benefit  of  convenient  Warmth,  and   pro- 
per Moifturej  and  then  again  withdraw,  and  guard 
them  againft  Rain  and  Cold.     Now  that  this  great 
Wifdom  which  the  Scriptures  attribute  unto,  and 
is  difcernible  in  this  little  Animal,  is  owing  only  to 
the  Inftind,  or  Infulions  of  the  great  Conferva- 


terra  repleto,  conclufas  cum  Vermiculis  ift'is  adfervabam  :  ibi 
non  fine  jucunditate  fpe6labam  ,  quo  terra  fieret  in  fuperficie 
ficcior,  eo  profundms  Formicas  cum  fcctibus  fuis  prorepere  :  cum 
'Verb  aquam  adfunderem,  vifu  mirificum  erat,  quanta  ajfe6lUj 
quanta  folicitudine,  quanta  XTt^yri  omnemineo  coUacartnt  ope- 
ram,  ut  foetus  fuqs  Jiccjore  c  tuto  loco  rtponertnt.  Sdpitts  vi- 
di,  cum  aliquot  diebus  aqua  caruijjent,  atque  eum  dffufo  tan- 
tillo  aquA  terram  illam  humii'arem,  evefttgio  a  Formicis  foetus 
fuos  eo  loci  fuijfe  allatos,  quos  lit  dijiin^e  confpiciebam  moveri 
atque  fttgere  humorem.  Multoties  fui  conatus,  ut  eos  Verm't- 
culos  tpje  educarem,  at  femper  conatum  fefelitt  eventus :  neque 
ipfas  Formicarum  Nymphas  altmenti  jam  non  indigas  unquam 
fine  ipfis  Formicis  potui  fotu  artificiali  excludere.  J.  Swam- 
merd.  Epilog,  ad  Hift.  Infed.  p.  153. 

Sir  Edward  King^  who  Was  very  curious  in  examining  the 
Generation  of  Ants,  obferves  their  great  Care  and  Diligence, 
I.  About  their  Sperm,  or  true  Eggs,  which  is  a  fine  white 
Subftance,  like  Sugar,  which  they  diligently  gather  together 
into  a  Heap,  when  Icattered;  and  on  which  they  lie  in  Mul- 
titudes. (I  fuppofe,  by  way  of  Incubation.)  2,.  1  have  ob- 
ferved,  faith  he,  in  Summer,  that  in  the  Morning  they 
bring  up  thofe  of  their  Young  (call'd  Ant-Eggs)  towards  the 
Top  of  the  Bank:  So  that  you  may  from  10  in  the  Morn- 
ing, until  5  or  6  Afternoon,  find,  them  near  the  Top 

for  the  molt  Part  on  the  South-fide  the  Bank.  But  towards 
7  or  8  at  Night,  if  it  be  cool,  or  likely  to  rain,  you  may  dig 
a  Foot  deep  before  you  can  find  them,  Phtlof.  Jranf.  N®. 
13.  or  Lowthorp%  Ahridg,  V.  i.  p.  7.  and  9. 


Chap.  VI.  Infers  Care  of  their  Toung.      373 

tor  of  the  World,  is  evident,  becaufe  cither  this 
Wifdom,  Thought,  and  Forecall,  is  an  Ad  of  the 
Animal  it  fclf,  or  of  fomc  other  Being  that  hath 
Wifdom.  But  the  Animal  being  irrational,  'tis 
impodible  it  can  be  its  own  Act,  but  mull  be  deri- 
ved, or  received  from  fome  wife  Being.  And  who  ? 
What  can  that  be,  but  the  infinite  Lord,  Confer- 
vator  and  Governour  of  all  the  World  ? 


CHAP.    VI. 

Of  the  Care  of  Insects  about  their  Young. 

TH  E  other  notable  Inftinct  I  am  to  treat  of, 
is  the  peculiar  Art  and  Care  of  the  Infc6t- 
Tribe,  about  the  Prefervation  of  their  Specips. 
Here  I  might  fpeak  of  many  Things,  but  I  have 
occafionally  mentioned  divers  of  them  before,  un- 
der fome  or  other  of  the  general  Heads,  and  there- 
fore fhall  fix  only  upon  two  Things  relating  to  their 
fpccial  Art  and  Care  about  the  Production  {ii)  of 
their  Young,  which  have  not  been  fo  particularly 
fpoken  to  as  they  deferve. 

One  Thing  is  their  fingular  Providence  for  their 
Young,  in  making  or  finding  out  fucb  proper  Re- 
ceptacles and  Places  for  their  Eggs  and  Seed ,  as 
that  they  may  receive  the  Advantage  of  a  futfici- 


(4)  The  Doftrine  of  /[equivocal  Generation,  is  at  this 
Day  fo  fufficiently  exploded  by  all  learned  I'hilofophers,  that 
I  (hill  not  enter  the  i-)ifpure,  but  take  it  for  gt anted,  that 
9II  Animils  fpring  from  other  Parent-Aniinals.  If  the  Rci- 
der  hath  any  doubt  about  it,  I  refer  hi  en  to  Seigneur  Reiii  d» 
Gen.  Infen.  and  M  Ray's  iVifJ.  of  God,  &:c.  p.  344.  Sec  al- 
I9  before,  Book  IV.  Qi.  15.  Note  (a). 

B  b  ;  cnc 


3  74    InfeEis  Care  of  their  Toung.  Book  VIII, 

cnt  Incubation,  and  that  the  Young,  when  pro* 
dueed,  may  have  the  Benefit  of  praper  and  fuffi- 
eient  Food  for  their  Nurture  and  Education,  till 
they  are  able  to  ihift  for  themfelves.  It  is  admira- 
ble to  fee  with  what  Diligence  and  Care  the  feve- 
ral  Species  of  Infects  lay  up  their  Eggs  or  Sperm 
in  their  feveral  proper  Places  5  riot  all  in  the  Wa- 
ters, in  Wood,  or  on  Vegetables  j  but  thofe  whofe 
Subfiftence  is  in  the  Waters  (^),  in  the  Waters 
thofe  to  whom  Flefh  is  a  proper  Food  \  in  Flefh  {c) ; 

thofe 


(fr)  It  would  be  endkrs  to  fpecify  the  various  Species  of 
Infeds,  that  have  their  Geiieration  in  the  Waters.  And 
therefore  I  ftiall  only  obferve  of  them,  i.  That  their  Egg« 
are  always  laid  up  wifh  great  Care,  and  in  good  Order. 
And  alfo,  1.  Where  pifoper  and  fufficient  Food  is.  3.  That 
in  their  Nympha-Stzie  m  the  Waters,  they  have  Parts  pro- 
per for  Food  and  Motion;  and  in  many,  or  moft  of  them, 
very  different  from  what  they  have  in  their  MatHre-SiQte,  ^ 
manifeft  Argument  of  the  Creator's  Wirdom  and  Providence. 
For  an  Inftance,  fee  Note  (r). 

(c)  As  Seigneur  Redi  was  one  of  the  firft  that  made  it 
his  Bufincfs  to  difcard  Anomalous  Generation,  fo  he  tried 
more  Experiments  relating  to  the  Vermination  of  SerpentSj 
Flefh,  Fifh,  putrified  Vegetables;  and  in  (hort,  whatever 
was  commonly  known  to  be  the  Nurfery  of  Maggots,  more 
I  fay  probably,  than  any  one  hath  done  fince.  And  in  all 
his  Obfervations,  he  conftantly  found  the  Maggots  to  turr» 
to  Aureiu,  and  thefe  into  Ilies.  But  then,  faith. he,  Dt^bii 
tare  coept,  utrutn  omm  hoc  vermium  in  came  ^enus,  ex  fola 
Mufcarum  femine,  an  ex  ipfis  futrefa5liicarn'tbus oriretur,  tan' 
toque  magi!  confirmabar  in  hoc  meo  dubio,    quanto  in  omnibus 

generationibus fepiti's   videram,  in  carnibus,  antequam 

verminare  inciperent,  refedijfe  ejufdem  Jpeciei  Mufcas,  cujus 
fropago  pofiea  nafcebatur.  Upon  this  he  tells  us,  he  put  Fifh, 
Fiefh,  tyc.  into  Pots,  which  he  covered  clofe  from  the  Flies 
with  Paper ,  and  afterwards  (for  the  free  Air  fake )  with 
Lawn,  whilfl:  other  Pots  were  left  open,  with  fuch  like 
l^lefli,  t^c.  -in  them  ;  that  the  Flies  were  very  eager  to  get 
into  the  covered  Pots;  and  that  they  produced  not  one 
Maggot,  when  the  open  ones  had  many.  Fr.  Redi  de  Gener. 
JnfeSi. 

Among 


Chap.  VI.  lufiSfs  Care  of  their  Toung.       375- 

thofc  to  whom  the  Fruits  {d)  or  Leaves  of  Vege- 
tables 


Among  the  Infcdsthat  come  from  the  Maggots  he  men- 
tions, he  names  Culices.  Now  from  the  mod  critical  Obfcr- 
vations  I  have  made,  I  never  obferved  any  fort  of  Gnat  to 
<:ome  from  putrified  Flefli,  Vegetables,  or  any  other  Thing 
he  taxeth  with  them.  So  that  either  he  means  by  Ctilcx^ 
fome  Fly  that  we  call  not  by  the  Name  of  Gnat;  or  elfc 
their  Gnats  in  Italy,  vary  in  their  Generation  from  ours  in 
FngUnd,  For  among  above  30,  near  40  diftincfl  Species  of 
Cnats  that  I  have  obferved  about  the  Place  where  I  live,  I 
never  found  any  to  lay  their  Eggs  in  I'lcfti,  Filli,  c/f.  but 
the  largeft  Sort,  called  by  Aldrovand,  Cuiices  maximi,  by 
Swammerdam,  TipnU  terreftres,  lay  their  Eggs  in  Meadows, 
crc.  under  the  Grafs ;  one  of  the  larger  middle  Sort,  in  dead 
Beer,  Yeaft,  tsrc.  lying  on  the  Tops,  or  in  the  Leaks  of 
Beer- Barrels,  isrc.  and  all  the  reft  (as  far  as  ever  I  have  ob- 
ferved) lay -and  hatch  in  the  Waters,  as  in  Note  (r). 

The  Generation  of  the  Second  of  the.fe  beingakintofome 
of  the  foregoing  Inftances,  and  a  little  out  of  the  way,  may 
deferve  a  Place  here.  This  Guat  lays  its  Eggs  commonly 
in  d^ad  Beer,  a-c.  as  I  faid,  and  probably  in  Vinegar,  and 
other  fuch  Litjuors.  Some  Time  after  which,  the  Maggots 
are  fo  numerous,  that  the  whole  Liquor  ftirreth  as  if  it  was 
alive;  being  full  of  Maggots,  fomc  larger,  fome  fmallcr; 
the  larger  are  the  ofF-lpring  of  our  Gnat,  the  fmallcr,  of  a 
fmall  dark  coloured  Fly,  tending  to  reddifti  ;  frequent  iti 
Cellars,  and  fuch  obfcure  Places.  All  thefe  Maggots  turn  to 
jiurelia,  the  larger  of  which,  of  a  Tan-Colour,  turn  to  our 
Gnat.  This  Gnat  is  of  the  unarmed  Kind,  having  no  Spear 
in  its  Mouth.  Its  Head  is  larger  than  of  the  commoii  Gnats, 
a  longer  Neck,  fliort  jointed  Ant^nm,  fpotted  Wings,  reach-.- 
ing  beyond  its-  fkndcr  Al-vus  ;  it  is  throughout  of  a  brown 
Colour,  tending  to  red,  efpccially  in  the  Female:  The  chief 
Difference  between  the  Male  and  Female,  is  (as  in  other 
Gnats,  yea,  moft  Infeds)  the  Male  is  lefs  than  the  Female, 
and  hath  a  flcnderer  Belly,  and  its  Podex  not  fo  iLarp  as  the 
Female's  is. 

{d)  The  Infeds  that  infcft  Fruits,  are  cither  of  the  IchneU' 
man-Fly  Kind,  or  PhaUn£.  Plums,  Peafc,  Nuts,  vc.  pro- 
duce fome  or  other  ichneumon-Fly.  That  generated  in  the 
Plum  is  black,  of  a  middle  Size,  its  Body  near  -I  Inch  long. 
Its  Tail  not  much  lefs,  confillmg  of  three  Briltles,  whejc- 
with  it  conveys  its  Eggs  into  I'ruits :  Its  Antenm,  or  Horns, 
long,  flcivder,    recurved;  its  Belly  longifh,  tapering,  fmall 

Bb  4  towards 


37^    Infers  C^re  of  their  Toting.  BookVII!, 

tables  are  Food,  are  accordingly  repofited,  fome  in 
this  Fruit,  feme  on  this  Tree  (^),  fome  on  that 
Plant  (/),  Tome  on  another,  and  another  i  butcon- 

ftantly 


towards  the  Thorax;  Legs  rcddidi;  Wmgs  membranaceous, 
thin  and  tranfparent,  in  Number  4,  which  i%  one  Charadte- 
^ifticjv  of  the  Ichneumon  Fly. 

The  Peafe  lchneii>non-Fly  ,  is  very  fraall ,  Wings  large, 
reaching  beyond  the  Podex ;  Antenna,  long;  Alvus  ftiort, 
fiiaped  Jike  aq  Heart,  with  the  Point  towards  the  Antis.,  it 
waiketh  ^nd  flieth  flowly.  No  Tail  appears  as^  in  the  for- 
mer; but  they  have  one  Ueth  hidden  under  the  Belly,  which 
they  can  at  Pleafure  bend  back  to  pierce  Peafe  when  they 
are  young  and  tender,  and  other  Things  alfo,  as  I  haveRe^- 
fon  to  fufpeft,  having  met  with  this  (as  indeed  the  former 
two)  in  divers  Vegetables. 

Pears  and  Apples  I  could  never  difcover  any  Thing  to 
breed  in,  but  only  the  lefler  PhaUna,  about  -4  Inch  long, 
whitifh  underneath;  greyifh  brown  above  (dappled  witix 
brown  Spots,  inclining  to  a  dirty  Red)  all  but  about  a  third 
Part  at  the  End  of  the  VVings ,  which  is  not  grey,  but 
brown,  elegantly  ftripcd  with  wavey  Lines,  of  a  Gold  Co- 
loijr,  as  if  gilt;  its  Head  is  fmall,  with  a  Tuft  of  whitifh 
brown  in  the  Forehead;  4«/e«»4  fmooth,  moderately  long. 
The  Aurelia  of  this  Moth  is  fmall,  of  a  yellowifli  brown. 
I  know  not  what  Time  they  require  for  their  Generation 
out  of  Boxes ;  but  thofe  I  laid  up  in  .^«^«y2,  did  nQt  become 
Moths  before  ^une  following. 

(e)  There  are  many  of  the  PhaUna  and  Ichneumon-Fly 
Tribes,  that  have  their  Generation  on  the  Leaves  or  other 
Parts  of  Trees  r-nd  Shrubs,  too  many  to  he  here  reckoned 
up.  The  Oak  haih  many  very  beautiful  phaUns,  bred  in 
Ks  convolved  Leaves,  white,  green,  yellow,  brown  fpot- 
ted  prettily,  and  neatly  dappled,  and  many  more  befides ; 
and  Its  Buds  aiford  a  Place  for  Cafes,  and  Balls  of  various 
Sorts,  as  fiiall  be  Ihewn  hereafter;  its  Leaves  expanded, 
minifter  to  the  Germination  of  globular,  and  other  fphse- 
roidal  Balls,  and  fat  Thec^,  fome  like  H^s,  fome  like  But- 
rons  excavated  in  the  Middle,  and  divers  others  fuch  like 
Repofitories,  all  belonging  to  the  Ichneumeon  Fly  Kind.  And 
not  only  the  Oak,  but  the  Maple  alfo,  the  White-Thorn,  the 
^riar.  Privet,  and  indeed  almoft  every  Tree  and  Shrub. 

(/)  And  as  Trees  and  Shrubs,  fo  Plants  have  their  pecu- 
'h^li  Iqfeds.     The  IVhite^Butterfiy  lays  its    voracious  OfF- 

.■'.v,  ^P^*"S 


Chap. VI.  InfeBsCareof  thcirToung.      377 

ftantly  the  fame  Family  on  the  fame  Tree  or  Plane, 
the  moft  agreeable  to  that  Family.  And  as  for  o- 
thcrs  that  require  a  conllant  and  greater  Degree 
of  Warmth,  they  are  accordingly  provided  by  the 
Parent-Animal  with  fome  Place  in  or  about  the 
Body  of  other  Animals  j  fome  in  the  Feathers  of 
Birds  ig)  5  fome  in  the  Hair  ot"  Bearts  {h)  j  fome 


fpring  on  Cabbage- Leaves  ;  a  very  beautiful  reddifti  occllatcd 
one,  Its  no  lefs  voracious  black  Off-fpring  of  an  horrid  A- 
fpedt,  on  the  Leaves  of  Nettles ;  as  alio  doth  a  very  beau- 
tiful, fmall,  grecni(h  Ichneumon- Fly,  in  Cafes  on  the  Leavcf 
of  the  fame  Plant  :  And  to  name  no  more  (becaufc  it  would 
be  endlcfs)  the  beautiful  Ragwort-Moth,  whofe  upper  Wings 
arc  brown,  elegantly  fpctted  with  red  and  underwings  edged 
with  brown;  thefe,  I  fay,  provide  for  theirgoldenring*di:r«- 
■Ci.  upon  the  Ragwort-  Plant. 

{g)  Many,  if  not  moft  Sort  of  Birds,  arc  infefted  with  a 
diiltinci  Kind  of  Lice,  very  different  from  one  another  in 
Shape,  Size,  (^-c.  For  Figures  and  Defcriptions  of  them,  I 
fhall  refer  to  Signieur  Redi  of  InfcSls.  See  i[{o  Moufet,  L.  r. 
c.  13.  Thefe  Lice  lay  their  Nits  among  the  Feathers  of  the 
refpedive  Birds,  where  they  are  hatched  and  nourifhed  ;  and 
as  Anfiotle  faith,  would  dcltroy  the  Birds,  particularly  Phea- 
Jants,  if  they  did  not  duft  their  Feathers.     Loco  infr.  e'ttat. 

(h)  And  as  Birds,  fo  the  fcveral  Sorts  of  Beifts  have  their 
pecuiur  Sorts  of  Lice;  all  diftind  from  the  two  Sorts  infelt- 
jng  Man:  Only  the  Afs,  they  fay,  is  free,  becaufeour  Savi- 
our rode  upon  one,  as  fome  think;  but  I  prefume  it  is  ra- 
.ther  from  the  Paffage  in  Pliny,  L  ii.  c.  33.  or  rather  ^r//7. 
Hijir  Animal.  L.  3.  c.  3 1,  who  faith,  Gluibus  pilus  eft,  non 
carent  eodem  [Pediculo]  excepto  Ajino,  qui  Hon  Pediculo  tan- 
tiim,  verum  etiam  Redivio  irnmnnis  eft.  And  a  little  before, 
fpeaking  of  thofe  in  Men,  he  (Lews  what  Conftitutions  arc 
moft  fubjed  to  them,  and  inftanceth  in  Alcman  the  Poet, 
and  Pherecydes  ityrius  that  died  of  the  Pthiriafis,  or  Lowly 
Difeafe.  For  which  foul  Diftcmper,  if  Medicines  are  defi- 
rtd,  Moufet  de  Infect,  p.  x6i.  may  be  confulted.  Who  in 
the  fame  Page  hath  this  Obfcrvation,   Animadvcrterunt  ncftra- 

fts ubi   A  fores  infutat  a   tergo   reliquerint ,    Pediculo! 

confcftim  omnes  tabefcere :  atque  ubi  eas  revijermt,  itcrutn  irt- 
numeros  aliot  fubito  oriri.  Which  Obfervation  is  confirmed 
by  Dr  Stubs.  Vid.  Lowth.  Abridg.  V.  3  p  558,  And  many 
Seamen  have  told  me  the  fame. 

in 


378     InfeBsCare  of  their  TouHg.  BookVHI, 

in  the   very.  Scales  of  Fifhes  {i)  j   fome  in  the 
Nofe  {k)  i   fome  in  the  Flefh  (/)  j   yea,  fome  in 

5     ,  the 


will      lll.i     '   I    "   H'l'l   I  II  I      ''I'M      itl 


(t)  Fifties,  one  would  think,  fliould  be  free  from  Lice,  by 
Rcafon  they  hvc  in  theWatersi  and  are  perpetually  moving 
In,  and  bruftiinj  through,  them;  but  yet  tliey  have  their 
Sorts  too. 

-  -Belides  whkhr^-I  bav«  ix^^o:tr\x\j  fooiid  'great  NumljeTSrnf 
long ilender  Worms  in  the  Stomachs,  and  other  Parts  of  Fifti, 
particularly  Codfijh,  efpecially  fuch  as  are  poor  ;  which 
Worms  have  work'd  themfelves  deeply  into  the  Coats  and 
Fle(K  fo  that  they  could  not  eafiiy  be  gotten  out :  So  Ari- 
fietle,  faith  of  fome  Fiflies,  Ballero  cr  Tilloni  Lumbricus  in- 
nafcitur,  qui  debditat,  &c.  Chalets  v'tUo  infejlattir  d'tro,  ut 
Pediculi  fub  Branchiis  innati  quam  multi  interimant.  Hift. 
An.  L.  8.  c.  io. 

(k)  Of  Infcds  bred  in  the  Nofe  of  Animals,  thofe  in  the 
Nofl:rils  of  Sheep  are  remarkable.  I  have  my  ielf  taken  out 
not  fewer  at  a  Time  than  tvsrenty  or  thirty  rough  Maggots, 
lying  among  the  Lamina,  of  the  Noftrils.  But  I  could  nevet 
ha.tch  any  of  them,  and  fo  know  not  what  Animal  they  pro- 
ceed from  :  But  I  have  no  great  doubt,  they  are  of  the  Ich- 
neumgn-Fh  Kindj  and  not  improbably  of  that  with  a  long 
Tail,  call'd  Trifeta,  whofe  three  Briftles  feem  very  commo- 
<iious  for  conveying  its  Eggs  into  deep  Places. 

I  have  alfo  feen  a  rough  whitifli  Maggot,  above  two  In- 
ches within  the  Intefiinum  re£lum  of  Horfes,  firmly  adhering 
thereto,  that  the  hard  Dung  did  not  rub  off.  I  never  could 
bring  them  to  Perfedion,  but  rufpe<ft  the  Side-Fly  proceeds 
from  it. 

{[)  In  the  Backs  of  Cozvs,  in  the  Summer-Months,  there 
are  Maggots  generated,  which  in  EJfex  we  call  Womils;  which 
are  firft  only  a  imall  Knot  in  the  Skin ;  and  I  fuppole  no  o- 
ther  than  an  Egg  laid  there  by  fome  Infec^l.  By  Degrees 
thefe  Knots  grow  bigger,  and  contain  in  them  a  Maggot  ly- 
ing in  a  purulent  Matter :  They  grow  to  be  as  large  as  the 
End  of  one's  Finger,  and  may  be  fqueez'd  out  at  a  Hole 
they  have  always  open:  They  are  round  and  rough,  and  of 
a  dirty  White.  With  my  utmoft  Endeavour  and  Vigilance, 
1  could  never  difcover  the  Animal  they  turn  into;  but  as 
they  are  iomewhat  like,  fo,  may  be  the  fame  as  thofe  in  the 
Note  before. 

<    In  Perfia  there  are  very  long  {lender  Worms,  bred  in  the 
Legs,  and  other  Parts  of  Men's  Bodi«s,  6  or  7  Yards  long. 

in 


Cbap.VI.  Infeifs  Care  of  their  Tomi^.      379 

the  very  Bo\¥cls   {m)  >    and   inmoll   Rcccflcs   of 

the 


In  Philof.  'Iranf.  Mr.  Dtnt,  and  Mr.  Ltwis,  relate  divers  Ex- 
amples ot  WoTirti  taken  out  of  the  Tongue,  Gums,  Nofe, 
and  other  Parts,  by  a  Woman  at  Leice/ltr,  which  they  were 
Eye-witnefl'fS  of.  Thcfe,  and  divers  others  mention'd  iti 
the  Tranfattions,  may  be  feen  together  in  Mr.  Lowthorfs 
Abridg.  Vol.  3.  p.  131. 

Narrat  mihi  vir  fide  dignus  ^"fp-  Wendlar.dt  ■■■  fe 

in  Polonia,  puero  cuidam  rufitce  duorum  annorum,   Vcrmkulum 

album  >  pallebra  extraxijfe, ma^nitudinis  Erua 

Similem  jere  huic  cafum  mthi  [Schulzio]  cr  D.  Segfro  narravit 
hoc.  Anno  1676.  chirurgus  nejler  Ant.  Statlender,  qui  euidam 
puero,  ex  Aure,  extraxit  Vermiculum  talem,  qualis  in  nucibtis 
avellanis  perforata  latitare  folet,  fed  paiiio  majoretn,  coloris  al- 
hilftmi ;    alteri  minores   5   ejufdem  generis  fttniliter   ex  Aure  : 

Omnei   aliquot   horas  fiipervtxernnt Vermiculos  adhtfc 

liventes  oculis  noflris  vidimus.  Ephem.  Germ.  T.  2.  Obf. 
24.  ubi  Vermiculi  Icon.  Many  other  Inftances  may  be  met 
with  in  the  fame  Tome.     Obf.  147,  148,   154. 

The  Worms  in  Deer  are  mention'd  often  among  ancient 
Writers.  Anflotle  faith,  '2KU?\t)x»i  [f^roi  w<x»7e«  txno-n,  c*  T»| 
xi<pxXy\  ^avTXi,  8cc.  They  [Deer]  all  have  Itve  Worms  in  their 
Heads ;  bred  under  the  Tongue.,  in  a  Cavity  near  the  Vertebra, 
on  which  the  Head  is  plac'd;  their  Size  not  left  than  of  thp 
largefi  Maggots;  they  are  bred  all  together,  in  number  about 
twenty.     Ariftot.  Hilt.  Animal.  1.  2.  c.  ij. 

To  thefe  Examples  may  he  added  the  Generation  of  the 
Ichneumon-Fly  in  the  Bodies  of  Caterpillars,  and  other  Nym- 
phx  oi  lnfe£is.  In  many  of  which,  that  I  have  laid  up  to 
be  hatch'd  in  Boxes,  inflead  of  Papilios,  &c.  as  I  expc<fted, 
I  have  found  a  great  Number  of  fmall  Ichneumon-Flies^ 
whofe  Parent-Animal  had  wounded  thofc  Nymphi,  and  dart- 
ed its  Eggs  into  them,  and  fo  made  them  the  Fofter-Mother 
of  its  Young.  More  Particulars  of  this  Way  of  Generation 
may  be  feen  in  the  great  Mr.  IVillughby's  Obfcrvations  in  Phi- 
lof. Tranf.  No.  76.  But  concerning  the  farther  Generation  of 
this  \nkf\,  I  have  taken  Notice  of  other  Particulars  in  other 
Places  of  thefe  Notes. 

{m)  The  Animals  ordinarily  bred  in  the  Stomach  and 
Guts,  are  the  three  Sorts  of  Worms  call'd  Lati,  Teretes,  and 
Afcaridfs ;  concerning  which,  it  would  be  irklbme  to  fpfaW 
in  Particular,  and  therefore  I  fliall  refer  to  Moufet,  L."2.  c. 
3r,  3z,  33.  Dr.  Tyfon%  Anatomy  of  them  in  Mr.  Lowthorp's 
Abridg.  V.  3.  p.  Til.  Seignior  F^eJis  Obf.  and  others  that 
have  written  of  them. 

And 


<3^o     Infedis  Care  of  their  Toting.  Book  VIH. 

the  Bodies   of    Man   and   other    Creatures    {n) : 
"And  as  for  others  to  whom  none  of  thefe  Methods 

arc 


And  not  only  Worms,  but  other  Creatures  alfo  are  faid  to 
be  found  in  the  Stomach ;  Inftances  of  which  are  fo  innume- 
rable, that  I  (hall  only  fele(5t  a  few  related  by  Ferfons  of  the 
bed  Credit.  And  firfl:  of  all,  by  fome  of  our  own  Country- 
^men.  Dr.  Lifter,  (whofe  Credit  and  Judgment  will  hardly 
be  queition'd,)  gives  an  Account  of  true  Caterpillars,  vomi- 
ted up  by  a  Boy  of  nine  Years  old ;  and  another  odd  Ani- 
mal by  a  poor  Man.  Mr.  Jejfop,  (another  very  judicious, 
curious  and  ingenious  Gentleman,  faw  Hexapods  vomited  up 
by  a  Girl ;  which  Hexapods  Hv'd  and  fed  for  five  Weeks.  See 
Lowth.  ib.  p.  135. 

And  to  Foreigners,  it  is  a  very  ftrangc  Story  (but  atte- 
fted  by  Perfons  of  great  Repute,)  of  Cathariaa  Gtilerla,  that 
dy'd  in  teb.  i66i,  in  the  Hofpital  of  Altenburg,  in  Germany, 
who  for  twenty  Years  voided  by  Vomit  and  Stool,  Tcads 
and  Lizzards,  &C.  Ephemer.  Germ.  T.  I.  Obf.  103.  See 
alfo  the  109.  Obfervation  of  a  Kitten  bred  in  the  Stomach, 
and  vomited  up;  of  Whelps  alfo,  and  other  Animals,  bred 
in  like  Manner.  But  I  fear  a  Stretch  of  Fancy  might  help 
in  fome  of  thofe  laft  Inftances,  in  thofe  Days  when  fponta- 
neous  Generation  was  held,  when  the  Philofophers  feem  to 
have  more  flightly  examined  fuch  Appearances  than  now 
they  do.  But  for  the  breeding  of  Frois  or  Toads,  or  Lacerti, 
Aquatics,  in  the  Stomach,  when  their  Spawn  happeneth  to 
be  drank,  there  is  a  Story  in  the  fecond  Tcme  of  the  Ephem. 
Gtrm.  Obf.  56.  that  favours  it,  viz.  In  the  Year  i66-j,  a  But- 
cher's Man  going  to  buy  fome  Lambs  in  the  Spring,  being 
thirfly,  drank  greedily  of  fome  ftanding  Water,  zvhich  a  whil^ 
after,  caus'd  great  Pains  in  his  Stomach,  which  grew  ivorfe 
and  worfe,  and  ended  in  dangerous  Symptoms.  At  laft  he 
thought  fomeivhat  was  alive  tn  his  Stomach,  and  after  that, 
vomited  up  three  live  Toads ;  and  fo  recover' d  his  former 
Health. 

Such  another  Story  Dr.  Sorbait  tells,  and  avoucheth  it 
feen  with  his  own  Eyes,  of  one  that  had  a  Toad  came 
out  of  an  Abicel's,  which  came  upon  drinking  foul  Water, 
Obf.  103. 

(»)  Not  only  in  the  Guts,  and  in  the  Flefti ;  but  in  ma- 
ny other  Parts  of  the  Body,  Worms  have  been  difcover'd. 
One.  was  voided  by  Urine,  by  Mr.  Mat.  Milfcrd,  fuppos'd 
to  have  come  from  the  Kidneys.  Lowth.  ib.  p.  135.  More 
f^cli  Examples  Moufet  tells  of.     ibid.     So  the  Vermes  Cucur- 

bitmi 


Chap.  VI.  Infers  Care  of  their  Toung.       381 

^xc  proper,  but  make  chemfclvcs  Neds  by  Perfo- 
rations in  the  Earth,  in  Wood,  or  Combs  they 
build,  or  fuch  like  Ways }  'tis  admirable  to  fee 
with  what  Labour  and  Care  they  carry  in,  and 


hit'tni  are  very  common  in  the  VclTels  in  Shceps  Livers:  And 
Dr.  Lijier  tells  of  them,  found  in  the  Kidney  or  a  D(  g,  and 
thinks  that  the  Snakes  and  Toads,  crc.  laid  to  be  found  in 
Animals  Bodies,  may  be  nothing  elfe.  Lowth.  ib.  p.  izo. 
Nay,  mere  tlian  all  this:  In  Dr.  Bern.  Verza/cha's  lixth  Ob- 
krwation,  there  are  divers  Inllances  of  Worms  bred  in  the 
Brain  of  Man.  One,  a  Patient  of  his,  troubled  with  a  vio- 
lent Hcadach,  and  an  itching  about  the  Noftrils,  and  fre- 
quent Snee/ing  ;  who,  with  the  Ufe  of  a  Sneezing- Powder, 
voided  a  Worm,  with  a  great  deal  of  Snot  from  his  Nofe. 
A  like  Inftance  he  gives  from  Barthotine,  of  a  Worm  void- 
ed from  the  Nofe  of  O.  IV.  which  he  gueifeth  was  the  famous 
Olaus  Wormius :  Another,  from  a  Country  Woman  of  Diet- 
marfu ;  and  others  in  Tulpius,  F.  Hildanus,  Schenckiut,  Sec. 
Thcfe  Worms  he  thinks  are  undoubtedly  bred  in  the  Brain  : 
But  what  way  they  can  come  from  thence,  1  can't  tell. 
Wherefore  I  rather  think,  they  are  fuch  VVorms  as  are 
mentioned  in  Note  (k),  and  even  that  Worm  that  was  adiu- 
ally  found  in  the  Brain  of  the  Paris  Girl  (when  opened). 
1  guefs  might  be  laid  in  the  Lamim  of  the  Noftrils,  by  Tome 
of  the  Ichneumon,  or  other  Infeft  Kind,  and  might  gnaw  its  way 
into  the  Brain,  through  the  Os  cribiforme.  Of  this  he  tells 
us  from  Bartholinc,  Tandem  cum  tabida  obiijfet,  Jlatim  aperto 
cranio  pnfcntes  Mcdict  totam  cerebelli  fubftantiam,  quA  ad  dex- 
ternm  "nfrgtt,  a  reliquo  corpore  fejunilam,  nigraque  tunica  in- 
■votutam  deprehenderunt :  hic  tunica  rupta,  latentem  I'ermem 
vivum,  c^  pilofum,  duobus  punClis  fplendidis  loco  orulor urn  pro- 
didit,  ejufdem  fere  molts  cum  reliqua  Cerebri  portione,  quidu- 
arum  horaram  fpacio  Jupervixit.  B,  Verzal.  Obf.  Mcdicae, 
p.  i6.  «. 

Hildanus  tells  us  fuch  another  Story,  viz  Tilius  Theod.  auft 
der  Roulen  ,  Avuncuit  mei ,  diuturno  vexabatur  dolore  capi- 
tis.    Deinde  febricula  O"  fiernutatione  exortd,  ruptus  e(i 

Abfceffus   circa  os  crihrofum  cr  Vermis  prorepjit.     By  his 

Figure  of  it,  the  Maggot  was  an  Inch  long,  and  full  of  Brif- 
tles.      Fabri  Htldan.  Cent.  i.  Obf. 

Galenus  Wierus  (Phyfician  to  the  Princ.  Jul.  S<  Cleve)  he 
faith,  told  him,  that  he  had,  at  divers  Times,  found  Worms 
in  the  Gall-bladder  in  Perlons  he  had  opened  at  DuJIi-lderp. 
Id.  ib,  Obf.  6c. 

fcal 


iii    InfeBs  Care  of  their  Toung.  BcwDkVIJL 

feal  up  Provifions,  that  fcrve  both  for  the  Produ" 
ftion  of  their  Yoang,  as  alfo  for  their  Food  and 
Karture  when  ptodoc'd  {o). 

The  other  Piece  of  remarkable  Art  and  Care  a:-* 
bout  the  Produ6i:ion  of  their  Young,  is  their  Cu- 
riofity  and  Neatnefs  in  repofiting  their  Eggs,  and 
in  their  Nidification. 

As  to  the  firfl:  of  which,  \s/e  may  obferve  that 
great  Curiofity,  and  nice  Order  is  generally  ob- 
ferv'd  by  them  in  this  Matter.  You  fhall  always 
fee  their  Eggs  laid  carefully  and  commodioufly 
up  {p).  When  upon  the  Leaves  of  Vegetahles, 
pr  other  Material  on  Land,  always  glu'd  thereon 
with  Care,  with  one  certain  End  lowermoft,  and 
with  handfom  juxta-Pofitions  {q\  Or  if  in  the  Wa- 
ters, in  neat  and  beautiful  Rows  oftentimes,  in  that 
fpermatick,  gelatine  Matter,  in  which  they  arc  re- 
pofited,  and  that  Matter  carefully  ty'd  and  faft- 
ned  in  the  Waters,  to  prevent  its  Diflipation  {r)^ 

or 


(o)  See  before  ^ook  IV.  Chap.  13.  Note  (c). 

if)  Some  Infedls  lay  up  their  Eggs  in  Clufters,  as  in  Holes 
of  Flefli,  and  fuch  Places,  where  it  is  nccelTary  they  (hould 
be  Crowded  together;  which,  no  queftion,  prevents  their 
being  too  much  dried  up  m  dry  Places,  and  promotes  their 
hatching.     But, 

(5)  As  for  fuch  as  are  not  to  be  cluftered  up,  great  Order 
is  uled.  I  have  iztxi  upon  the  Poils  and  Sides  of  Windows, 
little  round  Eggs,  refembhng  fmall  Pearl,  which  produced 
i'maliilv.iiry  Caterpillars,  that  were  very  neatly  and  orderly 
kid:  And  to  name  no  more,  the  White  Btttterjij  lays  its 
neat  Eggs  on  the  Cabbage  Leaves  in  good  Order,  always 
gluing  one  certain  End  of  the  Egg  to  the  Leaf.  I  call  them 
neat  Eggs,  becaufe  if  we  view  them  in  a  Microfcope,  we 
ihall  find  them  very  curioufly  furrowed,  and  handfomely 
made  and  adorned. 

(r)  By  Realbn  it  ^would  be  endlefs  to  fpecify  the  various 
Generation  of  Inlecls  in  the  Water,  I  (hall  therefore  (becaufe 
it  is  little  obferved)  take  Pliny's  Inftance  of  rhc  Gnat,  a 
mean   and  contemned  Animal,  but  a  notable  Inftance  of 

Natujfe's  Work,  as  he  faith. 

The 


Qh^^y\.  Nidification  af  Infe5fs,  383 

or  it'  made  to  float,  fo  carefully  fpread  and  poi- 

fed,  as  to  fwim  about  with  all  poflible  Artifice.        ^ 

And  as  to  their  other  Faculty,  that  of  Nicfifica- 

tion,   whether  it  be  exerted  by  boring  the  Earth 

or 


^( 


The  firft  Thing  conrtderable  in  the  Generation  of  this  la-^ 
fcift  is  (tor  the  Size  of  the  Animal)  it*  vaft  s/^atun,  being* 
fj^nie  of  thern  above  an  Inch  long,  znd  half  a  quarter  Dia- 
meter ;  made  to  float  in  the  Waters,  and  tied  to  fume  Sticky 
Stone,  or  other  fix'd  Thing  in  the  Waters,  by  a  fmall  Stem, 
or  St»lk.  In  this  gelatine,  tranfparent  Spawn,  the  Eggs  are 
ntatly  laid;  in  fome  Spawns  in  a  fingle,  in  forae  in  a  dou- 
ble Ipiral  Line,  running  round  from  end  to  end,  as  in  Fig. 
9,  and  10;  and  in  fome  tranfverlly,  a6  Fig.  8. 

When  the  Eggs  are  by  the  'Heat  of  the  Sun,  and  Warmth. 
of  the  Seafon  hatched  into  fmall  Maggots,  thefe  Maggots 
defcend  to  the  bottom,  and- by  mcairs  of  fome  of  thegcla- 
tioe  Matter  of  the  Spawn  (which  they  take  along  with 
them)  they  ftick  to  Stones,  and  other  Bodies  at  the  bottom, 
and  there  make  themfelves  little  Cafes  or  Cells,  which  they 
creep  into,  and  out  of  at  Pleafurc,  until  they  are  arrived 
to  a  more  mature  Nympha-State,  and  can  fwim  about  here, 
and  there,  to  feek  for  what  Food  they  have  occafion; 
at  which  Time,  they  are  a  kind  of  Red-worms,  above  hal£ 
an  Inch  long,  as  in  Fig.  rr. 

Thus  far  this  mean  Infe(5l  is  a  good  Inftance  of  the  di- 
vine Provideiice  towards  it.     But  if  we  farther  confider^ 
and  compare  the  three  States  it  undergoes  after  it  is  hatched, 
we  (hall  find  yet  greater  Signals  of  the  Creator's  Manage- 
ment, even  in  thefe  meaneft  of  Creatures.     The  three  States 
1  mean,  are  its  Nympha-Verm'tcular  State,  its   Aurelia,  and 
Mature-S>u\.Q,  alias  different  as  to  Shape  and  Accoutrements, 
as  if  the  Infecl:  was  three  different  Animals.     In  its  Vjrmif 
cv/^r- State,  ir  is  a  Red-Maggot,  as  I  faid,  and  hath  a  Mluih' 
and  other  Parts  accommodated  to  Food:    In   its  Aurelia- 
State  it  hath  no  fuch  Parts,  becaufe  it  then  fubfills  without 
Food;  butin  '\\:%  Mature,  G«4^ State,  it  hath  a  curious  well- 
made  Spear,  to  wound  and  fuck  the  Blood  of  other  Ani- 
mals.    In  its  Vermicular 'S\.nt,  it  hatha  long  Worm-like  Bo- 
dy, and  fomething  analogous  to  Fins  or  Feathers,  (landing 
creft  near  its  Tail,  and  running  parallel  with  the  Body,  by 
means  of  which  refilling  the  Waters,  it  is  enabled  to  fwim 
about  by  Curvations,  or  flapping  its  Body,  fide-ways,  this 
way  and  that,  as  in  Fig.  iz. 

But 


3?4-         Nid'tfication  of  Infers.  BookVIIL. 

or  Wood,   or  building  themfelves  Cells   (i),    or- 
fpinning  and  weaving  themfelves  Cafes  and  Webs, 
it  is  all  a  wonderful  Faculty  of  thofe  poor  little 
Animals,  whether  we  confider  their  Parts  where-; 
with  they  work,  or  their  Work  it  felf.     Thus 
thofe  who  perforate  the  Earth,   Wood,   or  fuch 
like,  they  have  their  Legs,  Feet,  Mouth,  yea, 
and  whole  Body  accommodated  to  that  Service  j 
their  Mputh  exactly  formed  to  gnaw  thofe  hand- 
Tome  round  Holes,   their  Feet  as  well  made  ta 
fcratch  and  bore  (^),  and  their  Body  handfome*! 
ly  turned  and  fitted  to  follow.     But  for  fuch  as, 
build  or  fpin  themfelves  Nefts,  their  Art  juftly 
bids  Defiance  to  the  moll  ingenious  Artift  among 
Men,  fo  much  as  tolerably  to  copy  the  nice  Geo- 
metrical Combs  of  fome  («),  the  Earthen  Cells 
of  others,  or  the  Webs,  Nets  and  Cafes  (w)  wo- 
ven 


^' But  in  Us  ^«re//^- State,  it  hath  a  quite  different  Body  ^ 
V/ith  a  CM-Head  (in  -which  the  Head,  Thorax,  and  Wings 
of  the  Gnat  are  inclofed)  a  (lender  Alvtts,  and  a  neat  finny 
Tail,  (landing  at  right  Angles  with  the  Body,  quite  contrary 
to  what  it  was  before;  by  which  means,  inftead  of  eafy 
flapping  fide-ways,  it  fwims  by  rapid,  brifk  Jirks,  the  quite, 
contrary  way  ;  as  is  in  fome  meafure  reprefented  in  Fig.  13.. 
But  when  it  becomes  a  Gwat,  no  finny  Tail,  no  Club-Head, 
but  all  is  made  in  the  moft  accurate  manner  for  Flight  and 
Motion  in  the  Air,  as  before  it  was  for  the  Waters. 

(i)  See  BooklY,  Chap.  13.   Nates  (»),  (0). 

(t)  Thus  the  Mouths  and  other  Parts  of  the  Ichneumon' 
Waff^  in  BoekW.  Chap.  13.  Note  (c).  So  the  Feet  of  the 
Gryllotalpa,  ibid.   Note  {s). 

[u)  See  the  laft  cited  Places,  Note  {0). 

(w)  Of  the  textrine  Art  of  the  Spider,  and  its  Parts  ferv- 
ing  tothat  Purpofe,  fee  the  laft  cited  Place,  Note  (x). 

Befides  thefe.  Caterpillars,  and  divers  other  InlciSs,  can 
emit  Threds,  or  Webs  for  their  Ufe.  In  this  their  Nympha- 
State,  they  fecure  themfelves  from  falling,  and  let  them- 
felves down  from  the  Boughs  of  Trees,  and  other  high 
Places,  with  one  of  thefe  Threads.  And  in  the  Cafes  they 
weave,  they  f«cure  tUemfelves  in  their  AurtUa-State. 

And 


Chap.  VI.  Nidification  of  InfeBs.  385- 

vcn  by  others.  And  here  that  natural  Glue  {x) 
■which  tlieir  Bodies  afford  feme  of  them  to  conlb- 
lidare  their  Work,  and  combine  its  Materials  to- 
gether, and  which  in  others  can  be  darted  out  at 
PJeafure,  and  fpun  and  woven  by  thcrn  into  filk- 
en  Balls  0')  or  Webs.    I  fay,  this  fo  peculiar,  fo 

I'erviccable 


And  not  only  the  OfFfpring  of  the  PhaUna-Tribe ,  but 
there  are  fome  ot  the  Ichneumon-Fly  Kind  alfo,  endowed 
with  this  texcrine  Art.  Of  thefe'l  have  met  with  two 
Sorts;  one  th.it  fpun  a  Milk-white,  long,  round,  filken 
Web,  as  big  as  the  top  of  ones  Fingers,  not  hollow  within, 
as  many  are,  but  filled  throughout  with  Silk.  Thefe  are 
woven  round  Bents,  Stalks  of  Ribwort,  crc.  in  Meadows. 
The  other  is  a  lump  of  many  yellow,  filken  Cafes,  Iticking 
conful'cdly  together  on  Ports,  under  Cole- worts,  crc  Theie 
Webs  contain  in  them,  fmall ,  whitiQi  Maggots;  which 
turn  to  a  fmall,  black,  Ichnatman-Fly,  with  long,  capillary 
jintennA  ;  Tan-couioured  Legs;  long  Wings  reaching  be- 
yond their  Body,  with  a  black  Spot  near  the  middle  ;  the  Al- 
vus,  like  an  Heart;  and  in  fome,  a  fmall  feraceous  Tail. 
Some  of  thefe  Flies  were  of  a  (liining,  beautiful  green  Co- 
lour. 1  could  not  perceive  any  Difference,  at  leaft,  not 
fpecifical,  between  tlie  Flies  coming  from  thofe  two  Pro- 
du<flions. 

(x)  I  have  often  admired  how  Waf{>s,  Hornets,  Ichneu- 
mon-Wafps,  and  other  Infedts  that  gather  dry  Materials  for 
building  their  Nefts,  have  found  a  proper  matter  to  cement 
and  glue  their  Combs,  and  line  their  Cells;  which  we  find 
always  fufficienily  context  and  firm.  But  in  all  Probability, 
this  ufeful  iMaterial  is  in  their  own  Bodies ;  as  'tis  in  the 
Tinea  ve/iivora,  the  Cadew  Wrrm,  and  divers  others.  Gcedart 
obferves  of  liis  Eruca,  Num.  xx.  6.  lh;t  fed  upon  Sallow- 
Leaves,  that  it  made  its  Cell  of  the  comminuted  Leaves, 
glued  together  with  its  cvn  Spittle,  hic  pulverls  ant  artn& 
injlar  comminuit,  ac  pituitofo  quodam  fui  corporis  fucco  ita 
maceravit,  ut  inde  a^ommodatum  fubeundA  mntationi  inftanti 
locum  fibi  exflruxerit.  Domuncula  hic  a  communi  Salicum 
ligno  nihil  dtffcrre  videbatur,  nifi  quod  longe  ijfct  durior,  adto 
ut  cultro  vix  difrumpi  pfjfet. 

(y)  An  ingenious  Gentlezvamaii  of  my^ Acquaint anct ,  Wi^t 
to  a  learned  Phypcian,  taking  much  Pleafure  to  keep  Silk- 
IVormtt  had  once  the  ^urioft'iy   to   drazv   out  one  of  the  oval 

C  C  C4/(f;, 


385  Nidificationof  Infetis.  BookVlII. 

ferviceable  a  Material,  together  with  the  curlou* 
Structure  of  all  Parts  miniftring  to  this  textrine 
Power,  as  mean  a  Bufinefs  as  it  may  feem,  is  fuch 
as  may  jullly  be  accounted  among  the  noble  De* 
figns  and  Work?of  the  infinite  Creator  and  Con- 
fervator  of  the  World. 

In  the  laft  Place,  there  is  another  prodigious 
Faculty,  Art,  Cunning,  or  what  fhall  I  call  it? 
that  others  of  thofe  tittle  Animsls  have,  to  make 
even  Nature  it  felf  ferviceable  to  th^ir  Purpofej 
and  that  is  the  making  the  Vegetation  and  Growth 
of  Trees  and  Plants,"  the  very  Means  of  the  build- 
ing of  their  little  Neils  and  Cells  {z)  j  fuch  as  are 

the 


Ca^es^  which  the  Silk-Worm  [pins  — —into  all  the  Silken  Wife 
it  was  made  up  of,  which,  to  the  great  Wonder  as  well  of  her 
Hiifhand,    as  her  felf,  •  appeared  to  be ,    by  meafure ,   a 

great  deal  above  joo  Yards,  and  yet  weighed  but  two  Grains 
and  an  half.     Boyl  Subtil,  of  Effluv,  ch.  ^. 

{z)  Since  my  penning  this,  1  have  met  with  the  mod  fa- 
gacious  Malpighi's  Account  of  Galls,  &c.  and  find  his  De- 
kriptions  to  be  exceedingly  accurate  and  true,  having  tra- 
ced my  felf  many  of  the  Produdlions  he  hath  mentioned. 
But  I  find  Italy  and  Sicily  (his  Book  de  Gallis  being  publifh- 
ed  long  after  he  was  made  Profeflbr  of  Meffina)  more  lux- 
uriant m  fuch  Produdtions  than  England,  at  lead,  than  the 
Farts  about  Upminfler  (where  I  live)  are.  For  many,  if  not 
moft  of  thofe  about  us,  are  taken  Notice  of  by  him,  and 
feveral  others  befides  that  I  never  met  with  ;  although  I 
have  for  many  Years  as  critically  obferved  all  the  Excref- 
cences,  and  other  morbid  Tumors  of  Vegetables,  as  is  al- 
mort  poflible,  and  do  believe  that  few  of  them  have  efcap- 
ed  mc. 

As  to  the  Method  how  thofe  Galls  and  Balls  are  produc- 
ed, the  moll  fimple,  and  confequently  the  moft  eafy  to  be 
accounted  for,  is  that  in  the  Gems  of  Oak,  which  may  be 
CzWed  Se]uamouS'Oak-Cones,  Capitula  fquamata,  inMalpighi: 
Whofe  Defcription  not  exadly  anfwering  our  Engltfh-Cones 
,  jn  divers  Refpeds,  I'  fhall  therefore  pafs  his  by,  and  (hew 
©nly  what  1  have  obferved  my  felf  concerning  them. 

%  Tbefs 


Chap.  VI.  Ntdtficdtton  of  InfeEfs.  ^87 

the  Galls  and  Balls  found  on  the  Leaves  and  Branch- 
es of  divers  Vegetables,  fuch  as  the  Oak,  the  Wil- 
low {aa)^  the  Briar,  and  fomc  others. 

Now 


Thefe  Cones  are,  in  outward  Appearance,  perfciftly  like 
the  Gems,  only  valUy  bigger;  and  indeed  they  are  no  oiher 
than  the  Gems,  encrealed  in  Bignefs,  which  naturally  ought 
to  be  puihed  out  in  Length  :  The  Caufe  of  which  Obrtruc- 
tion  of  the  Vegetation  is  this :  Into  the  very  Heart  of  the 
young  tender  Gem  or  Bud  (which  begins  to  be  turgid  in 
'^unt,  and  to  Ihoot  towards  the  latter  end  of  that  Month, 
or  beginning  of  the  next;  into  this,  I  fay)  the  Parent-In- 
fed  thrufts  one  or  more  Eggs,  and  not  perhaps  without 
fome  venemous  Ichor  tlierewith.  This  Egg  foon  becomes 
a  Maggot,  which  eats  it  felf  a  little  Cell  in  the  very  Heart 
or  Pith  of  the  Gem,  which  is  the  Rudiment  of  the  Branch, 
together  with  its  Leaves  and  I'ruit,  as  ftiail  be  hereafter 
(hewn.  The  Branch  being  thus  wholly  deflroyed,  or  at  lead 
its  Vegetation  being  oblbufled,  the  Sap  that  was  to  nourifli 
it,  is  diverted  to  the  remaining  Parts  of  the  Bud,  which 
are  only  the  fcaly  Teguments ;  which  by  thefe  Means  grow 
large  and  flounfhing,  and  become  a  Covering  to  the  Infcd- 
Cafe,  as  before  they  were  to  the  tender  Branch  and  its  Ap- 
pendage. 

The  Cafe  lying  withm  this  Cone,  is  at  firft  but  fmall,  as 
the  Maggot  included  in  it  is,  but  by  degrees,  as  the  Maggot 
increafeth,  fo  it  grows  bigger,  to  about  the  Si7.e  of  a  large 
white  Peaie,  long  and  round,  refembling  the  Shape  of  a 
fmall  Acorn. 

The  inftil  it  felt,  is  (according  to  the  modern  InfecSolo- 
gers)  of  the  ichneumon-Fly  Kind;  with  four  Membranace- 
ous WingSt  reaching  a  little  beyond  the  Body,  articulated 
Horns,  a  large  ihorax,  bigger  than  the  Belly  ;  the  Belly  lliort 
and  conical  ;  much  like  the  Heart  of  Animals  :  The  Leg: 
partly  whitilh,  partly  black.  The  Length  of  the  Body  from 
Head  to  Tail,  about  TTof  an  Inch;  its  Colour,  a  very  beau- 
tiful ftiining  Green,  ig  lome  tending  to  a  dark  Copper-Co- 
lour. Figures  both  of  the  Cones,  Calcs,  and  Infedts,  may 
be  feen  among  Malpighi's  Cuts  of  Galls,  Tab.  13.  and  Tab. 
xo.  Fig.  71.  which  Fig.  71,  exhibits  well  enough  fomeothers 
of  the  Gall-lnfetls,  but  its  Thorax  is  fomewhat  too  fliort  for 
curs. 

(aa)  Not  only  the  Willow,  and  fome  other  Trees,  but 
Piants  alfo,  as   Ktttles,  Ground-Ivy,  &c.  have  Calcs  produ- 

C  c  1  ced 


588  Nidification  of  Infers,  Book  VIIT. 

Now  this  is  fo  peculiar  an  Artifice,  and  fo  far 
out  of  the  Reach  of  any  mortal  Undertfanding, 
Wit,  or  Power,  that  if  we  confider  the  Matter, 
with  fome  of  its  Circumllances,  we  muft  needs 
perceive  manifeft  Defign,  and  that  there  is  the 
Concurrence  of  fome  great  and  wife  Being,  that 
hath,  from  the  Beginning,  taken  Care  of,  and 
provided  for  the  Animal's  Good;  For  which  Rca- 
fon,  as  mean  as  the  Inftance  may  feem,  I  might  be 
cxcufed,  if  1  fhould  enlarge  upon  its  Particulars. 
But  two  or  three  Hints  fhall  fuffice. 

In  the  firfl  Place,  'tis  certain  that  the  Forma- 
tion of  thofe  Cafes  and  Balls  quite  exceeds  the 
Cunning  of  the  Animal  it  felf  j  but  it  is  the  Ad 
partly  of  the  Vegetable ,  and  partly  of  fome 
Virulency  (or  what  fhall  I  call  it?)  in  the  Juyce, 
or  Egg,  or  both,  repofited  on  the  Vegetable 
by  the  Parent  Animal  {hh).  And  as  this  Viru- 
lency   is   various ,   according   to  the   Difference 


ced  on  their  Leaves,  by  the  Injedlion  of  the  Eggs  of  an 
Jchneumon-Fly.  I  have  obferved  thofe  Cafes  always  to  grow 
in,  or  adjoining  to  fome  Rib  of  the  Leaf,  and  their  Pro- 
dudion  I  conceive  to  be  thus,  viz..  The  Parent-Infed,  with 
its  ftiff  fetaceous  Tail,  terebrates  the  Rib  of  the  Leaf,  when 
tender,  and  makes  Way  for  its  Egg  into  the  very  Pith  or 
Heart  thereof,  and  probably  lays  in  therewith,  fome  proper 
Juice  of  its  Body,  to  pervert  the  regular  Vegetation  of  it. 
From  this  Wound  arifes  a  fmall  Excrefcence,  which  (when  the 
Egg  is  hatched  into  a  Maggot)  grows  bigger  and  bigger,  as 
the  Maggot  increafes,  fvvellmg  on  each  Side  the  Leaf  between 
the  two  Membranes,  and  extending  it  felf  into  the  parenchy- 
mous  Part  thereof,  until  it  is  grown  as  big  as  two  Grains  of 
Wheat.  In  this  Cafe  lies  a  fmall,  ^hite,  rough  Maggot, 
which  turns  to  an  Aurelia,  and  afterwards  to  a  very  beau- 
tiful green,  fmall  Ichneumon-Fly. 

{bb)  What  1  fufpecfted  my  felf,  I  find  confirmed  by  'Mat- 
fighi,  who  in  his  exad  and  true  Defcription  of  the  Fly  bred 
]n  the  Oaken  Galls,  faith,  Non  fat  fuit  nature  tam  miro  arti- 
ficio  Terehram  fen  Litnam  condidijje;  fed  inflttto  vulnere,  -oel 
exdtato  forarnine  mfundendum  exmde  Uquorem  intra  Jerebram 

(ondidit ; 


Chap.  VI.     Nidijicatlon  of  Infe6fs,  389 

of  its  Animal,  fo  is  the  Form  and  Texture  of 
the  Cafes  and  Balls  excited  thereby  ;  fome  be- 
ing  hard  Shells  {cc)^  fome   tender    Bails  {eld)  ^ 

fome 


comiiAlt :  quare  fraHa  per  tranfverfam  mitfcarum  terebra  fre- 
quentijfime,  vivente  animal/^  gutU  aliqttot  diaphant  humoris 
effluunt.  And  x  little  after,  he  confirms,  by  ocular  Obl'erva- 
tion,  what  he  imagin'd  before,  viz.  Semel  prope  Junit  finem 
vidi  Mufcam,  qualem  fnperiits  delineavi,  inftdentem  qutrcinti 
^emt/j.i,  adhuc  germinanti ;  hdrebat  etenim  follolo  jiabili  ab  a- 
pice  hiantis  gemm&  erumtenti;  v  convulfo  in  arcum  corpore, 
terebram  evaginabat,  ipfamque  tenfam  immittebat ;  cr  tume- 
jaClo  ventre  circa  terebn  radicem  tumorcm  excitabut,  qutm 
interpolatis  vicibus  remittebat.  In  folio  igitur,  avut/d  Alufcd, 
minima  c/  diaphana  reperii  ejecla  ova,  Jimillima  iis,  qu&  ad- 
h-'.c  tn  tubis  Jupererant.  Non  licuit  iterum  idem  admirarifpec- 
tac Ilium,  Sec. 

Somewhat  hke  this,  which  MaUnghi  faw,  I  had  the  good 
Fortune  to  fee  my  felf  once  fome  Years  ago:  And  that  was, 
the  beautiful,  fliining  Oak-Ball  ichneumon  ftrike  us  Terebrain- 
to  an  Oak-Apple  divers  Times,  no  doubt  to  lay  its  Eggs 
therein.  And  hence  I  apprehend  we  fee  many  Vermicules 
towards  the  Outfide  of  many  of  the  Oak-Apples,  which  I 
guefs  were  not  what  the  Primitive  Infedts  laid  up  in  the 
Gem,  from  which  the  Oak- Apple  had  its  Rife,  but  fome 
other  fupervenient,  additional  Inl'eds,  laid  in  after  the  Ap- 
ple was  grown,  and  whilll  it  was  tender  and  foft. 

{cc)  The  Aleppo-Galls,  wherewith  we  make  Ink,  may  be 
reckoned  of  this  Number,  being  hard,  and  no  other  than 
Cafes  of  Infects  which  are  bred  in  them  ;  who  when  come 
to  Maturity,  gnaw  their  Way  out  of  them  ;  which  is  the 
Caufe  of  thofe  little  Holes  obfervablc  in  them.  Of  the  In- 
fe(5ts  bred  in  them,  fee  Philof.  Tranfatl.  No.  145.  Of  this  Num- 
ber alfo  are  thofe  little  fmooth  Gales,  as  big  as  lari;e  Peppcr- 
Corns,  growing  clofe  to  the  Ribs  under  Oaken-Lcavcs,  glo- 
bous,  but  flattilb;  at  tirlt  touched  with  a  blulliing  red,  after- 
wards growing  brown  ;  hollow  withm,  and  an  hard  thiji 
Shell  without.  In  this  licth  commonly  a  rough,  white  Mag- 
got, which  becomes  a  little  long  winged,  black  Ichneumon- 
Fly,  that  eats  a  little  Hole  m  the  Side  of  the  Gall,  and  fo 
gets  out. 

{d4)  For  a  Sample  of  the  tender  Balls,  I  fliall  choofe  the 
globous  Ball,  as  round,  and  fome  as  big  as  fmall  Muskef- 
BuUcts,  growing  clofe  to  the  Ribs,  under  Oaken- Leaves, 

C  c  3  of 


390         Nidlficatton  of  InfeBs.  Book  VIII. 

fome  fcaly   (^^),   fome  fmooth  (//),  fome  Hai- 
ry (^s)j   fome  Long,  fome  Round,  fome  Co- 
nical, 


of  a  greenifli  yellowifti  Colour,  with  a  blufh  of  red;  their 
Skin  fmooth,  with  frequent  Rilings  therein.  Inwardly  they 
are  very  foft  and  fpongy ;  and  in  the  very  Center  is  a  Cafe 
with  a  white  Maggot  therein,  which  becomes  an  Ichneumon- 
Fh>  not  much  unlike  the  lalt.  As  to  this  Gall,  there  is  one 
Thing  1  have  obferved  fomewhat  peculiar,  and  I  may  fay 
providential,  and  that  is,  that  the  Fly  lies  all  the  Winter  in 
thefe  Balls  in  its  Infantile-State,  and  comes  not  to  its  Matu- 
rity till  the  following  Spring.  In  the  Autumn,  and  Winter, 
thefe  Balls  fall  down  with  their  Leaves  to  the  Ground,  and 
the  Infedl  indofed  in  them  is  there  fenced  againft  the  Win- 
ter Frofts,  partly  by  other  Leaves  falling  pretty  thick  upon 
them,  and  efpeciaily  by  the  thick,  parenchymous,  fpongy 
Walls,  afforded  by  the  Galls  themfelves. 

Another  Sample  fliall  be  the  large  Oak-Balls,  called  Oak- 
'^pples,  growing  in  the  Place  of  the  Buds,  whofe  Generati- 
on, Vegetation  and  Figure,  may  be  feen  in  Malpig.  de  Gal- 
Us,  p.  2,4.  and  Tab.  lo.  Fig.  33,cyc.  Out  of  thefe  Galls,  he 
faith  various  Species  of  Flies  come,  but  he  names  only  two, 
and  they  are  the  only  two  I  ever  faw  come  out  of  them  : 
Frequenter  (faith  he)  fubnigr&  funt  mti[c&  hrev't  miinits.  tere- 
bra.  Inter  has  aliquA  obfervantur  aure&y  levi  viridis  tinHur^ 
fup{f£y  oblonga  pollentes  terebra.  Thefe  two  differently  co- 
loured FHes,  I  take  to  be  no  other  than  Male  and  Female 
of  the  fame  Species.  I  have  not  obferved  Tails  (which  are 
their  Terebrd)  in  all,  as  Malpighi  feems  to  intimate :  Per- 
haps they  were  hid  in  their  ThecA,  and  I  could  not  difcover 
them  :  But  I  rather  think  there  were  none,  and  that  thofe 
were  the  Males :  But  in  others,  I  have  obferved  long,  re- 
curvous  Tails,  longer  than  their  whole  Bodies.  And  thefe 
I  take  to  be  the  Females.  And  in  the  Oak- Apples  them- 
ftlves,  I  have  feen  the  Aurelu,  fome  with,  fome  without 
Tails.  And  I  muftconfefs,  'twas  not  without  Admiration  as 
well  as  Pleafure,  that  I  have  feen  with  what  exad  Neatnefs 
and  Artifice,  the  Tail  hath  been  wrapt  about  the  Aurellut 
whereby  it  is  fecured  from  either  annoying  the  Infc«ft,  or 
being  hurt  it  felf. 

(ee)  See  before  Note  {z^. 

(  ff)  As  in  the  preceding  Note. 

Igg)  Of  the  rough  or  hairy  Excrefcences,  thofe  on  the 
'Briar,  or  Dog-Rofe,  are  a  good  Inllance.  Thefe  Spongioid 
%:illofi,  z$Mx,Ray,  GalU  rtmof'i,  as  Dr.  Af<f//'/^^<  calls  them, 

arc 


Chap.  VI.   Nidi ficat ion  ofInfe6is.  391 

nical,  ^c.  {hh).  And  in  the  laft  Place,  let  us 
add,  That  thofe  Species  of  Infects  are  all  endow- 
ed with  peculiar  and  cxaftly  made  Parts  for  this 


are  thus  accounted  for  by  the  latter;  Ex  copiofis  relidlis  ovis 
ita  turbatur  ajjliiens  [Rubl]  fuccus,  ut  ftrumofa  fiant  complu- 
ra  tubercul*  pmul  confuse  conge/la^  qut  utrtcitlorum  feriebus, 
C?"  fibrarum  impiieatione  contexta,  ramofas  propagines  germi- 
nant,  ita  ut  minima  quaft  fylva  apparent.  Glu^Ubet  propago 
ramos,  hinc  inde  villofos  edit.  Jiinc  inde  piit  pariter  erum- 
punt,  &c. 

Thefe  Balls  are  a  fafe  Repofitory  to  the  Infecfl  all  the 
Winter  in  its  Vermicular-State.  For  the  Eggs  laid  up,  and 
hatched  the  Sumtiicr  before,  do  not  come  to  mature  Infeffts 
until  the  Spring  following,  as  Mr.  Ray  rightly  obferves  in 
Cat.  Cantab. 

As  to  the  In/cc'ls  themfelves,  they  are  manifeilly  Ichtjeu- 
mon-Flits,  having  four  Wings,  their  ^/i/wj  thick  and  large  to- 
wards the  Tail;  and  tapering  up  till  it  is  fmall  and  flender  at 
its  fetting  on  to  the  Thorax.  But  the  Alvi  or  Bellies  are  not 
alike  in  all,  though  coloured  alike.  In  fome  they  are  as  is 
now  defcribed ,  and  longer,  without  Terebrji,  or  Tails;  in 
fome  ftiorter  with  Tails :  And  in  fome  yet  fhorter,  and  thick, 
like  the  Belly  of  the  jint,  or  the  Heart  of  Animals,  as  in 
thofe  before,  Note  {z).  But  for  a  farther  Defcription  of 
them,  I  fliall  refer  to  Mr.  Ray,  Cat.  Plant,  circa  Cantab,  un- 
der Rofafylveft. 

{hh)  It  being  an  Inftance  fomewhat  out  of  the  Way,  I 
ftjall  pitch  upon  it  for  an  Example  here,  viz..  The  gouty 
Swellings  in  the  Body,  and  the  Branches  of  the  Blackberry- 
Bufl] ;  of  which  Malpighi  hath  given  us  two  good  Cuts  in 
Tab.  17.  Mg.  6i.  The  Caufe  of  thefe  is  manifeflly  from 
the  Eggs  of  lnfe<fls  laid  in  (vvhilft  the  Shoot  is  young  and 
tender)  as  far  as  the  Pith,  and  in  fome  Places  not  fo  deep: 
Which  for  the  Realbns  before- mentioned,  makes  the  young 
Shoots  tumify,   and  grow  knotty  and  gouty. 

The  Infeift  that  comes  from  hence  is  of  the  former  Tribe, 
a  fmall,  Ihining  black  ichneumon-fly,  about  a  tenth  of  an 
Inch  long ;  with  jointed,  red,  capillary  Horns,  four  long 
Wings,  reaching  beyood  the  Body,  alargeT^or4x,  red  Legs, 
and  a  fliort,  heart-like  Belly.  They  hop  like  Fleas.  The 
Males  are  lefs  than  the  Females;  are  very  venereous,  endea- 
vouring a  Coit  in  the  very  Box  in  which  they  are  hatch'd ; 
getting  up  on  the  Females,  and  tickling  and  thumping  them 
with  their  Breeches  and  Horns,  to  excite  them  to  Venery. 
Cc  4  Service, 


392'  The  Conclujion.        Book  VIII. 

Service,  to  bore  and  pierce  the  Vegetable,  and  to 
reach  and  injedt  their  Eggs  and  Juice  into  the  ten- 
der Parts  thereof. 


The  Conclusion. 

AN  D  now  thefe  Things  being  ferioufly  confi- 
deredj  what  lefs  can  be  concluded,  than  that 
there  is  manifefl:  Defign  and  Forecaft  in  this  Cafe, 
and  that  there  mufl:  needs  be  fome  wife  Artift,  fome 
careful,  prudent  Confervator,  that  from  the  very 
Beginning  of  the  Exidence  of  this  Species  of  Ani- 
mals, hath  with  great  Dexterity  and  Forecaft,  pro- 
vided for  its  Prefervation  and  Good?  For  what 
elfe  could  contrive  and  make  fuch  a  Set  of  curious 
Parts,  exadly  fitted  up  for  that  fpecial  Purpofe  : 
And  withal  implant  in  the  Body  fuch  peculiar  Im- 
pregnations, as  fhould  have  fuch  a  ftrange  uncouth 
Power  on  a  quite  different  Rank  of  Creatures? 
And  laftly,  what  fhould  make  the  Infed  aware  of 
this  its  ftrange  Faculty  and  Pov/er,  and  teach  it  fo 
cunningly  and  dextroufly  to  employ  it  for  its  own 
Service  and  Good  ? 


BOOK 


393 


BOOK   IX. 

0/  R  E  p  T  I L  F.  s,  and  the  Inhabitants  of 
•  the  Waters. 

CHAP.   I. 

Of  Reptiles. 

I^PP^UVING  difpatch'd  the  inl^a  Tribe, 
■^^^B  there  is  but  one  Genus  of  the  Land- 
^  m.  Animals  remaining  to  be  furvey'd  j  and 
,,^^,,^  that  is,  that  cf  Reptiles  {a).  Which  I 
ihall  difpatch  in  a  httle  Compafs,  by  Ileafon  I  have 
fomewhat  amply  treated  of  others,   and  many  ot 

the 


(a)  Notwithftanding  I  have  before,  in  Book  IV.  Chap.  ^^. 
Note(p),  tzkcnSoUctoi  iht  Earth-worm  ;  yet  it  being  a  good 
Example  of  the  Creator's  wile  and  curious  Workmanlhip.  m 
even  this  meanert  Branch  of  rhe  Creation.  I  ^^^ ^l^ u, /r 
few  farther  Remarks  from  Drs.  WilUs  and  Tyfon  Saith  iVtlUt, 
Lumlricm  urreflrts,  licit  vile  V  contcmptMe  hubctur,  Orga^ 

(J  «4 


3p^  Of  Reptiles.  Book  IX. 

the  Things  may  be  apply'd  hereu  But  there  are 
fome  Things  in  which  this  Tribe  is  fomevvhat  An- 
gular, which  I  {hall  therefore  take  Notice  of  brief- 
ly in  this  Place.  One  is  their  Motion,  which  I 
have  in  another  Place  {b)  taken  Notice  of  to  be 
not  lefs  curious,  than  it  is  different  froni  that  of 
other  Animals,  whether  we  confider  the  Manner 
of  it,  ias  vermicular,  or  finuous  (t),  or  like  that  of 

the 


no,  vitaliaf  necnon  cr  alia  vifcera,  O"  membra  divino  artific'to 
admirabiUter  fahrefacla  fort'itur :  totius  corporis  compages  muf- 
culorum  anntilarium  catena  eji,  quorum  fibra  orbiculares  con- 
iradli  qusmque  annulum,  prius  amplum,  cr  dilatum,  aTfgufii- 
orem  d"  longiorem  reddunt.  [This  Mufde  in  Earth-Worms, 
I  find  is  fpiral,  as  in  a  good  Meafure  is  their  Motion  like- 
wife  ;  fo  that  by  this  Means  they  can,  (like  the  Worm  of  an 
Augre,)  the  better  bore  their  PaJJage  into  the  Earth.  Their 
reptile  Motion  alfo,  may  be  explain  d  by  a  Wire  wound  on  a  Cy- 
liifder,  which  zvhenjlipp'd  off,  and  one  End  extended  and  heldjafif 
■will  bring  the  other  nearer  it.  So  the  Earth-Worm,  having 
JJjot  out,  or  extended  its  Body,  (which  is  with  a  Wreathing,)  it 
takes  hold  by  thofe  fmall  Feet  it  hath,  and  fo  contra£ls  the 
hinder  Part  of  its  Body.  Thus  the  curious  and  learned  Dr. 
Tyfon,  Phil.  Tranf.  N".  147.]  Nam  proinde  chm  portio  cor- 
poris fuperior  elongata,  <y  exporrecla,  ad  fpatium  altering  ex~ 
tenditur,  ibidemque  piano  affigitur,  ad  ipfum  quafi  ad  centrum 
portio  corporis  inferior  relaxata,  er  abbreviata  facile  pertrahitur. 
PeduncuU  ferie  quadruplici,  per  totam  longitudinem  Lumbrici 
difponuntur  ;  his  quafi  totidem  uncis,  partem  modo  hanc,  mo- 
do  ifiam,  piano  affigit,  dum  alteram  exporrigit,  aut  poft  fe  du~ 
cit.  Supra  oris  hiatum,  Probofcide,  qua,  terram  perforat  & 
elevat,  donatur.  And  then  he  goes  on  with  the  other  Parts 
that  fall  under  View,  the  Bram,  the  Gullet,  the  Heart,  the 
fpermatick  Vejfels,  the  Stomachs  and  Intefiines,  the  Foramina 
on  the  Top  of  the  Back,  adjoyning  to  each  Ring,  fupply- 
ing  the  Place  of  Lungs,  and  other  Parts.  Wdlis  de  Anim, 
Brut.  P.  I.  c.  3. 

ib)  In  Book  IV.  Chap.  8. 

(c)  There  is  a  great  Deal  of  geometrical  Neatnefs  and 
Nicety,  in  the  finuous  Motion  of  Snakes,  and  other  Ser- 
pents. For  the  aflTifting  in  which  Adion,  the  annular  Scales 
under  their  Body  are  very  remarkable,  lying  crofs  the  Belly, 
contrary  to  what  thofe  in  the  Back,  and  reft  of  the  Body  do ; 

alfo 


Chap.  I.  Of  Reptiles  39^ 

the  Snail  {d),  or  the  Caterpillar  (0?  or  tht  Multi- 

pedous 


alfo  as  the  Edges  of  the  foremoft  Scales  lye  over  ihe  Edges 
ol:"  their  tollowmg  Scales,  from  Head  to  Tail;  fo  thofc  Ed- 
ges run  out  a  little  beyond,  or  over  their  following  Scales ; 
fo  as  that  when  each  Scale  is  drawn  back,  or  fct  a  little  up- 
right by  its  Miilcle,  the  outer  Edge  thereof,  (or  I'oot  it  may- 
be call'd,)  is  rais'd  alio  a  little  from  the  Body,  to  lay  hold 
on  the  Earth,  and  fo  promote  and  facilitate  the  Serpent's 
Motion.  This  is  what  may  be  ealiiy  feen  in  the  Slough,  or 
JBelly  of  the  Serpent-kind.  But  there  is  another  admirable 
Piece  of  Mcchanifm,  that  my  Antipathy  to  thofe  Animals 
hath  prevented  my  prying  into  ;  and  that  i-s  that  every 
Scale  hath  a  diHindt  Mufcle,  one  End  of  which  is  tack'd  to 
the  Middle  of  its  Scale;  the  other,  to  the  upper  Edge  of  its 
following  Scale.  This  Dr.  Tyfon  found  in  the  Rattle- Snake, 
and  I  doubt  not  is  in  the  whole  Tribe. 

{d)  The  wife  Author  of  Nature,  having  deny'd  Feet  and 
Claws  to  enable  Snails  to  creep  and  climb,  hath  made  them 
amends  in  a  Way  more  commodious  for  their  State  of  Life, 
by  the  broad  Skin  along  each  Side  of  the  Belly,  and  the  un- 
dulating Motion  oblervable  there.  By  this  latter  'tis  they 
creep  ;  by  the  former,  aflifted  with  the  glutinous  Slime  emit- 
ted from  the  Snail's  Body,  they  adhere  firmly  and  fecurely 
to  all  Kinds  of  Superficies,  partly  by  the  Tenacity  of  their 
Slime,  and  partly  by  the  Prcirure  of  the  Atmofphere.  Con- 
cerning this  Part,  (which  he  calls  the  Snail's  Feet,)  and  their 
Undulation,  Sec  Dr.  Lijler's  Exercit.  Anat.  i.  §.  i.  and  37. 

(e)  The  motive  Parts,  and  Motion  of  Caterpillars,  are 
ufeful,  not  only  to  their  ProgrefTion  and  Conveyance  from 
place  to  Place;  but  alfo  to  their  more  certain,  eafy  and 
commodious  gathering  of  Food.  For  having  Feet  before 
and  behind,  they  are  not  only  enabled  to  go  by  a  kind  of 
Steps  made  by  their  fore  and  hind  Parts;  but  alfo  to  climb 
up  Vegetables,  and  to  reach  from  their  Boughs  and  Stalks 
for  Food  at  a  Diftance  ;  for  which  Services,  their  Feet  are 
very  nicely  made  both  before  and  behind.  Behind,  they 
have  broad  Palms  for  flicking  too,  and  thefe  befet  almoft 
round  with  fmall  fliavp  Nails,  to  hold  and  grafp  what  they 
are  upon  :  Before,  their  Feet  are  fliarp  and  hook'd,  to 
draw  Leaves,  vc  to  them,  and  to  hold  the  fore- part  of  the 
Body,  whilft  the  hinder- parts  are  brought  up  thereto.  But 
nothing  is  more  remarkable  in  thcfe  Reptiles,  than  that  thefe 
Pans  and  Motion  are  only  temporary,  and  incomparably  a- 
daptcd  only  to  their  prefent  l^ym^ha-Stntf,  whereas  in  ihcir 

Aurtln\- 


39<^  Of  Reptiles.  Book  IX. 

pedous  (/)  or  any  other  Way,  or  the  Parts  mini- 
ftring  to  it,  particularly  the  Spine  (^),  and  the 
Mufcles  co-operating  with  the  Spine,  in  fuch  as 
have  Bone,  and  the  annular  and  other  Mufcles,  in 
fuch  as  have  none,  all  incomparably  made  for 
thofe  curious,  and  I  may  fay,  geometrical  Wind- 
ings and  Turnings,   Undulations,  and  all  the  va- 


'Atirelia-State,  they  have  neither  Feet  nor  Motion,  only  a 
little  in  their  hinder-parts:  And  in  their  Mature-State,  they 
have  the  Parts  and  Motion  of  a  flying  Infedl,  made  for 
Fhght. 

(/)  It  is  a  wonderful  pretty  Mechanifm,  obfervable  in  the 
going  of  Multipedes,  as  the  'JhU,  Scolopendr&,  &c.  that  on 
each  Side  the  Body,  every  Leg  hath  its  Motion,  one  very 
regularly  following  the  other  from  one  End  of  the  Body  to 
the  other  in  a  Way  not  eafy  to  be  defcrib'd  in  Words;  fo 
that  their  Legs  in  going,  make  a  kind  of  Undulation,  and 
give  the  Body  a  fwifter  Progreffion  than  one  would  imagine 
it  fliould  have,  where  fo  many  Feet  are  to  take  fo  many 
lliort  Steps. 

(g)  Vert ebr arum  Apophyfes  breviores  funt,  prAcipue  juxta  ca- 
put, cujus  propterea  fiexus  in  averfum,  ct"  latera,  facilis  Vipe- 

ris  eft  :  [ecus  Leonibus,  &:c. Incumbit  his  Ojfibtts  ingens  Muf- 

culorum  minutorum  pr^Jidium,  turn  fpinivs  tendinum  exilium 
tnagno  apparatu  diducentium^  turn  vertebras  potiljtmum  in  di- 
ver/a fietientium,  atque  erigentium.  Adeoque  illam  corporis 
tniram  agilitatem,  non  tanthm  (ut  Ariftot.)  on  tJCi>c«.M.7r««  xj 
XovS^uS'eti  01  a-TfovSvXoi  quoniam  faciUs  ad  flexum,  c?"  cartilagi- 
Tieas  prodtixit  -vertebras,  fed  quia  etiam  multiplicia  tnotu^  loca- 
lis  iaftrumenta  mufculos  fabrefecit  provida  rerum  Parens  Na- 
tura,  confecuta  fuit.  Blaf.  Anat.  Anim.  P.  i.  c.  39.  de  Vi- 
pera  e  Veflmgio. 

That  which  is  moft  remarkable  in  the  Vertebrae  [of  the  Rat- 
ile-Snake,  befides  the  other  curious  Articulations,]  is,  that 
the  round  Ball  in  the  lower  Part  of  the  upper  Vertebra,  enters 
a  Socket  of  the  upper  Part  of  the  lower  Vertebra,  like  as  the 
Head  of  the  Os  Femoris  doth  the  Acetabulum  of  the  Os  If- 
chii ;  by  which  Contrivance,  as  alfo  the  Articulation  with  one 
another,  they  have  that  free  Motion  of  zvinding  their  Bodies 
any  Way.  Dr.  Ty fan's  Anat.  of  the  Rattle- Snake  in  Phil. 
Tranf.  No.  144.  What  is  here  obferv'd  of  the  Vertebrs,  of 
this  Snake^  is  common  to  this  whole  Genus  of  Reptiles. 

rious 


Chap.l.  Of  Reft  ties.  397 

rioiis   Motions    to    be    met   with   in   the   reptile 

Kind. 

Another  Thing  that  will  dtfcrve  our  Notice,  is, 
the  Poyfon  (/;)  that  many  of  this  Tribe  arc  flock'd 
with.  Which  1  the  rather  mention,  bccaufe  ibme 
make  it  an  Objeftion  againll  the  divme  Super- 
intendence and  Providence,  as  being  a  Thing  fo 
far  from  ufeful,  (they  thmk,)  that  'tis  rather  mif- 
chievous  and  deflru6tive  of  God's  Creatures.  But 
the  Anfwer  is  eafy,  'viz.  That  as  to  Man,  ihofc 
Creatui^s  are  not  without  their  great  Ufes,  par- 
ticularly in  the  Cure  of  (;)  fome  of  the  moit  ftub- 

born 

{h)  My  ingenious  and  learned  Friend,  Dr.  Mead^  exa- 
mined with  his  Microfcope,  the  Texture  of  a  Fiper's  Poyfon, 
and  found  therein  at  firft  only  a  Parcel  of  fmall  Salts  nimbly 
floating  in  the  Ltquor  ;  hut  in  a  fliort  Time  the  Appearance 
1VM  Chang  d,  and  thefe  faline  Particles  were  /hot  out  tnto  Cry- 
fidls,  of  an  incredible  Tenuity  and  Sharpnefs,  with  fomething 
like  Knots  here  and  there,  from  which  they  feem'd  to  proceed; 
fo  that  the  whole  Texture  did  in  a  Manner  reprefent  a  Spi- 
der sWeb,  though  injinttely  finer.     Mead  of  Poyfons,  p.  9. 

As  to  the  Nature  and  Operation  of  this  Poyfon,  fee  the 
fame  ingenious  Author's  Hypothefis,  in  his  following  Pages. 

Th\s  Poyfon  of  the  Ftper,  lieth  in  a  Bag  in  the  Gums,  at 
the  Upper-end  of  the  Teeth,  It  is  feparated  from  the  Blood 
by  a  conglomerated  Gland,  lying  in  the  anterior  lateral  Part 
of  the  Os  Sincipitis;  juft  behind  the  Orbit  of  the  Eye:  From 
which  Gland  lieth  a  Duft,  that  c&nveys  the  Poyfon  to  the 
Bags  at  the  Teeth. 

The  Teeth  are  tubulated,  for  the  Conveyance,  or  Emif- 
fion  of  the  Poyfon  into  the  Wound,  the  Teetli  make  ;  but 
their  Holiownefs  doth  not  reach  to  the  Ape.x,  or  Top  of  the 
Tooth,  (that  beiilg  lolid  and  flurp,  the  better  to  pierce  ;) 
but  it  ends  in  a  long  flit  below  the  Point,  out  of  wliich  the 
Poyfon  is  emitted.  Thcic  i''erforations  of  the  Teeth,  Ga- 
len faith,  the  Mountebanks  us"d  to  itop  with  fome  kind  of 
Pafle,  before  they  fuffer'd  the  Vipers  to  bite  them  before 
their  Spcdaiors.  Cuts  of  thei'e  Parts,  crc  may  be  feen  in 
the  lalt  ciccd  Book  of  Dr.  Mead.  Alfo  Dr.  Tyjcn's  Anat.  of 
the  Kaitle-Sna'xe,  in  Philof.  Tranfatl.  N«.  144. 

(i)  That  Vipers  have  tlieir  great  Lies  in  Pliyfick,  is  mani- 
fcft  from  their  bearing  a  great  Share  in  lun.c  of  our  bc!t 

Antidotes, 


39?  Of  Reptiles.  BooklX. 

born  Difeafes}  however,  if  they  were  not,  there 
would  be  no  Injuftice  for  God  to  make  a  Set  of 
fuch  noxious  Creatures,  as  Rods  and  Scourges,  to 
execute  the  divine  Chaftifements  upon  ungrateful 


Antidotes,  fuch  as  Theriaca  Andromachi,  and  others ;  alfo 
in  the  Cure  of  the  Elephantiafis,  and  other  the  Uke  ftubborn 
Maladies,  for  which  i  fliall  refer  to  the  medical  Writers. 
But  there  is  fo  lingular  a  Cafe  in  the  curious  CoUecflion  of 
i)r.  Ol.  Worm,  related  from  Kircher,  that  I  ftiall  entertain  the 
Reader  with  it.  Near  the  Village  of  Sajfa,  about  eight  Miles 
from  the  City  Bracciano  in  Italy,  faith  he,  Specus  feu  caverns 
(vulgb  La  Grotta  delli  Serpi)  duorum  hominum  capax,  fiftulofis 
qu'tbufdam  foram'tnibus  in  formam  crilri  perforata  cernitury 
ex  quihus  ingens  qu&darn,  principio  verts,  diverficolorum  Ser- 
pent um,  nulla  tamen,  ut  dicitur,  Jinoulari  veneni  qualitate 
imbutorum  progenies  quotannis  puUulare  folet.  In  hac  fpelun- 
cA  Elephantiacos,  Leprofos,  Paralyticos,  Arthriticos,  Podagri- 
cos,  &c.  nudos  exponere  folent,  qui  mox  haiituum  fuhterrane^ 
erum  colore  in  fudorem  refoluti,  Serpentum  propullulantium, 
totum  corpus  infirmi  implicantium,  fu5lu  linSluque  ita  otnni  vi- 
tiofo  virulentoque  humore  privare  dicuntur,  ut  repetito  hdc 
per  aliquod  tempus  medicamento,  tandem  perfe5l&  fanitati  refli~ 
tuantur.  This  Cave  Kircher  vifited  himfelf,  found  it  warm, 
and  every  Way  agreeable  to  the  Defcription  he  had  of  it; 
he  faw  their  Holes,  heard  a  murmuring  hiding  Noife  in 
them  ;  but  although  he  miffed  feeing  the  Serpents  (it  being 
not  the  Seafon  of  their  creeping  out)  yet  he  faw  great  Num- 
bers of  their  ExuviA,  or  Sloughs,  and  an  Elm  growing  hard  by 
laden  with  them. 

The  Difcovery  of  thisT^ave,  was  by  the  Cure  of  a  Lep£r 
going  from  Rowe  to  feme  Baths  near  this  Place  ;  who  la- 
fing  his  Way,  and  being  benighted,  happened  upon  this 
Cave  ;  and  finding  it  very  warm,  puU'd  off  his  Cloaths,  and 
being  weary  and  fleepy,  had  the  good  Fortune  not  to  feel 
the  Serpents  about  him,  till  they  had  wrought  his  Cure.  Vid. 
Mufeum  Worm.      L.  3.  c.  9. 

The  before-commended  Dr.  Mead,  thinks  our  Phyficians 
deal  too  caudoufly  and  fparingly,  in  their  prefcribing  only 
fmall  Quantities  of  the  Viper's  Flelh,  ct-c  in  the  Elephantiafts, 
and  ftubborn  Leprofes :  But  he  recommendeth  rather  the  Gel- 
ly  or  Broth  of  Vipers;  or,  as  the  ancient  Manner  was,  to 
boil  Vipers,  and  eat  them  like  Filh;  or  at  leaft  to  drink 
Wine,  in  which  they  have  been  long  infufed.  Vid.  Mead, 
ubi,  ftipr.  p.  34. 

and 


Chap.  I.  Of  Reptiles.  399 

and  finful  Men.  And  I  am  apt  to  think  that  the 
Nations  which  know  not  God,  arc  the  moll  an- 
noy'd  with  thofe  noxious  Reptiles,  and  other  per- 
nicious Creatures.  As  to  the  Animals  themftlvcs, 
their  Poyfon  is  no  doubt  of  iome  great  and  c(pe- 
cial  Ufe  to  themfelves,  ferving  to  the  more  cafy 
Conqueil,  and  fure  Capture  ot"  their  Prey,  which 
might  otherwile  be  too  rcfly  and  (Irong,  and  if 
once  efcap'd,  would  hardly  be  again  recover'd,  by 
Reafon  of  their  fwifter  Motion,  and  the  Help  of 
their  Legs ;  befidcs  all  which,  this  their  Poyfon 
may  be  probably  of  very  great  Ufe  to  the  Digc- 
ftion  of  their  Food. 

And  as  to  the  innocuous  Part  of  the  Reptile 
Kind,  they  as  well  deferve  our  Notice  for  their 
Harmlefnefs,  as  the  others  did  for  their  Poyfon. 
For  as  thofe  are  cndow'd  with  Poyfon,  becaufc 
they  are  predaceous  •,  fo  thefe  need  it  not,  becaufc 
their  Food  is  near  at  hand,  and  may  be  obtain'd 
without  Strife  and  Contell,  the  next  Earth  {k) 
affording  Food  to  fuch  as  can  tcrebrate,  and  make 
Way  into  it  by  their  Vermicular  Faculty  j  and  the 
next  Vegetable  being  Food  to  others  that  can  climb 
and  reach  (/),  or  but  crawl  to  it. 


{k)  ThTLlEarth-zvortnsYwt  upon  Earth,  is  manifeft  from  the 
httle  curled  Heaps  of  their  Dung  ejeifted  out  ot  their  Holes.  But 
in  Phtlof.  Tranfatl.  N°.  191.  1  have  laid,  it  is  in  all  Probabi- 
lity tarth  made  of  rotted  Roots  and  Plant?,  and  fuch  like 
nutritive  Things,  not  pure  Harth.  And  there  i<;  tariher  Rea- 
fon tor  it,  becaufe  Worms  will  drag  the  Leaves  of  Trees 
into  their  Holes. 

(/)  SnaiLs  might  be  in  Danger  of  vi'anting  Food,  if  they 
were  to  live  only  upon  fuch  tender  Plants  as  arc  near  the 
Ground,  within  their  Reach  only  ;  to  impoNverthem  there- 
fore to  extend  their  Purluits  farther,  they  are  enabled  by 
the  Means  mentioned  in  Note  {d),  to  ftick  unto,  and  creep 
up  Walls  and  Vegetables  at  their  Pleafure. 


CHAP. 


400  ^  Book  IX. 

CHAP.  II. 

Of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Waters. 

I  Have  now  gone  through  that  Part  of  the  Ani- 
mal World,  which  I  propofed  to  furvey,  the 
Animals  inhabiting  the  Land. 

As  to  the  other  Part  of  the  Terraqueous  Globe, 
the  Waters,  and  the  Inhabitants  thereof,  not  ha- 
ving Time  to  finifh  what  I  have  begun  on  that 
large  Subjedl,  I  fhall  be  forced  to  quit  it.  for  the 
prefent,  altho'  we  have  there  as  ample  and  glori- 
ous a  Scene  of  the  Infinite  Creator's  Power  and 
Art,  as  hath  been  already  fet  forth  on  the  dry 
Land.  For  the  Waters  themfelves  are  an  admira- 
ble Work  of  God  («),  and  of  infinite  Ufe  {b)  to 


(<i)  Befides  their  abfolute  Neceffity,  and  great  Ufe  to  the 
World,  there  are  feveral  Topics,  from  whence  the  Waters 
may  be  demonftrated  to  be  God's  Work;  as,  the  creating  fo 
vafta  Part  of  our  Globe;  the  placing  it  conmodioufly  there- 
in, and  giving  it  Bounds;  the  Methods  of  keeping  it  fweet 
and  clean,  by  its  Saltnefs,  by  the  Tides,  and  Agitations  by 
the  Winds ;  the  making  the  Waters  ufeful  to  the  Vegetati- 
on Qf  Plants,  and  for  Food  to  Animals,  by  the  noble  Me- 
thods of  fweetning  them;  and  many  other  Things  bcfides, 
"Which  are  infilled  on  in  that  Part  of  my  Survey. 

{b)  Plin'j  having  named  divers  Mirabilia  Aquarum  ,  to 
(hew  their  Power;  then  proceeds  to  their  Ufes,  viz.  E&dem 
cadentes  omnium  terra  nafcentium  eaufa  fiunt,  prorfus  mirabi- 
li  naturd,  ftquis  velit  reputare,  utfruges gignantur,  arbores  frU' 
ticefque  vivant,  in  caelum  migrare  aquas,  aKimamque  ettam  her- 
bis  I'italem  inde  deferre :  jujiA  ccnfejfione,  cmnes  terr&  quoque 
'vires  aquarum  ejfc  heyjeficii.  ^aprcpter  ante  omnia  ipfarum 
potentiA  exempla  ponemus :  Cunticts  enim  quis  mortalium  enit- 
merare  qtwnt  ?  And  then  he  goes  on  with  an  Enumeration 
of  fome  Waters  famed  for  being  medicinal,  or  fome  other 
unufual  Quality.     Pirn,  L,  31.  c.  i,crz. 

that 


Chap.  II.     The  JV at ery  Inhabitants.  401 

that  Part  of  the  Globe  already  furveyed  j  and  the 
prodigious  Variety  (f),  and  Multitudes  of  curious 
and  wonderful  Things  obfervable  in  its  Inhabitants 
of  all  Sorts,  are  an  incxhauftible  Scene  of  the  Cre- 
ator's VVifdom  and  Power.  The  vail  Bulk  of 
fome  (i),  and  prodigious  Minutenefs  of  others  (^J, 
together  with  the  incomparable  Contrivance  and 
Structure  of  the  Bodies  (/")  of  all  >  the  Provifions 
and  Supplies  of  Food  afforded  to  fuch  an  innume- 
rable Company  of  Eaters,  and  that  in  an  Element, 
unlikely  one  would  think,  to  afford  any  great  Store 
of  Supphes  {£) }    the  Bufinefs  of  Refpiration  per- 

(c)  P/;«y  reckons  176  Kinds  in  the  Waters,  whofe  Names 
may  be  met  with  in  his  L.  31.  c.  11.  but  he  is  fhort  in  his 
Account. 

id)  Pliny,  L.  9.  c.  3.  faith,  that  in  the  Indian  Sea  there 
are  Balem  quaternum  jugerum  (i.  e.  960  Feet)  Pnfles  zoo 
cnbitorHtn  (i.  e.  300  Feet.)  And  L.  31.  c.  i.  he  mentions 
Whales  600  Foot  long,  and  360  broad,  that  came  into  a 
River  of  Arabia.  If  the  Reader  hath  a  mind,  he  may  fee 
his  Reafon  why  the  largelt  Animals  are  bred  in  the  Sea, 
L.  9.  c.  ^. 

{«)  As  the  largeft,  fo  the  moft  minute  Animals  are  bred 
in  the  Waters,  as  thofe  in  Pepper- water;  and  fuch  as  make 
the  green  Scum  on  the  Waters,  or  make  them  feem  as  if 
green,  and  many  others.  See  Book  W.  Chap.  ir.  Note{n),{o). 

(/)  It  might  be  here  Ihewn,  that  the  Bodies  of  all  the 
feveral  Inhabitants  of  the  Waters  are  the  beH  contrived  and 
fuited  to  that  Place  and  Bufinefs  in  the  Waters,  which  is  pro- 
per for  them  ;  that  particularly  their  Bodies  are  cloathed  and 
guarded,  in  the  beft  Manner,  with  Scales,  or  Shells,  ct-c.  fuit- 
table  to  the  Place  they  are  to  refide  in,  the  Dangers  they 
may  there  be  expoTe.l  unto,  and  the  Motion  and  Bulineis 
they  are  thc:re  to  pertorm  :  That  the  Center  of  Gravity  (of 
great  Conlideration  in  that  fluid  F.lement,)  is  always  plac'd 
in  the  fitted  Part  of  the  Body  :  Th.\t  the  Shape  of  their  Bo- 
dies, (efpeciilly  the  more  fwift,)  is  the  moit  commodious 
for  making  Way  through  the  Waters,  and  moft  agreeable  to 
geometrical  Rules;  and  many  other  Matters  bcfides  would 
deferve  a  Place  here,  were  they  not  too  long  for  Notes, 
and  that  I  fhall  anticipate  what  will  be  more  proper  for  ^no* 
ther  Place,  and  more  accurately  treated  of  ihcrs. 

(^)  See  before  Book  IV.  chaf>.  11. 

D  d  form'd 


40X         The  fFdtery  Inhabitants.   Book  IX. 

form'd  in  a  Way  fo  different  from,  but  equivalent 
to  what  is  in  Land  Animals  {h);  the  Adjuftment 
of  the  Organs  of  Vifion  {i)  to  that  Element  in 
which  the  Animal  liveth ;  the  Poife  (/^),  the  Sup- 
port (/),  the  Motion  of  the  Body  {m)y  forwards 

with 


ih)  Galen  was  aware  of  the  Refpiration  of  Fifhes  by  their 
"BranchU.  For  having  faid,  that  Fifties  have  no  Occalion  of 
a  Voice,  neither  refpire  through  the  Mouth  as  Land  Ani- 
mals do,  he  faith,  Sed  earum,  quas  Branchias  nuncupamuSf 
conftruSlio,  ipjis  vice  Pulmonis  *Ji.  Cum  e«i;»  crebris  ac  tenui- 
bus  foraminibus  fint  Branchi&  hd.  intercept  a,  a'eri  quidem  o" 
^apori  perviisy  fubtilioribus  tamen  quam  pro  mole  aqu&;  hanc 
quidem  extra  repellunt,  ilia  autem  prompte  intromittunt.  Ga- 
len de  Uf.  Part.  L.  6.  c.  9.  So  alfo  Phn'y  held,  that  Fifhes 
refpired  by  their  Gills ;  but  he  faith  Anftotle  was  of  a  diffe- 
rent Opinion.  Plin.  L.  9.  c.  7.  And  fo  Arijlotle  feems  to 
be  in  liis  Hift.  Animal.  L.  8.  c.  2.  and  in  other  Places, 
And  I  may  add  our  famous  Dr.  Needham.  See  his  De  form. 
Jcetu,  Chap.  6.  and  Anfwer  to  Severinus. 

(i)  A  protuberant  Eye  would  have  been  inconvenient  for 
Fidies,  by  hindring  their  Motion  in  fo  denfe  a  Medium  as 
Water  is;  or  elfe  their  brufliing  through  fo  thick  a  Medium 
would  have  been  apt  to  wear,  and  prejudice  their  Eyes; 
therefore  their  Cornea  is  flat.  To  make  amends  for  which, 
as  alfo  for  the  Refradtion  of  Water,  different  from  that  of 
the  Air,  the  wife  Contriver  of  the  Eye,  hath  made  the  Cry- 
fialline  fpherical  in  Fifties,  which  in  Animals,  living  in  the 
Air,  is  lenticular,  and  more  flat. 

{k)  As  I  have  (hew'd  before,  that  the  Bodies  of  Birds  are 
nicely  pois'd  to  fwim  in  the  Air;  fo  are  thoie  of  Fifties  for 
the  Water,  every  Part  of  the  Body  being  duly  balanc'd,  and 
the  Center  of  Gravity,  (as  I  faid  in  Note  (/),  accurately  fix'd. 
And  to  prevent  Vacillation,  fome  of  the  Fins  ferve,  parti- 
cularly thofe  of  the  Belly;  as  BorelU  prov'd  by  cutting  off 
the  Belly-fins,  which  caus'd  the  Fifti  to  reel  to  the  right  and 
left  Hand,  and  render'd  it  unable  to  ftand  fteadily  in  an  up- 
right Pofture. 

(/)  To  enable  the  Fifti  to  abide  at  the  Top,  or  Bottom, 
or  any  other  Part  of  the  Waters,  the  Air-Bladder  is  given 
to  moft  Fifties,  which  as  'tis  more  full  or  empty,  makes  the 
Body  more  or  lefs  buoyant. 

{m)  The  Tail  is  the  grand  Inftrument  of  the  Motion  of 
the  Body ;  not  the  Fins,  as  fome  imagine.    For  which  Rea- 

fOB;, 


Chap.  11.   The  IVatery  Inhabitants.  403 

with  great  Swiftnefs,  and  upwards  and  downwards 
with  great  Readincfs  and  Agility,  and  all  without 
Feet  and  Hands,  and  ten  thoufand  Things  bcfides^ 
all  thcie  Things,  1  fay,  do  lay  before  us  fo  va» 
rious,  fo  glorious,  and  withal  fo  incxhaurtible  a 
Scene  of  the  divine  Power,  Wifdom  and  Good- 
nefs,  that  it  would  be  in  vain  to  engage  my  fclf 
in  fo  large  a  Province,  without  allotting  as  much 
Time  and  Pains  to  it,  as  the  preceding  Survey 
hath  cod  me.  Paffing  by  therefore  that  Part  of 
our  Globe,  1  fhall  only  fay  fomewhat  very  brief- 
ly concerning  the  infenftthe  Creatures,  particularly 
thofe  of  the  vegetable  Kingdom^  and  fo  conclude 
this  Survey. 


fon,  Firties  arc  more  mufculous  and  flrong  in  that  Part,  than 
in  all  ihe  reft  of  their  Body,  according  as  it  is  in  the  mo- 
tive Parts  of  all  Animals,  in  the  pcdoral  Mufcles  of  Birds, 
the  Thighs  of  Man,  csrc. 

If  the  Reader  hath  a  Mind  to  fee  the  admirable  Method, 
how  Fiflies  row  themfelves  by  their  Tail,  and  other  Curio* 
fities  relating  to  their  Swimming;  I  (hall  refer  him  ro  Borelli 
ie  mot,  Antm,  Part.  i.  Chap.  13.  particularly  to  Prop.  113. 


D  d  2       BOOK 


4^4  Book  X. 

BOOK    X. 

0/ Vegetables. 


"^'^'^'^^"'^^ H E  Vegetable  Kingdom,  although 
an  inferiour  Branch  of  the  Creation, 
exhibits  to  us  fueh  an  ample  Scene  of 
the  Creator's  Contrivance,  Curiofity, 
and  Art,  that  I  much  rather  chufe  to 
fhew  what  might  be  faid,  than  engage  too  far  in 
Particulars.  I  might  infifl  upon  the  great  Variety 
there  is,  both  of  Trees  and  Plants  provided  for 
all  Ages,  and  for  every  Ufe  and  Occafion  of  the 
World  (a)  5  fome  for  Building,  for  Tools  and  U- 
tenfils  of  every  Kind  j  fome  hard,  fome  foft  j  fome 
tough  and  flrong,  fome  brittle ;  fome  long  and  tall, 
fome  fhort  and  low>  fome  thick  and  large,  fome 
fmall  and  flender  5  fome  for  Phyfick  (^j,  fome  for 

Food, 


(a)  The  fifth  Book  of  Theophraftus's  Hifi.  Plant,  may  be 
here  confuked  :  Where  he  gives  ample  Inftances  of  the  va- 
rious Conftitutions  and  Ufes  of  Trees  ^  in  various  Works, 
Gc.     See  alfo  before  Book  IV.  Chap.  13.   Note  (a). 

(b)  Invifis  quoque  herbis  inferuit  [Natura]  remedia :  quip- 
fe  cum  meduinas  dederii  etiam  acuieatis  ■.  in  quibus  tp- 

Jis  providentiam  Nature  fatis  admirar't  ample^lique   non  efi. 
«  Inde  excogitavit  aliquas  afpeSlu  hifpidas,  taSf.u  truces ^ 

lit  tantum  non  "uocem  ipfius  fingentis  illas,  rationemque  red- 
dentis  exaudire  videamury  ne  fe  depafcat  avida  ffluadrupes,  ne 
procaces  manus  rapiant,  ne  negUila  veftigta  obterant,  ne  infi' 
dens  Ales  infringat  •  his  muniertdo  Aculeis,  teltfque  armandjy 
rsmediis  ut  tuta  ac  falvafint.  Ita  hoc  quoque  quod  in  iis  odi' 
mus,  hommum  causa,  excogitaium  eji,  Plin.  N.  H.  L.  zz.  c.  6. 
6  Art 


Book  X.     Anatomy  of  Vegetables.  405- 

Food,  fomc  for  Plcalure  j  yea,  the  mofl:  abjc<5t  {c) 
Shrubs,  and  the  very  Buihcs  and  Brambles  them- 
felvcs,  the  Husbandman  can  tedify  the  Ufcof. 

I  might  alio  lurvey  here  the  curious  Anatomy 
and  Scru6bure  of  their  Bodies  {d) ,  and  fliew  the 

admirable 


Are  fame  of  the  Species  of  Nature  noxious  ?  They  are  aU 
fo  ufeful —— Doth  a  Nettle  fling  ?  It  is  to  fecure  fo  good  x 
Medicine  from  the  Rapes  of  Children  and  Cattle.  Doth  the 
Bramble  cumber  a  Garden  r  It  make\  the  better  Hedge  ;  where 
if  It  chanceth  to  prick  the  Owner,  it  will  tear  the  ihief.  Grew 
Cofmolog.  L.  3.  c.  z.  §.47. 

(c)  That  the  moft  abject  Vegetables,  err.  have  their  V^c, 
and  are  beneficial  to  the  World,  may  in  fome  meafure  ap- 
pear trom  the  Ulc  the  Northern  People  put  rotten  Wood,  ctt. 
unto.  Sat)s  ingeniofutn  modum  habent populi  feptentrionales  in  ne- 
moribus  no^lnrno  tempore  pertranfeuntes,  tmo  c?  diurno,  quan- 
do  in  remotioribus  Aquilonis  partibus  ante,  cr  po/i  Solfiitium 
hyemale  continue  nottcs  habentur.  <^tque  his  remediis  indi- 
gent. Cortices  quercinos  inquirunt  put  res,  eafque  collocant  certo 
interftitio  itineris  inflituti,  ut  eorum  fplendore,  quo  voluerint^ 
ferjiciant  iter.  Nee  foltim  hoc  prAJiat  Cortex,  fed  O"  Truncus 
putrefatlus,  ac  fungus  ipfe  Agaricus  appellatHs,  8cc.  Ol.  Mag. 
Hift.  L.  r.  c.  16. 

To  this  we  may  add  Thiflles  in  making  Glafs,  whofe  Afhes 
Dr.  Merret  faith,  are  the  beft,  viz.  the  Allies  of  the  Com- 
tnon-way  ThijUe,  though  all  Thiftles  ferve  to  this  Purpofe. 
Next  to  Thifiles  are  Hop-firings,  cut  after  the  Flowers  are  ga- 
thered. Plants  that  are  Thorny  and  Prickly,  feem  to  afford 
tiie  befl  and  moft  Salt.  Merret's  Obfer-v,  on  Anton.  Ntr. 
p.z6s. 

Giuid  majora  fequar  ?   Salicts,  humilefque  Genijiit 
Aut  ilia,  pecort  frondem,  aut  pafloribus  umbram 
Sujficiuntf   Sepemque  fatis,  cr  pabula  melli. 

Virg.  Georg.  L.  i. )?,  434, 

(d)  Dr.  Beat  (who  was  very  curious,  and  tried  many  Ex- 
periments upon  Vegetables)  gives  fome  good  Reafons  to 
imagine,  that  there  is  a  dire<5t  Communication  between  the 
Parts  of  the  Tree  and  the  Fruit,  fo  that  the  fame  Fibres 
which  conftitutethe  Root,  Trunk,  and  Boughs,  arc  extend- 
ed into  the  very  Fruit.     And  in  old  Hornbeams,  I  have  ob- 

D  d  3  "  leived 


40^  Anatomy  of  Vegetables,     BookX. 

admirable  Provifion  made  for  the  Conveyance  of 
the  lymphatick  and  eflential  Juices,  for  communi- 
cating the  Air,  as  neceflary  to  Vegetable,  as  Ani^ 
mal  Life  {e) :  I  might  alfo  fpeak  of,  even  the  very 
Covering  they  are  provided  with,  becaufe  it  is  a 
curious  Work  in  Reality,  although  lefs  fo  in  Ap- 
pearance :  And  much  more  therefore  might  I  furvey 


ferved  fomething 'very  like  this;  in  many  of  which,  there 
are  fivers  great  and  fmall  Ribs  (almoft  like  Ivy,  only  united 
to  the  Body)  running  from  the  Root  up  along  t'he  outlide  of 
the  Body,  and  terminating  in  one  fuigle,  or  a  few  Boughs : 
Which  Bough  or  Boughs  fpread  again  into  Branches,  Leaves 
and  Fruit.  See  what  Dr.  Beal  hath  m  Lowth.  Abr.  V.  2. 
p.  710. 

But  as  to  the  particular  Canals,  and  other  Parts  relating 
to  the  Anatomy  of  Vegetables,  it  is  too  long  a  Subje<ft  for 
this  Place,  and  therefore  I  (hall  refer  to  Seigneur  Malpighi'^ 
and  Dr.  Grew's  Labours  in  this  kind. 

(e)  '  Tanta  eft  Refpirationis  necejfttas,  &  ufus,  ut  Natura  in 
Cmgulis  viventium  ordinibus  varia,  fed  analoga,  pafaverit  in- 
firumenta,  t^ua  Pulmones  vocamus  [and  fo  he  goes  on  with 
obferving  the  AppAratmmzAQ  in  the  various  Genera  of  Ani- 
mals, and  then  faith]  In  Plantis  vera,  qu£  infimum  anitnali- 
um  attingunt  ordinem,  tantam  Trachearum  copiam  er  prodttc- 
tionem  extare  par  eft,  ut  his  minima  Vegetantium  partes  prater 
corticetn  irrigentur.  — —  Plants  igitur  ( ut  conje^ari  fas  eft) 
ckm  fint  viventia,  i/ifceribus  infixa  terra,  ab  hac,  feu  potius 
ab  aqua  e/  a'ere,  commixtis  c?  percolatis  a  terra,  Refpiratio- 
nis fu&  materiam  recipiunt,  ipfarumque  Trachea  ab  halitu  ter- 
TA  ,  extremas  radices  fubingrejfo  ,  replentur.  Malpig.  Op.  A- 
nat.  Plant,  p.  15. 

Thefe  Trachea  or  Air-Vejfcls,  are  vifible,  and  appear  very 
pretty  in  the  Leaf  of  Scabious,  or  the  Vine,  by  pulling  afun- 
der  fome  of  its  principal  Ribs,  or  great  Fibres ;  between 
which,  may  be  feen  the  Spiral  Air-Veffels  (like  Threads  of 
Cob-web)  a  littie  uncoyled  :  A  Figure  whereof,  Dr.  Grew 
hath  given  us  in  his  Anat.  Plant.  Tab.  51,  jz. 

As  to  the  curicms  coyling,  and  other  Things  relating  to 
the  Structure  of  thofe  Alr-Veffels ,  I  refer  to  Malpig.  p.  14. 
^nd  Dr.  Gre-x,  ib.  L.  3.  c  3.  §.i6.  C7*c.  and  L.  4.  c.  4.  §.190 
ef  y\i.  Rfly^  from  them  fucciniflly,  Hift.  Plant.  L.  i.  c.  4. 


BookX.  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  407 

the  neat  Variety  and  Texture  of  their  Leaves  ("/), 
the  admirable  Finery,  Gaiety,  and  Fragrancy  of 
their  Flowers  (^).     1  miglu  alio  inquire  into  the 

wondcr- 


(/)  Concerning  the  Leaves,  I  fliall  note  only  two  or  three 
Things.  I.  As  to  the  Ttbres  of  the  Leaf,  ihey  Hand  not  in 
the  Stalk,  in  an  even  Line,  but  always  in  an  Angular,  or 
Circular  Poilurc,  and  their  vafcular  Fibres  or  Threads,  are 
3,  5,  or  7.  The  Reafon  of  their  Pofition  thus,  is  for  the 
more  ered  Growth  and  greater  Strength  of  the  Leaf,  as  al- 
fo  for  the  Security  of  its  Sap.  Of  all  which  fee,  Dr.  Grew, 
L.  r.  C.4.  §.8,crc.  and  L.  4.  Par.  r.'c.  3.  alfojTab.  4.  Fig.  x. 
to  II.  Another  Obfervable  in  the  Fibres  of  the  Leaf,  is 
their  orderly  Pofition,  fo  as  to  take  in  an  eighth  Part  of  a 
Circle,  ^%\n  Mallows;  in  fome  a  tenth,  but  in  moft  a  twelfth, 
as  in  Holy-Oak;  or  a  fixth,  as  in  S/ryw^a.    Id.  ib.  Tab.  46,  47. 

1.  The  Art  in  folding  up  the  Leaves  before  their  Erupti- 
on out  of  their  Gems,  crc.  is  incomparable,  both  for  its  E- 
legancy  and  Security,  viz..  in  taking  up  (fo  as  their  Forms 
zvill  bear)  the  leafl  room  ;  and  in  being  fo  conveniently  couched 
as  to  be  capable  of  receiving  Prote^ibn  Jrom  ether  Parts,  or  of 
giving  it  to  one  another,  e.  g.  rirjl,  there  is  the  Bow- lap, 
where  the  Leaves  are  all  laid  fomewhat  convexly  one  over  ano- 
ther, but  not  plaited  ■■  ■  •  but  where  the  Leaves  are  not  fo 
thick  fet,  as  to  flandin  the  Bow-lap,  there  we  have  the  Plica- 
ture,  or  the  Flat-lap;  as  inRofe-tree,  &C.  And  fo  that  curi- 
ous  Obferver  goeson  (hewing  the  various  Foldings,  to  which 
he  gives  the  Names  of  the  Duplicature,  Multiplicature,  the 
Fore-rowl,  Back-rowl,  and  Trerowl,  or  Treble-rowl.  Grew. 
ib.  L.  I.  c.  4.  §.  14,  crc.  To  thel'e he  adds  fome  others,  L.  4. 
P.  I.  c.  I.  §.  9.     Confult  alfo  Malpig.  deGemmis,  p.  iz.  &c. 

To  thefe  curious  Foldings,  we  may  add  another  noble 
Guard  by  the  Interpofition  of  Films, cr-c.  of  which  Dr.  Grew 
faith,  there  are  about  fix  Ways,  vit.  Leaves,  Surfoyts,  In- 
terfoyls,  Stalks,  Hoods,  and  Mantlings.  Crew,  ib.  and  Tah. 
41,  41.  Malpig.  ibid. 

(g)  In  the  Flower  may  be  confidered  the  Empalement,  as 
Dr.  Grew;  the  Calix,  or  Perianthium,  as  Mr.  Ray  and  others, 
call  it,  defigned  to  be  a  Security,  and  Bands,  to  the  other 
Parts  of  the  Flower.  Floris  velut  bafs  u"  fulcimentHm  efl. 
Ray  Hift.  L.  t.  c,  10.  Flowers,  whofe  Petala  ^re  ftrong 
(as  Tulips)  have  no  Cj/iv.  Carnations,  whofe  Petala  are 
long  and  flender,  have  an  Empalement  of  one  Piece:  And 
others,  fuch  as  the  Knap-weeds,  have  it  confifVng  of  feveral 

D  d  4  Pieces, 


4o8  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  BookX. 

wonderful  Generation  and  Make  of  the  Seed  {h), 
and  the  great  Ufefulnefs  of  their  Fruit  :  I  might 
fhew  that  the  Rudiments  and  Lineaments  of  the 
Parent-Vegetable,  though  never  fo  large  and  fpa- 
cious,  is  locked  up  in  the  little  Compafs  of  their 
Fruit  or  Seed,  though  fome  of  thofe  Seeds  are  fcarce 
vilible  to  the  naked  Eye  {i).     And  forafmuch  as 

the 


Pieces,  and  in  divers  Rounds,  and  all  with  a  counterchange- 
able  RefpecH:  to  each  other,  for  the  great-er  Strength  and  Se- 
curity of  themfelves,  and  the  Petala,&zc.  they  include. 

The  next  is  the  Foliation,  as  Dr.  Grew,  the  Petala,  or  Fo- 
lia, as  Mr.  Ray,  and  others.  In  thefe,  not  only  the  admi- 
rable Beauty,  and  luxuriant  Colours  are  obfervable,  but  alio 
their  curious  Foldings  in  the  Calix,  before  their  Expanlion. 
Of  which  Dr.  Grew  hath  thefe  Varieties,  via.  The  Clofe- 
Couchy  as  in  Rofes ;  th.t  Concave-Couch,  as  in  Blattaria  fiore 
alio;  the  single- Plait ,  as  in  Peafe-Blojfoms  ;  the  Double- 
Plait,  as  in  Blue-Bottles,  &c.  the  Couch  and  Piatt  together, 
as  in  Marigolds,  &c.  the  Rowl ,  as  in  Ladies  Bower ;  the 
Spire,  as  in  Malloivs;  and  laftly,  the  Plan  and  Spire  toge- 
ther, as  in  Convolvulus  Doronici  folio.  L.  i.  c.  5.  §.  6.  and 
Tab.  54. 

As  to  the  Stamina  with  their  Apices,  and  the  Stylus,  (cal- 
led the  Attire  by  Dr.  Grew)  they  are  admirable,  whether 
we  confider  their  Colours,  or  their  Make,  efpecially  their 
Ufe,  if  it  be  as  Dr,  Grew,  Mr.  Ray,  and  others  imagine, 
namely,  as  a  Male  Sperm,  to  impregnate  and  frudtify  the 
Seed.  Which  Opinion  is  corroborated  by  the  ingenious  Ob- 
fervations  of  Mr.  Sam.  Morland,  in  Philof.  Tranf.  No.  287. 

Reliqua  ufus  alimentique  gratia  genuit  [Natura]  ideoque  fe- 
cula  annofque  frihuit  its.  Flares  vero  odorefque  in  diem  gignit : 
jnagnd  (ut  palameji)  admonitione  hominum,  qm  fpe^latijfim'e 
jioreant,  celerrime  marcefcere.     Plin.  N.  H.   L.21.    C.  I. 

{h)  As  to  the  curious  and  gradual  Frocefs  of  Nature  in  the 
Formation  of  the  Seed  or  Fruit  of  Vegetables,  Cuts  being 
jieceffary,  I  (hall  refer  to  Dr.  Grew,  p.  45,  and  209,  and 
Malpig.   p.  57. 

(i)  Vetus  efi  Empedoclis  dogma,  Plantarum  femina  Ova  ejff, 
ab  fifdem  decidua  -  Ineft  in  eo  [Ovo  vel  Semine]  velut 

jpj  cicatrice,  non  fola  viventis    carina,  fed  cum  minima   trunco 
ajj'iirge}}tes  pi^rtes,  Gemma fcilicet,  cr  inftanis  r/tJ'-'h  Cs^nus,  &c. 

Malpig. 


BookX.  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables,  409 

the  Perpetuity  and  Safety  of  the  'Species  depends 
upon  the  Safety  of  the  Seed  and  Fruit  in  a  grcac 
mcafurc,  1  might  therefore  take  notice  of  the  pc- 
cuhar  Care  the  great  God  of  Nature  hath  taken 
for  the  Confervation  and  Safety  hereof:  As  parti- 
cularly in  fuch  as  dare  to  flicw  their  Heads  all  the 

Year, 


Malpig.   ib.  p.  8i.    vid.  plura  in   tratft.    de  Stminum  veget. 
p.  14.  &  paflim. 

In  Malpighi'i  Life,  a  Debate  may  be  feen  between  him 
and  Seign.  Triumphetti,  the  Frovolt  of  the  Garden  at  Rowf, 
whether  the  whole  Plant  be  adually  in  the  Seed.  The  Af- 
firmative is  maintained  by  Malpighi,  with  cogent  Arguments ; 
among  which,  this  is  one  ;  Nou  prdoccupatd  menu,  oculismi- 
crofcopio  armat'ts,  lujlret  qmfo  Phafeolorum,  fetninalem  plan-' 
tulam  tiandum  fatani,  in  qud  folta  fiabtita,  hs.cqiie  ampla  evi^ 
denter  o'jfervabit ;  in  eddem pariter  gemmam,  nodos,feu  unplan- 
tationes  'uarias  foliorum  canlis  deprehendet.  Canlem  injtgnem 
fibris  ligneis,  cr  utriculorum  feriebus  conflantem  confptcue  at- 
linger.  And  whereas  S.  Triumphetti  liad  objeded,  that  vegeta- 
tione,  metamorphofi,  inedid  plantas  in  alia:  degenerare,  ut  ex- 
emplo  plftrium  [conflatj  prAcipue  triticiin  loitum,  ct"  lolii  in  tr't- 
ticum  tierfi.  In  anfwer  to  this,  (which  is  one  of  the  ftrongeft 
Arguments  againft  Malpighi's  Affertion)  Malpighi  rephes , 
Nondttm  certumefl  de  imegntate,  c^t"  fuccejfu  experimenti,  nam 
facienti  mihi,  CT*  amtcis,  trittci  metamorphofn  non  cejfit.  Ad- 
tnijja   tamen  metamorphofi,  quoniam  hic  negletla  cultura,  aut 

vitio  foil,  aut  aeris  contmgtt tdeo  ex  morbofo  CT  monftrU' 

ofo  affedlu  non  licet  inferre  permanentem  Jiatum  a  Naturd  in- 
tentum'.  Objervo  plantas  fylvefires  culturd  varias  reddi,  &C. 
I  have  more  largely  taken  notice  of  Malpighi's  Anfwer,  bc- 
caufe  he  therem  (hews  his  Opinion  about  the  Tranfmutation 
of  Vegetables.     Vid.  Malpig.  Vit.  p.  67. 

So  Mr.  Ltxvenhoeck,  after  his  nice  Obfervationsof  an  Orange- 
Kernel,  which  he  made  to  germinate  in  his  Pocket, ct-c.  con- 
cludes, Thus  tve  fee,  how  [mail  a  Particle,  no  bigger  than  a 
co'4rfe  Sand  (as  the  Plant  is  reprefented)  is  increafed,  Sec.  A 
plain  Demonflration,  that  the  Plant,  and  all  btlongint^  to  it, 
•was  atlually  in  the  Seed,  iji  the  •young  Plant,  its  Body,  Root, 
&c.  Philof.  Tranf.  N".  2S7.  See  alio  Rait  Cat.  Cant,  in  A- 
cermaj.  frqim  Dr.  Highmore.  But  in  all  the  Seeds  which  I 
have  viewed,  except  the  Maple,  the  Plant  appears  the  plained 
j.o  the  naked  Eye,  and  s^Ko  very  elegant,  in  the  Nux  Vomica. 

Nadtra 


4IO  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  BookX. 

Year,  how  fecurely  their  Flower,  Seed  or  Fruit 
is  locked  up  all  the  Winter,  together  with  their 
Leaves  and  Branches,  in  their  Gems  {k\  and  well 

fenced 


Natura  non  obfervat  magnitudinis  proportionem  inter  femi' 
no.  cr  plantcts  ab  itfdem  ortas,  ita  ut  majm  femen  majorem 
femper  producat  pla»tam,  minus  minorem.  Sunt  enim  in  gt- 
nere  herharum  non  pauca,  quarum  femina  arborum  novnulla- 
rum  fetnmibus  non  dtco  aqualia  funt ,  fed  multo  majora.  Sic 
V.  g.  Semtna  Fab£,  &c.  femina  Ulmi,  &c.  myitis  vicibus  mag- 
nitudine  fuperant.     Rail  ubi  fupra,   L.  i.  c.  13. 

Filicem  reliquafque  Capillares  herbeti  Semine  carere  Veteres 
flerique  -prodidere  ;  quos  etiam  fecuti  funt  e  Recentiori- 

bus   nonnuUi,  DodonAm,  &c.  ■  Alti   e   contra^  Bauhi- 

Ttus,  &C.  Filices  ^  congeneres  fpermatophoras  efj'e  contendimt  : 
Par/im   quia  Hifloria  Creationis  ,   Genef.  ji.  li.  &c.  '■ 

Hanc  fententiam    •veriffimam  ejfe    •  autopfta  convincit. 

Tredericus  dfius,  he  laith,  was  the  firft  that  difcovered  thefe 
Seeds  with  the  Help  of  a  Microfcope.  And  fince  him,  Mr. 
W.  C.  hath  more  critically  obferved  them.  Among  other 
Things  obferved  by  that  ingenious  Gent,  are  thefe,  Pixidu- 
Is.  feu  capfuU  femina  continentes  in  plerifque  hoc  gentu  plantis 
perquam  exili  granulo  arens,  vulgaris  cinere&  plus  duplo  minores 
funt  i  imo  in  nonnullis  fpeciebus  vix  tertiam  quartamve  are- 
nuls,  partem  magnitudine  Aquant,  veficularum  quarundam  an- 
uulls  attt  fafciolis  vermifirmibus  obvolutarum  f[^eciem  exhiben- 
tes.     Nonnulla  ex  his  veficulis  \oo  circiter  femina  continere  de- 

frehendebantur. adeo  eximia  parvitate  ut  nudo  oculo  pror- 

fm  effent  invifibilia,  nee  nifi  microfcopii  interventu  detegi  pof- 
fent,  •  Ofmunda  Regalis,  qua  aliis  omnibui  Filicis  fpecie- 

bus  mole  — —  antecellit  vafcula  feminalia  obtinet  <sque  cum 

reliquis   congeneribus  magnitudinls  >  quorum   immtnfa  ct* 

vifum  fugicns  parvitas  cum  magnitudine  plants  collata  — — 
adeo  nullam  gerere  proportionem  invenietur,  ut  tantam  plan- 
lam  e  tantillo  femine  produci  attentum  obfervatorem  merito  in 
admirationem  rapiat.  Ray,  ibid.  L,  3  pag.  131.  This  f-I^.  C. 
was  Mr.  Wit.  Cole,  as  he  owneth  in  a  Letter  I  have  now  in 
my  Hands  of  his  to  Mr.  Kay,  of  oHob.  18. 1684. 

{k)  Vegetantium  genus,  ut  debitam  magnitadinem  fortiatur, 
&  fuA  mortalitatis  jaiJuram  fuccefftva  prolis  edu^lione  reparety 
/talis  temporibus  novcos  promit  partes,  ut  tandem  emergentes  U- 
teri,  recentes  edant  Soboles.  Emanantes  igitur  a  caule,  caitdi- 
fe,  ramis,  c^  radicibus  novelU  hujufmodi  partes,  non  illico 
iax0t£  extcnduntury  fed  compendia  qmdam  coagmentatA  intra 

folii 


Book  X.  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  411 

fenced  and  covered  there  with  neat  and  clofc  Tu- 
nicks.  And  for  iuch  as  dare  not  fo  to  cxpofe  thcm- 
felvc5,  with  what  Safety  arc  they  preferved  under 
the  Coverture  of  the  Earth,  in  their  Root  (/), 
Seed  (w),  or  Fruit,  till  invited  out  by  the  kindly 


folii  axillam  cuhantes,  non  parum  fubjiflunt,  (Jemm*  appMaa- 
tur,ikc.  And  then  rhat  great  Man  goes  on  to  flicw  the  ad- 
mirable various  Methods  of  Nature,  in  repofiting  in  that 
little  Compafs,  fo  large  a  Part  of  a  Tree  or  Plant,  the  curi- 
ous Structure  of  the  Gems,  the  admirable  Guard  afforded 
them,  and  the  Leaves,  Flowers  and  Seed  contained  in  them, 
c^c.  Of  which  having  taken  Notice  before,  I  pafs  over  it 
now,  and  only  refer  to  our  hnxhox  Malptghly  and  Dr. Grew, 
in  the  Places  cited  in  Note  (/)  and  (^). 

(/)  Of  Bulbous,  and  a  great  many  more,  probably  of  the 
far  greater  Number  of  Perennial  Roots  of  Herbs,  as  Arurrit 
Rape- Crowfoot,  Hc.  it  is  very  obfervable,  that  their  Root  is 
annually  renewed,  or  repaired  out  of  the  Trunk  or  Stalk  it 
feif.  That  is  to  fay,  the  Bafis  of  the  Stalk  continually,  and 
by  iiifenlible  Degrees  defcending  below  the  Surface  of  the 
Earth  ,  and  hidmg  it  felf  therein  ,  is  thus  both  in  Nature, 

Place  and  Office,  changed  into  a  true  Root. So  in  Brozvn- 

ivorr,  the  Bafis  of  the  Stalk  finking  down  by  Degrees,  till  it 
lies  under  Ground  ,  becomes  the  upper  Part  of  the  Root; 
and  continuing  Hill  to  fink,  the  next  Year  becomes  the  lower 
Fart:  And  the  next  after  that,  rots  away  ;  a  new  Addition 
being  ftill  yearly  made  out  of  the  Stalk,  as  the  elder  Parts 
yearly  rot  away.     Grew.  ibid.  L.  2.  pag.  59.  ub'i  plura  vid. 

(m)  How  fafe  and  agreeable  a  Confervatory  the  Earth  is 
to  Vegetables,  more  than  any  other,  is  maniteft  from  their 
rotting,  drying,  or  being  rendred  intecund  in  the  Waters,  or 
the  Air;  but  m  the  Earth  their  Vigour  is  long  preferved. 
Thus  Seeds  particularly,  Mr.  Ray  thmks  fome,  may  proba- 
bly retain  their  Fecundity  for  ten  Years,  and  others  lofeitin 
five  ;  bur,  faith  he.  In  terra  gremio  latitantia,  quamiis  tot 
calor'ti,  frigoris,  humoris  z^  ficcitatis  zarietatibtcs  ibidem  ob- 
noxia,  diutihs  tamtn  (utpttto)  fertiittatem  fuam  tucntur  quam 
ab  hominibsts  diligentifftme  ctijlodita ;  nam  c"  ego  cr  alii  ante 
me  multi  obfervarunt  Sinapeos  -vim  magnam  cnatam  in  aggi' 
ribu4  foffarum  rec'cns  Jailis  inque  areis  gramineis  effojfif,  ubi 
poji  hominttm  memoriam  nulla  unquatn  Sinapeos  feges  fticcrevt- 
rat.  &tiam  tamen  non  fpont'e  ortam  fufpicor,  fed  e  feminibut 
in  terra  per  tot  anncs  refidms  etiam  prolificii.  Ray.  Hift.  PI. 
L.  I.  C.  J3. 

Warmth 


412,  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  Book  X. 

Warmth  of  the  Spring!  And  when  the  whole  Ve- 
getable Race  is  thus  called  out,  it  is  very  pretty  to 
obferve  the  Methods  of  Nature  in  guarding  thofe 
infenlitive  Creatures  againft  Harms  and  Inconve- 
niencies,  by  making  fome  (for  Inftance)  to  lie 
down  proftrate,  and  others,  to  clofe  themfelves 
up  («)  upon  the  Touch  of  Animals,  and  the  moft 
to  fliut  up  their  Flowers,  their  Down  (oj,  or  other 
their  like  Guard,  upon  the  Clofe  and  Cool  of  the 
Evening,  by  Means  of  Rain,  or  other  Matters  thac 
may  be  prejudicial  to  the  tender  Seed. 

And  now  to  thefe  Confiderations  relating  to  the 
Seed,  I  might  add  the  various  Ways  of  Nature  in 
diflipating  and  fowing  it,  fome  being  for  this  end, 
winged  with  light  Down,  or  Wings,  to  be  con- 
veyed about  by  the  Winds  >  others  being  laid  in 


(»)  PlantA  nonnulU  JEfch'jnomens,  Veteribus  dt£l&y  Recenti- 
oribm  Viva,  ct*  SenfitivA,  cr  Mimof&,  baud  obfcura  fenfus  in- 
dicia produnt ;  fiquidem  folia,  earum  manu  aut  baculo  taSla^ 
^■paululum  comprejfa,  plena  etiam  meridie,  fplendente  Sole,  illico 
fe  contrahunt ;  in  nonnuliu  etiam  fpeciebiis  cauliculi  teneriores 
concidunt  Z7  velut  marcefcunt ;  quod  idem  ab  a'ere  frigidiore 
admijfa  patiuntur.  Ray.  Hift.  PI.  T.  i.  L.  i8.  App.  S.  i. 
C.2.  p.  978, 

{0)  I  have  obferved  that  many,  if  not  moft  Vegetables, 
do  expand  their  Flowers,  Down,  ^c.  in  warm,  Sun-fhiny 
Weather,  and  again  clofe  them  towards  Evening,  or  in 
Rain,  ct'c  efpecially  at  the  Beginning  of  Flowering,  when 
the  Seed  is  young  and  tender;  as  is  manifeft  in  the  Down 
pf  Dandelion ,  and  other  Downs ;  and  eminently  in  the 
Flowers  of  Pimpernel-,  the  opening  and  fhutting  of  which, 
are  the  Country-Man's  Weather-wifer ;  whereby  Gerard  faith, 
he  foretelleth  what  Weather  ftiall  follow  the  next  Day  ;  for 
faith  he,  //  the  Flowers  be  ckfe  flmt  up,  it  betokeneth  Rain 
and  foul  Weather ;  contraryzvife,  if  they  be  fpread  abroad,  fair 
Weather.     Ger.  Herb.  B.  2..   c.  183. 

Ejl  o'  alia  [arbor  in  Tylis]  fimilis,  foliofior  tamen,  rofeique 
jloris;  quern  no6lH  comprimens,  aperire  incipit  Solis  exortu,  me- 
ridie expandit.  IncoU  dormin  earn  dicunt,  Plin.  Nat.  Hift. 
L.  li.  c.  II. 


elaftick, 


BookX.  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  413 

el.iftick,  fpringy  Cafes,  that  when  they  burft  and 
crack,  dart  their  Seed  at  convenient  Diltances, 
performing  thereby  the  Part  of  a  good  Husband- 
man   (/))  j    others  by   their   agreeable  Tailc   and 

Smell, 


{p')  So  foon  as  the  Seed  is  ripe.  Nature  taketh  feveral  Me- 
thoJs  for  its  Letng  duly  Sozvn ;  not  only  in  the  opening  of  tht 
Uterus,  but  alfo  tn  the  make  of  the  Seed  it  felf.  For,  Ftrfi, 
The  Seeds  of  many  Plants,  zvhich  ajfeci  a  peculiar  Soil  or  Seaty 
as  of  Arum,  Poppy,  ike.  are  heavy  and  fmall  enough,  with- 
out further  Care,  to  fall  direclly  down  into  the  Ground 
But  if  they  are  fo  large  and  light,  as  to  be  expos'd  to  the  Wind^ 
they  are  often  furntjii'd  with  one  or  more  Hooks,  to  flay  thtm 

from  Jiraying  too  far  from  their  proper  Place So  the  Seeds 

of  Avens  have  one  Jingle  Hook ;  thofe  of  Agrimony  and  Goole- 
grafs,  many ;  both  the  former  loving  a  warm  Bank  ;  the  latter^ 
an  Hedge  for  its  Support.  On  the  contrary,  many  Seeds  ate 
furniflj'd  with  Wings  or  Feathers ;  partly  with  the  Help  of  the 
Wind  to  carry  them,  zvhen  ripe,  from  off  the  Plant,  as  of  Afh, 

&c. and  partly  to  enable  them  to  make  their  Flight  more  or 

lefs  abroad,  that  fo  they  may  not,  by  falling  together,  come  up 
too  thick;  and  that  if  one  jhould  mifs  a  good  Soil  or  Bed,  another 

may  hit.     So  the  Kernels  of  Fine  haze  Wings yet  jl}ort 

•whereby  they  fly  not  into  the  Air,  but  only  flutter  upon  the 
Ground.     But  thofe  of  Typha,  Dandelion,  and  mofi  of  the  pap- 

pous  Kind have  long  numerous  Feathers,  by  which  they  are 

■wafted  every    Way.  'Again,    there   are  Seeds   which  are 

fcatterd  not  by  flying  abroad,  but  by  being  either  fpirted  or 
flung  away.  The  firfl  of  thofe  are  Wood  Jorrel,  which  having 
a  running  Root,  Nature  fees  fit  to  fow  the  Seeds  at  fotne  Dt~ 
fiance.      The  doing  of  which  is  ejfetled  by  a  white  flurdy  Cover^ 

of  a  tendinous  or  fpringy  Nature. This  Cover,  fo  foon  as 

it  begins  to  dry,  bur/Is  open  on  one  Side,  in  an  Inflant,  and  is 
•violently  turn'd  Infide  outward  ■  •  and  fo  fmn/:ly  throws 

off  the  ,seed.     The  Seeds  of  Harts-tongue,  /;  flung  or  jhot  an-ay 
by  the  curious  Contrivance  of  the  Seed-cafe,   as  in  Cod- 
ded-Almart,    only   there  the  fpnng  moves  and  curls  inward^ 

but   here  outward,    viz.    Every    -^'ed-cafe is  of  a  fphcrick 

^Figure,  and  girded  about  with  a  Jiurdy  Spr:?j^. ihe  Sur- 
face of  the  Spring  refembles  a  fine  Screw.  -  -So  foon  as 
this  Spr!>!^  is  become  Jlark  enough,  it  fuddenly  breaks  the  Cafe 
into  two  Halfi,  like  izvo  little  Cups,  and  fo  fltn^s  tht  Sttd. 
rjrew.  ib.  p.  199.  and  in  Tab.  71.  all  thefc  admirable  Arti- 
fices arc  handlbmely  reprefcntcd. 


414  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  BookX. 

Smell,  and  falutary  Nature,  inviting  themfelves  to 
be  fwallow'd,  and  carry'd  about  by  the  Birds,  and 
thereby  alfo  fertiliz'd  by  palling  through  their  Bo- 
dies 


6^;»  fi  quantitas  mod'ica  fem'inum  (Filicis  Phyllitidis  quo- 

que)  a,  foltii  In  fuhjeilam  charu  munda -fchedam  decti- 

tiatur,  deter  gat  lirve,  c  deinde  tn  acervum  con-verratur,  veficu' 
larum  feminalium  plurimis  una-  dtjfilientibus,  ^  ftbi  invicem 
altifis,  acervulus  njarie  moveri  per  partes  videbitur,  non  /ecus 

ac  fi  Syronilius  aut  ijiiufmodi  beftioUs  repletus  eJJ'et (^um 

fi  locus  tranquillus  fit,  aure  proxime  admotd,  crepitantium  in- 
ter rumpendum  vafculorum  fonitus percipietur  i  O'  fi  mi- 

crofcopio  chartam  oculis  oberres,  femina  per  earn  undique  /par- 
fa,  £7"  ad  notabtkm  ab  acervo  difiantiam  proje^a  comperies, 
Ray  ibid.  p.  131, 

The  admirable  Contrivance  of  Nature,  in  this  Plant  is  mofi 
plain.  For  the  3eed-Vejjels  being  the  befi  Preserver  of  the  Seed, 
'tis  there  kept  from  the  Injuries  of  Air  and  Earth,  'till  it  be 
rainy,  when  it  is  a  proper  Time  for  it  to  grow,  and  then  it  is 
thrown  round  the  Earth,  as  Grain  by  a/kdful  Sower. 
When  any  Wet  touches  the  End  of  the  Seed  VeJJels,  with  a 
ftnart  Noife  and  fudden  Leap  it  opens  it  /elf,  aud  with  a 
Spring  fcatters  its  Seed  to  a  pretty  Difiance  found  it,  where  it 
grows.  Dr.  Sloane  Voy,  to  Jamaica,  p.  150.  of  tiae  Genti- 
anella  flore  coeruleo,  8cc.  ox  Spirit -Leaf. 

The  Plants  oi  the  Cardamine-Family,  and  many  others, 
may  be  added  here,  whofe  Cods  fly  open,  and  dart  out 
their  Seed,  upon  a  fmall  Touch  of  the  Hand.  But  the 
moft  remarkable  Inftance  is  in  the  Cardamine  impatiens,  cu- 
jus  SiliquA  (faith  Mr.  Ray)  vel  leviter  tail&,  a^Htkm  ejaculan- 
tur  [Semina]  iml,  quod  longe  mirabilius  videtur,  etfi  filiquas 
non  tetigeris,  fi  tamen  manum  velut  ta^urus  proxime  admo-ve- 
as,  femina  in  approprinquantem  evibrabunt ;  quod  turn  Mc* 
rifonus  fe  f&pius  expertum  fcribit,  turn  ^ohnftonus  apud  Gerar* 
iium  verum  efe  affirmat.     Hiil.  Plant.  L.  i6.  c.  20. 

Neither  is  this  Provifion  made  only  for  Land  Vegetables, 
but  for  fuch  alfo  as  grow  in  the  Sea.  Of  which  I  fliall  give 
an  Inftance  from  my  before  commended  Friend  Dr.  Sloane. 

uls  to  the  Fuci, their  Seed  hath  been  difcover'd,  (and  fliew'd 

me  firft,)  by  the  Induftry  of  the  ingenious  Herbarifl,  Air.  Sam* 
Doody,  who  found  on  many  of  this  Kind,  folid  Tuhercules,  or 
Rifings  in  fame  Seafons,  wherein  were  lodg'd  feveral  round 
Seeds,  as  big  as  Muftard-Seed,  which,  when  ripe,  the  out' 
"Ward  Membrane  of  the  Tuhercule  breaking,  leaveth  the  Seed  ta 
float  up  and  down  ivith  the  Waves,  The  Seed  coming  near 
6  StoneSf 


BookX.  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  41 5* 

dies  {q) }  and  others  not  thus  taken  Care  of,    do 
many  of  them  by  their  Ufcfulnefs  in  human  Life, 
invite  the  Husbandman  and  Gardiner  carefully  to 
fow  and  nurfe  them  up. 
To 

Stones,  or  an'^  folid  Foundation,  ly  Means  of  a  Mucilage  h 
carries  wtfh  it,  fiicks  to  them,  and  [hoots  forth  Ligulae  tvtth 
Branches,  and  in  Time  conns  to  its  PerftClion  and  Magyutude^ 
Sloan  Voy.  Jamaica,  p.  jo. 

But  although  Mr.  Doody  had  hinted,  and  conjedur'd  at 
the  Thing  ;  yet  the  firlt  that  difcovcr'd  the  Seeds  \n  Fttci-, 
was  the  before  commended  Dr.  Tancred  Robin/on ;  as  may 
be  ieen  by  comparnig  what  Mr.  Ray  faith  in  his  S'^nopf.  Stirp. 
Brit.  p.  6.  with  his  Append.  Hifi.  p  1849.  Btfidcs  which 
luct,  the  Dr.  tells  me,  he  obierv'd  Vefl'cls  and  iieed  in  C*- 
ralloid  shrubs,  as  alio  in  fevcral  Fungi,  not  only  in  the  Spe- 
cies ot  Crepitus  Lupi,  but  alfo  between  the  LarrietU  of  other 
Species,  and  in  that  iubterraneous  Kind  call'd  imffies,  whofe 
Seed  and  Veflels  open  in  the  Cortex,  at  fome  Scafons  he 
faith,  like  that  of  Mallows  in  Sh.ipe. 

As  to  the  Crepitus  Lupi,  I  have  more  than  once  cxamin'd 
their  Powder,  with  thole  excellent  Microfcopcs  of  Mr.  Wd^ 
fon's  Make:  But  the  molt  fatisfadory  View  Mr.  IV/lfon  hiin-» 
lelf  gave  me;  by  which  I  found  the  Seeds  to  be  fo  many 
exceeding  fmall  Puff-Bails,  with  round  Heads,  and  longer 
than  ordmary  fharp-pointcd  Stalks,  as  if  made  on  purpofe 
to  prick  eafily  into  the  Ground.  Thefe  Seeds  are  iiuer- 
mix'd  with  much  dully  Matter,  and  become  hurtful  to  the 
Eyes,  probably  by  their  (harp  Stalks  pricking  and  wounding 
that  tender  Organ, 

(q)  The  ancient  Naturalifh  do  generally  agree,  that  Mif- 
feltce  is  propagated  by  its  Seeds  carried  about  by,  and  pafiing 
through  the  Body  of  Birds.  Thus  Theophrajlus  de  Cauf. 
plant.  L.  1.  c.  24.  T«  I)  is3Ti  c-?j  c^^l^ui,  &c.  Initium  vero 
a  pafiu  avium  ■    'ilU'pp'  V'fco  detratlo  conftcto.'juc  in  al' 

'veis,  quod  frigidifflmum  eji,  femen  cum  excrement 0  puvum  dU 
mittitur,  cr  faiia  mulatione  aliqua  tn  arbore  Stercoris  cauf4 
fullulat,  erumpitque,  &c.  So  aifo  Pliny  faith,  V17-.  Omnino 
autem  famm  LVilcnmj  nnllo  modo  nafcitur,  nee  nift  per  al- 
vum  Avium  redditutn,  maxitn'e  Palumbis  ac  Turdi.  Hac  cf^ 
natura,  tit  nifi  maturatum  in  ventre  Avium,  non  proveniat. 
Phn.  N.  H.  L.  16.  c.  44.  Whether  what  Theophraflus  and 
Pliny  affirm,  be  conducive  to  the  better  fertilizing  the  Seciis 
of  MiJJtltoe,  I  know  not;  but  that  it  is  not  of  aulblute  Nc- 
celCty,  1  can  affirm  upon  mine  own  Experience,  having  fcfo 

the 


416  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  BookX. 

To  this  fo  fingular  a  Care  about  the  Propaga- 
tion and  Confervation  of  the  Species  of  Vegeta- 
bles, I  might  add  the  nice  Provifion  that  is  made 
for  their  Support  and  Aid,  in  (landing  and  grow-* 
ing,  that  they  may  keep  their  Heads  above  Ground, 
and  not  be  rotted  and  fpoil'd  in  the  Earth  them- 
felves,  nor  thereby  annoy  us  5  but  on  the  contrary, 

t^e  Seeds  germinate,  even  in  the  Bark  of  Oak.  But  although 
they  (hot  above  an  Inch,  and  feem'd  to  root  in  the  Tree^ 
yet  they  came  to  nothing,  whether  deftroy'd  by  Ants,  CT'f. 
"Which  1  fufpeded,  or  whether  difagreeing  with  the  Oak,  I 
know  not.  But  I  fince  find  the  Matter  put  out  of  doubt  by 
Mr.  Doody,  which  fee  in  Mr.  Ray's  Hift.  Plant,  jipp.  p.  1918. 

Nutmegs  are  faid  to  be  fertiliz'd  after  the  fame  Manner^ 
as  Tavern'ter  faith  was  confirm'd  to  him  by  Perfons  that  li- 
ved many  Years  in  thofe  Parts ;  whofe  Relation  was,  The 
Nutmeg  being  ripe,  feveral  Birds  come  from  the  Iflands  to- 
ward the  South,  and  devour  it  whole,  but  are  forced  to 
throw  it  up  again,  before  it  be  digefted  :  And  that  the  Nut- 
fnegy  then  befmear'd  with  a  vifcous  Matter,  falling  to  the 
Ground,  takes  Root,  and  produces  a  Tree,  which  would 
never  thrive,  was  it  planted.  Tavern,  of  the  Commod.  of  thd 
G.  Mogul.  And  Monjieur  Thevenot,  in  his  Travels  to  the 
Indies,  gives  this  Account;  The  Tree  is  produc'd  after  this 
Manner;  there  is  a  kind  of  Birds  in  the  Ifland,  that  having 
pick'd  off  the  green  Hufk-,  fwallow  the  Nuts,  which  having 
been  fome  Time  in  their  Stomach,  they  void  by  the  ordi- 
nary Way  ;  and  they  fail  not  to  take  rooting  in  the  Place 
where  they  fall,  and  in  Time  to  grow  up  to  a  Tree.  This 
Bird  is  (Kap'd  like  a  Cuckow,  and  the  Dutch  prohibit  their 
SubjeAs  under  Pain  of  Death,  to  kill  any  of  them.  V:d. 
Sir  T.  Pope  Blum's  Nat.  Hift. 

But  Mr.  Ray  gives  a  fomev/hat  different  Account :  Hunc 
fruHum  [Nucem  Mofchatam]  -variA  qtiidem  aves  depafcuntury 
fed  maxime  Columb&  genus  album  c  parvum^  qu&  dchifcente 
Tiucamento,  ille6lA  fuavitate  Macis,  hunc  cum  Nute  eripiunt 
Cr  devorant,  nee  nifi  repletd  ingluvie  capaciffima  faginam  de*- 
ferunt.  Noftrates  ibi  mercatores  Cclumbis  iftis  Nut- eaters 
five  Nucivoris  nomen  impofuerant.  <^as  antem  vorant  Nucesy 
poft  integras  per  alvum  reddunt.  Reddits.  citius  deinde  gertni- 
nant  utpote  pr&macerat&  fervore  Ventriculi.  Arbores  inde  na- 
t£  ceu  pr&cociores,  facile  funt  corruptioni  obnoxis.  fru^umque 
ferunt  ceteris  multo  viliorem,  CT*  hdc  caufd,  negleElum  incolit 
contempt nmque,  prater  Macin^  qucm  ad  adulterandum  tnelia- 
rem  adhiber.t.     Ray  H,  P.  L.  27.  c.  4. 

minider 


BookX.  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  417 

niiniftcr  to  all  their  Ends,  and  ourUfcsj  to  afford 
us  Houfcs,  Ucenfils,  Food  (r),  Phylick,  Cloath- 
ing,  yea,  Divcrfion  too,  by  the  Beauty  of  their 
Looks,  by  the  Fragancy  of  their  Smell,  by  crea- 
ting us  pleafant  Shades  againtl  the  fcorching  Beams 
of  Summer,  and  skreening  us  againlt  the  piercing 
Winds,  and  Cold  of  Winter  {s). 

And  it  is  very  obfervable  what  admirable  Pro- 
vifions  are  made  for  this  Purpofe  of  their  Support 
and  Standing,  both  in  fuch  as  ftand  by  thtir  own 
Strength,  and  fuch  as  need  the  Help  of  others. 
In  fuch  as  (land  by  their  own  Strength,  it  is^  by 


(r)  Arivres  blandioribus  fruge  fnccis  hominem  mitigAvere. 
Ex  lis  recreans  membra  Olei  liquor,  virefque  potus  Vtni :  tot 
denique  fapores  annul  fponte  ventcntes :  CT*  mtnfs.  depugnctur 
licet  earum  caufd  cum  feris,  v  pafli  naufragoru'm  corporibiii 
pifces  expeiantur,  etiamnum  tamcn  [ecunds..  Alilte  praierea 
fant  ujtis  eanitn,  fint  qtabus  x/ita  degi  non  poffit.  Arbore  ful- 
camusmaria,  leirafque  admovemus,  arbore  exs-dificatnui  teila. 
Plin.  N.  H.  L.  li.  c.  r. 

(j)  Plantarum  Ufus  latijfim^e  paiet,  ct*  in  omni  vil£  parte 
occurrit.  Sine  illis  lauie,  fine  Hits  con/mode  non  vivitnr,  at 
nee  vivitur  omnino  :  (S}u£cunque  ad  "viclum  neceffaria  funt, 
quicunque  ad  delicim  faciunt,  e  locupletijfimo  fuo  penu  abunde 
fubminifirant.  ffhtanto  ex  iis  menfa  ir.nocentior,  mundur,  Ja- 
Lubrior  xju.itn  ex  Animalium  ade  cr  lanicnd  ?  Homo  certe  na- 
turd  Animal  carnivorum  non  e/i ;  nullis  ad  pndam  cr  rapi- 
nam  armis  injlniclum,  non  dentikus  exertis  <y  ferrdtis,  non 
non  unguibus  aduncis.  Mantis  ad  /rutins  colligendosy  denies 
dd  mandendos  comparati.  Non  legimus  ei  ante  Diluvium  car- 
nes  ad  efum  conceffas.  At  non  viSlum  tantum  nobis  fuppedi- 
tant,  fed  u"  Vejlitum,  cr  Medicinam  c?  Domtcilia  aliaque  ddi~ 
ficia,  cjy  Navigia,  c/  Supelletlilem,  v  Focum,  O'  ObleHamentd 
Senfuum  Animique  :  Ex  his  naribus  odoramenia  or  fufumigid 
parantur.  Horum  flores  inenarrabili  colorum  ct*  Scherhatum 
t'drietate,  v  elegantia,  oculos  exhilarant,  fudvijftma  odorutf% 
t^uos  expirant  fragantia  fpiritus  recreant.  Horum  fru^us  gult 
HlecebrA  mcnfas  Jecundas  inftruunt,  o"  languentem  appetituni 
excitant.  Taceo  virorem  arnxniffitnum  ocuUs  amicutn,  qiierri 
per  prata  pafcua  agros,  fylvas  Jpatiantibus  objiciunt,  O"  umbrat 
quas  contra  t/Ium  O"  folis  ardores  pnbtnt.  Ray.  ib.  L.  i.  C< 
14.  p.  0,6. 

£  c  Meani 


41 8  Flowers  and  Seed  of  Vegetables.  BookX. 

Means  of  the  llronger  and  more  ligneous  Parts, 
(equivalent  to  the  Bones  in  Animals,)  being  made 
not  inflexible,  as  Bones  -,  becaufe  they  would  then 
be  apt  to  break ;  but  of  a  yielding  elaftick  Nature, 
to  efcape  and  dodge  the  Violence  of  the  Winds  5 
and  by  Means  alfo  of  the  Branches  fpreading  hand- 
fomely  and  commodioufly  about,  at  an  Angle  of 
about  4f  gr.  by  which  Means  they  equally  fill  up, 
and  at  the  fame  Time  make  an  iEquilibration  of 
the  Top  {t). 

And  as  for  fuch  Vegetables  as  are  weak,  and 
not  able  to  fupport  themfelves,  'tis  a  wonderful 
Faculty  they  have,  fo  readily  and  naturally  to  make 
Ufe  of  the  Help  of  their  Neighbours,  embracing 
and  climbing  up  upon  them  («),  and  ufing  them 

as 


it)  All  Vegetables  of  a  tall  and  fpreading  Growth,  feem 
to  have  a  natural  Tendency  to  a  hemifpherical  Dilation,  but 
generally  confine  their  Spreading  within  an  Angle  of  90  gr. 
as  being  the  moft  becoming  and  ufeful  Difpofition  of  its 
Parts  and  Branches.  Now  the  fhorteft  Way  to  give  a  moft 
graceful  and  ufeful  filling  to  that  Space  of  dilating  and  fpread- 
ing out,'  is  to  proceed  in  flrait  Lines,  and  to  difpofe  of  thofe 
Lines,  in  a  Variety  of  Parallels,  zyc.  And  to  do  that  in  ^ 
GuadraRta!  Space,  crc.  there  appears  but  one  way  poffible, 
and  that  is,  to  form  all  the  Interfedions  which  the  Shoots 
and  Branches  make,  with  Angles  of  45  gr.  only.  And  I 
dare  appeal  to  all  if  it  be  not  in  this  Manner,  almoft  to  a 
Nicety  obferv'd  by  Nature,  c?-c.  A  vifible  Argument  that 
the  plailic  Capacities  of  Matter  are  govern'd  and  difpos'd  by 
an  all-wife  and  infinite  Agent,  the  native  Striclnefies  and 
Regularities  of  them  plainly  (hewing  from  whofe  Hand  they 
come.  Account  of  the  Origine  and  Format,  of  Fojf.  Shetis, 
&C.  Print.  Lond.  1705.  pag.  38.  41. 

(»)  In  Hedera,  fui  cult  ct*  rami  hinc  inde  claviculos,  quaji 
radiculas  cmitiunt,  qu^  parietihus,  iiel  occurrentibus  arboribui 
'veluti  digitis  jirmantur.,  zj"  in  altum  fufpenduntur.  Hujufmo- 
di  radicuU  fubrotundd  fitnt,  CT'  pHis  cooperiuntur ;  cr  quod  mi  ■■ 
fufnefi,  gliitinojum  fundunt  hmnoremy  feu  Terebinthinatn,  qua 

arife  lapidibiis  neHuntur  cr  agglutir.antur. Non  minori  in- 

dnftria  Natura  utiturin  Vite  Canadcnfi,  &c.     The  admirable 
1  and 


BookX.    The  Support  of  Vegetables.         41  c) 

as  Clutches  to  their  feeble  Bodies :  Some  by  their 
odd  convolving  Faculty,  by  twilling  themfejves 
like  a  Screw  about  others >  lome  advancing  them- 
fclves,  by  catching  and  holding  with  their  curious 
Clafpers  and  Tendrels^  equivalent  to  the  Hands  -, 
Tome  by  flriking  in  their  rooty  Feet  ;  and  others 
by  the  Emiflion  of  a  natural  Glue,  clofclyand  firm- 
ly adhering  to  fomething  or  other  that  adminilkrs 
fufficient  Support  unto  them.  All  which  various 
Methods  being  To  nicely  accommodated  to  the  Indi- 
gencies of  thofe  helplefs  Vegetables,  and  not  to 
be  met  with  in  any  befides,  is  a  manifeft  Indica- 
tion of  their  being  the  Contrivance  and  Work  of 
the  Creator,  and  that  his  infinite  Wifdom  and 
Care  condefcends,  even  to  the  Service,  and  well- 
being  of  the  meaneft,  moft  weak,  and  helplefs  in- 
fenfitivc  Parts  of  the  Creation. 


and  curious  Make  of  wliofe  Tendrcls  and  their  Feet,  fee  in 
the  illuftrious  Author,  Malpig.  de  Capreolts,  &c.  p.  48. 

Clafpers  are  of  a  comjound  Nature,  betv/een  that  of  a 
Root  and  a  Trunk.  Their  Ufe  is  fometimes  for  Support  on- 
ly ;  as  in  the  ("Clafpers  of  Vines,  Briony,  cs'c  whole  Branches 
being  long,  (lender  and  fragile,  would  fall  by  their  own 
Weight,  and  that  of  their  Fruit  ;  but  thele  ClafperJ  taking 
hold  of  any  Thing  that  is  at  Hand:  Which  they  do  by  a 
natural  Circumvolution  which  they  have  ;  (thofc  of  Briony 
have  a  retrograde  Motion  about  every  third  Circle,  in  the 
Form  of  a  double  Clal'p  ;  fo  that  if  they  mifs  one  Way,  they 
may  catch  the  other.)  Sometimes  the  Ufe  of  Clafpers  is  aU 
fo  for  a-  Supply,  as  in  the  Trunk  Roots  of  Ivy  ;  which  being 
a  Plant  that  mounts  very  high,  and  being  of  a  cloier  and 
more  compadl  Subrtance  than  that  of  Vmes,  the  Sap  would 
not  be  fufficicntly  fupply'd  to  the  upper  Sprouts,  unlefs  thele 
affiited  the  Mother  Root ;  but  thele  ferve  alio  for  Support 
too.  Sometimes  alfo  they  ferve  for  Stabilimcnr,  Propaga- 
tion and  Shade;  for  the  firlt  of  thefc  lerve  the  Clafpers  of 
Cucumers;  for  the  fecond,  thofe,  or  rather  the  Trunk- 
Roots  of  Chamomll ;  and  for  all  three  the  Trunk-Roots  of 
Strawberries,     Hams  Lex.  Tech.  in  verb,  Cialpcrj. 

Eel  Ijq 


42.0       Vegetables  peculiarly  ufeful.  BookX. 

In  the  laft  Place,  to  the  Ufes  ah-eady  hinted 
at,  1  might  add  a  large  Catalogue  of  fuch  among 
Vegetables,  as  are  of  peculiar  Ufe  'and  Service  to 
the  World,  and  feem  to  be  defign'd  as  'twere  on 
Purpofe,  by  the  mod:  merciful  Creator,  for  the 
Good  of  Man,  or  other  Creatures  {iso).  Among 
Grain,  I  might  name  the  great  Fertility  (x)  of 
fuch  as  ferves  for  Bread,  the  eafy  Culture  and  Pro- 
pagation thereof,  and  the  Agreement  of  every  Soil 
and  Climate  to  it.  Among  Trees,  and  Plants,  I 
might  inilance  in  fome  that  feem  to  be  defign'd, 
as  'twere  on  Purpofe,   for  almaft  every  Ufe  (>), 

and 


(w)  Vegetables  afford  not  only  Food  to  Irrationals,  but 
alfo  Phyfick,  if  it  be  true  which  AnftotU  laith,  and  after 
him  Pliny;  which  latter  in  his  8th  Book,  Chap.  27.  Ipeci- 
fies  divers  Plants  made  ufe  of  as  Specificks,  by  divers,  both 
Beafts  and  Birds :  As  Dittany  by  wounded  Beer,  Celandine 
by  Swalloivs,  to  cure  the  fore  Eyes  of  their  Young,  z^c. 
And  if  the  Reader  hath  a  Mind  to  fee  more  Initances  of 
this  Nature,  (many  of  them  fanciful  enough,)  he  may  con- 
fult  Merfenne  in  Genef.  pag.  933. 

{x)  See  before  Book  IV.  Chap.  11.  Note  {b). 
(y)  Planta  h^c  unica  [Aloe  Americana]  inqmt  Vr.  Hernan- 
dez, quicquid  viti  ejf'e  poteji  neceJJ'ariutn  prdflare  facile  poteft,  fi 
ejfet  rebus  humanis  modus,  Tota  enim  ilia  lignorum  [epiendo- 
fumque  agrorum  ufum  prijiat,  cautes  tignorum,  folia  vera  te- 
fla  tegendi  imhricuin,  lancium  :  eorundem  nervuli,  cr  fibr£  e- 
undem  habent  ufum  ad  linteamina,  calceos,  CT"  vefiimenta  con- 
jicienda  quern  apud  nos  Linum,  Cannabis,  Goffipium,  &c.  E 
mucronibus  fiunt  clavi,  aculei,  fubuU,  quibus  perforandis  au- 
ribus,  maeerandi  corporis  gratia,  Indis  iiti  mos  erat  cum  D<£- 
monum  vacarent  cultiii;  item  aciads.,  acus,  tribuii  militants 
C  raflilla  idonea  peciendis  fubtegmmtbus.  Prdtcrea  e  fucca 
fnananti,  cujus  evulfis  germinibus  internis  fotiifve  tenerioribus 
cultis  [Yztlinis]  in  mediam  cavitaism,  fiillat  planta,  unica  ad 
50  interdum  amphoras  (quod  diilu  eft  mirabile)  Vina,  Mel,  A- 
cetum  ac  Saccharum  parantur  [The  Methods  of  which  he 
tells.]  idem  fuccus  menfes  ciet,  alvum  Unit,  Urinam  tvocat, 
Renes  ZP"  Veficdm  emundat,  E  radice  quoque  Rejies  fiunt  fir- 
ihifjimi,  Crajftores  foliorum  partes,  truncufque,  deco6ta  fuh 
terra ,  tdendo  funt  apta ,  fapiuntque  Citrea  frtij}a  faccharp' 
eondiiA  :  qiiin  CT*  vulnsra  recmfia  mire  conglutinant. — -Folia 

e^uoqtis 


BookX.    Vegetables  feciiliarly  nfeful.     411 

and  Convenience-,  lomc  ro  heal  ;he  mod  ihibborn 
and  dangerous  Diltcmpers  {z)^  to  alleviate  and  cafe 
the  Pains  {aa)  of  our  poor  infirm  Bodies,  all  the 
World  over:  And  fome  dcfigncd  for  ihc  peculiar 
Service  and  Good  of  particular  Places ,  either  to 
cure  fuch  Diftcmpcrs  as  arc  peculiar  to  them,  by 


/]Uoque  ajft  CT"  affe6ia  hep  impofta  convuljlonetn  curant,  ac  do- 
Lores  lenmnt  (pncipue  ft  fuc-cus  ipfe  calens  iibattir)  quamvis  ab 
Indica  proficifcantur  lue,  Jeiifu^  heleranty  atque  torporem  in^ 
ducttnt.  Radicis  fuccut  luem  I'entrtam  curat  apud  Indos  itt 
Br.  Palmer.  Ray.  ib.  L.  ii.  c.  7.  See  alfo  Dr.  Shane  I'oy. 
to  Jamaica,  p.  247. 

There  are  alio  two  Sorts  of  Abe  befules,  mentioned  hy 
the  lame  Dr.  Shane,  one  of  which  is  made  ufe  of  for  Fifti- 
ing-Liiies,  Bow-Strings,  Stockmgs,  and  Hammocks.  Ano- 
ther hath  Leaves  that  hold  Ra;n-Water,  to  which  Travel- 
lers, cc  refort  to  quench  their  Thirfl,  in  Scarcity  of  Welfs, 
or  Waters,  in  thofedry  Countries,     ibid.  p.  Z49. 

(i)  For  an  Inflance  here,  I  Avail  name  the  Cortex  Peruvi' 
anus,  which  Dr.  Morton  calls  uintidotits  in  levamen  arumna- 
riim  vitthum.ini  plurimarum divinitus  concejfa.  De  Febr.  Ex- 
er.  V.  c.  3.  In  Sanitatem  Gentium  procuUubio  a  Deo  O.  M. 
conditus.  Cuius  gratia,  Arbor  -vits.,  fiqua  alia,  jure  merito 
appellari  potejl.  Id.  ib.  c.  7.  F.heu  .'  quot  convitiis  Hercitha  qt* 
divtna  ht.c  Antidotus  jaifabatur  ?  Ibid. 

To  this  (if  we  may  believe  the  F.phemer.  German.  Ann.  xi. 
Obfcr.  74.  and  fome  other  Authors)  we  may  add  Trifolium 
faludofum,  which  is  becoine  the  Panacea  of  the  German  and 
Northern  Nations. 

(aa)  Pro  dAoribus  qHilufcunqne  fedandis  pnjiantijftmi  fetn- 
per  ufus  Opium  habetur ;  quamobrem  merit})  Nepenthe  appel- 
lari folet,  zsr  remedium  vere  divinum  exijlit.  Et  quidem  fatis 
tmrari  vix  pojfumus,  quomodo  urgente  vifceris  aut  tnembri  cu- 
jufpiam  tortura  inftgni,  c/  intolerahili  cruciatu,  pharmacum 
hoc,  incantatmnti  injlar,  levatnen  c/  iiaXyria-ixii  fubitam,  im- 
yno  interdum  abfque  fomno,  aut  faltem  prists  quam  advcnerit, 
concedit.  Porro  adhuc  ma^is  Jlnpendum  ejl,  quod  donee  parti- 
culi  Opiatici  operari,  Cy'  potentiam  fuam  narcoticam  extrere 
continuant,  immo  etiam  aliqnamdiu  pojlquam  [omnia  finitur, 
fumma  aleviatio  ,  cr  indolentia  in  parte  affeSla  perfifii.  Wil- 
lis, Phar.  rat.  par.  i.  S.  7.  c.  i.  §.  15. 


Ee  5  growing 


•4^x      Vegetables  fecuU^rly  ufeful.  BookX. 

growing  more  plentifully  there  than  clfewhere  {hh)  \ 
or  elfe  to  obviate  fome  Inconvenience  there,  or  to 
fupply  fome  conftant  Neceffity,  or  Occafion,  not 
poflible ,  or  at  lead  not  eafy ,  to  be  fupplied  any 
other  Way  {cc),  'Tis,  for  Inftance,  an  admira- 
ble Pfovifion  made  for  fome  Countries  fubjedb  to 

Drought, 


{hh')  Tales  Plant  arum  f[>ecies  in  quacunque  regtone  a  Deo 
creantur  quales  hominibus  cy  animalihus  ibidem  natis  maxime 
conveniunt ;  into  ex  plant  arum  nafcentium  frequentia  je  fere 
animadvertere  pojj'c  qtiibui  tnorhis  [cndetniis]  qualibet  regio  fub- 
je^a  fit,  fcrihit  Solenander.  Sic  apud  Danos ,  Frifios ,  Hol- 
landos,  qnibus.  Scorbutus  frequens,  Cochlearia  copios'e  prove- 
pit.     Ray.  H.  PI.  L.  i6.  c.  3 

To  this  may  be  added  Elfner's  Obfervations  concerning 
the  Virtues  of  divers  Things  in  his  Obfervations  de  Vince- 
toxico  Scrophularujn  remedio.    F.  Germ.  T.  I.  Obf.  57. 

John  Benerovinusy  a  Phylician  of  Dort,  may  be  here  con- 
fulted,  who  wrote  a  Book  on  purpofe  to  ftiew,  that  every 
Country  hath  every  Thing  ferving  to  itsOccafions,  and  par- 
ticularly Remedies  afforded  to  all  the  Diftempers  it  is  fub- 
jeft  unto.  V,  Bener,  'Avtu^khci.  Batav.  five  Introd.  ad  Me- 
dic, indigenam. 

(cc)  The  Defcription  Dr.  Sloane  gives  of  the  Wild-Pine 
is,  that  its  Leaves  are  chanelled  fit  to  catch  and  convey 
Water  down  into  their  Refervatories,  that  thefe  Reiervato- 
ries  are  fo  made,  as  to  hold  much  Water,  and  clofe  at  Top 
when  full,  to  hinder  its  Evaporation;  that  thefe  Plants  grow 
on  the  Arms  of  the  Trees  in  the  Woods  every  where  [in 
thofe  Parts]  as  alfo  on  the  Barks  of  their  Trunks.  And  one 
Contrivance  of  Nature  in  this  Vegetable,  he  faith,  is  very 
admirable.  The  Seed  hath  long  and  many  Threads  of  To- 
pientum,  not  only  that  it  may  be  carried  every  where  by 

the  Wind but  alfo  that  it   may  by  thofe  Threads, 

when  driven  through  the  Boughs,  be  held  fall,  and  flick  to 
the  Arms,  and  extant  Parts  of  the  Barks  of  Trees.  Sofoon 
as  it  fprouts  or  germinates,  although  it  he  on  the  under  Part 

of  a  Bough, its  Leaves  and  Stalk  rife  perpendicular, 

or  ftrait  up,  becaufe  if  it  had  any  other  Pofition,  the  Ci- 
ftern  (before-mentioned,  by  which  it  is  chiefly  nourifhed  — ) 
made  of  the  hollow  Leaves,  could  not  hold  Water,  which 

is  neceffary  for  the  Nourilbment  and  Life  of  the  Plant 

In  Scarcity  of  Vt'ate:,  this  Refervatory  is  neceffary  and  fuf- 

ficient, 


BookX.    Vegetables  peculiarly  nfeful.     413 

Drought ,  that  when  the  Waters  every  where 
fail,  there  arc  Vegetables  which  contain  not  only 
Moifture  enough  to  fupply  their  own  Vegetation 
and  Wants,  but  atFord  Drmk  alfo  both  to  Man  and 
other  Creatures,  in  their  great  Extremities  {dd)  j 

ficient,  not  only  for  the  Plant  it  felf,  but  likcwife  is  very 
ufeful  to  Men,  Birds,  and  all  burts  of  inkets,  uhithcr  they 
come  in  Troops,  and  feldom  go  away  without  Rcfrclhmcnt. 
Id.  ib.  p.  188.  and  Phil.  Tranf.  N".  15  [,  where  a  Figure  is  ot 
this  notable  Plant,  as  alio  in  Lo-jjthorp'%  Abrldg.  V.  i.  p.Ci). 

The  Wiid-Ptne,  lb  called,  cp-c.  hath  l^eaves  that  will  hold 
a  Pint  and  a  hall,  or  Quart  ot  Rain-VVatcr;  and  this  Water 
retrellies  the  Leaves,  and  nounllies  the  Root.  When  we 
find  thefe  Pines,  we  flick  our  Knives  into  the  Leaves,  juft 
above  the  Root,  and  that  lets  out  the  Water,  which  we  catch 
in  our  Hats,  as  I  have  done  many  Times  to  my  great  Re- 
lief.    Datnpier's  Voy.  to  Campeachy,  c.  1.  p   56. 

{dd)  NAvarctteicWs  us  of  a  Tree  called  the  Bejuc^,  which 
twines  about  other  Trees,  with  its  End  hanging  downwards; 
and  that  Travellers  cut  the  Nib  ofl  it,  and  prelently  a  Spout 
of  Water  runs  out  from  it,  as  clear  as  Cryftal,  enough  and 
to  fpare  for  fix  or  eight  Men.  I  drank,  faith  he,  to  my  Sa- 
tisfaction of  it,  found  It  cool  and  fvveet,  and  would  drink  it 
as  often  as  I  found  it  in  my  Way.  It  is  a  Juice  and  natural 
Water.  It  is  the  common  Relief  of  the  Herds  men  on  the 
Mountains.  W^hen  they  are  thirlty,  they  lay  hold  6n  the 
Bejuco,  and  drink  their  Fill.  CoUcfi.  of  Voy.  and  Trav.  Kot.  i. 
in  the  Suppl  to  Navarctte';  Account  of  China,  p.  355. 

The  iVaterwtth  of  Jamaica  hath  the  fame  Ufes,  concern- 
ing which,  my  before-commended  Friend,  Dr.  Shane,  fa- 
voured me  with  this  Account  from  his  Original  Papers -.^yr^/; 
Vine  grovjing  on  dry  Hills,  in  the  Woods,  where  no  Water  is  to 
be  met  uith,  its  Trunk,  if  cut  into  Pieces  two  or  three  Yards 
long,  and  held  by  cither  tnd  to  the  Mouth,  affords  fo  plentiful- 
ly a  limpid,  innocent,  and  refreflitng  Water,  or  Sap,  as  gives 
nezu  Life  to  the  droughty  Traveller  or  Hunter.  Whence  this  is 
very  much  celebrated  by  all  the  Inhabitants  of  thefe  Iflands, 
(U  an  immediate  Gift  of  Providence  to  their  dijireffed  Condition. 
To  this  we  may  add  what  Mr.  Ray  takes  notice  of  con- 
cerning the  Birch-Tree.  In  initiis  Verts  antequam  folia  pro- 
diere,  vulnergta  duUem  fuccurn  copiose  effundit,  quern  fitiprefft 
Pajlores  in  fylvts  fdpenumero  potare  folent.  Nos  etiam  nonfC' 
mel  e}  liquore  recreati  fumus,  ci'.m  herbarum  grati.i  vafias  pe- 
ragravimus  fylvas ,  wqttit  Tragus.  Rail  Cat.  Plant,  circa, 
Cantab,  in  Beiula. 

Ee  4  and 


42-4  Of  Vegetables.  Book  X. 

and  a  great  deal  more  might  be  inftanced  in  of  a 
Jike  Nature,  and  Things  that  bear  fuch  plain  Im- 
prefles  of  the  Divme  Wifdom  and  Care,  that  they 
manifeft  the  Super-intendence  of  the  infinite  Cre- 
ator. 

Thus  I  have  given  a  Sketch  of  another  Branch 
of  the  Creation,  which  (although  one  of  the  mean- 
eft,  yet)  if  it  was  accurately  viewed,  would  abun- 
dantly manifeft  it  felf  to  be  the  Work  of  God. 
But  becaufe  I  have  been  fo  long  upon  the  other 
Parts,  although  lefs  than  they  deferve,  1  muft  there- 
fore content  my  felf  with  thofe  general  Hints  I 
have  given  J  which  may  however  ferve  as  Speci- 
mens of  what  might  have  been  more  largely  faid 
about  this  inferiour  Part  of  the  animated  Crea- 
tion. 

As  to  the  Inanimate  Part^  fuch  as  Stones,  Mi- 
nerals, Earths,  and  fuch-like,  that  which  1  have 
already  faid  in  the  Beginning  Ihall  fuffice. 


BOOK 


BOOK  XI. 

PraBkal  Inferences  from  the  fore- 
gotrjg  Survey. 


M 


A  VI N  G  in  the  preceding  Books  car- 
ried my  Survey  as  far  as  I  care  at  prc- 
fW^x  fcnt  to  engage  my  felf,  all  that  remain- 
_  fld4S-«^1^-'  ^^'""^  '-"'  ^°  draw  fomc  Inferences  from 
the  foregoing  Scene  of  the  great  Creator's  Works, 
and  fo  conclude  this  Part  of  my  intended  Work. 

CHAP.    I. 

That  God's  Works  are  Great  and  Excellent, 

TH  E  firft  Inference  I  fhall  make,  fliall  be  by 
way  of  Confirmation  of  the  Text,  That  the 
Works  ef  the  Lord  are  j'eat  {a).  And  this  is  necefla- 
ry  to  be  obferved,  not  againfl:  the  Athcifl  only, 
but  all  other  carelcfs,  incurious  Obfervers  of  God's 
Works.  Many  of  our  ufeful  Labours,  and  fomc 
,of  our  beft  modern  Books  fliall  be  condemned 
with  only  this  Note  of  Reproach,  That  they  arc 


(<j)  F.qu'tdem  ne  laudare  qu'tdem  fans  pro  merit o  poffum  ejus 
Sapuniiam  ac  Potentiam,  qui  animalia  fabric  at  ut  tfi.  Nam 
ejufmodi  opera  non  LaHiiibus  mod),  verUm  eiiam  Hymnis  funt 
majora,  qud  priuffjuam  infpexijjemus,  fieri  non  pojj'e  ptrfuafutn 
habeamus,  confpicatt  vera,  falfos  nos  cpintone  fuijje  comperi- 
pus.    Galen.  deUf.Part.  L.  7.  c.  ij. 

*  abou? 


41 6  Cods  Works  are  great.     Book  XI. 

about  trivial  Matters  (^),  when  in  Truth  they  are 
ingenious  and  noble  Difcoveries  of  the  Works  of 
GOD.     And  how  often  will  many  own  the  World 
in  general  to  be  a  Manifeflation   of  the  Infinite 
Creator,  but  look  upon  the  feveral  Parts  thereof  as 
only  Toys  and  Trifles,  fcarce  deferving  their  Re- 
gard? But  in  the  foregoing  (I  may  call  it)  tran- 
lient  View  1  have  given  of  this  lower,  and  moil 
flighted  Part  of  the  Creation,  I  have,  I  hope,  a- 
bundantly  made  out ,  that  all  the  Works  of  the 
Lord,  from  the  moit  regarded,  admired,  and  prai* 
fed,  to  the  mcaneft  and  moll  flighted ,  are  great 
and  glorious  Works,  incomparably  contrived,  and 
as  admirably  made,  fitted  up,  and  placed  in  the 
World.     So  far  then  arc  anv  of  the  Works  of  the 
LORD,  (even  thofe efteemed  the  meanefl)  from 
deferving  to   be  difregarded,     or   contemned    by 
us  (<:),  that  on  the  contrary  they  deferve  (as  fhall 
be  fhewn  in  the  next  Chapter)  to  be  fought  out^ 
enquired  after ^  and  curioufly  and  diligently  pryed  into 
by  us  j  as  I  have  ihewed  the  Word  in  the  Text  im- 
plies. 


{b)  Nan  tamen  pigere  debet  LeSiores,  ea  intelljgere,  (^uemad- 
moiium  ne  Naturam  quidem  piguit  ea  reipsa  efficete.  Galen, 
ibid.  L.  II.  fin.  • 

(c)  An  igitur  etiawfi  quemadmodum  Natura  hu,  cr  ejuf- 
tKodi,  fummA  rat'tone  ac  provtden'tiA  agere  potuit,  ita  (y  not 
imitari  aliquanda  poffentus  ?  Ego  vera  exifiimo  multis  noflrum 
ne  id  quidem  pojfe,  neque  enim  artem  Natur&  exponunt :  Eo 
enim  modo  omnino  earn  admirarentur ,  Sin  minhs^  earn  faltem 
non  vftuperarent.     Galen,  ib.  L.  lo.  c.  3. 


CHAP, 


Chap.  II.  4^7 


CHAP   II. 

That  GodV  Works  ought  to  be  enquird  intOy 
and  that  fuch  Enquiries  are  commendable. 

THE  Creator  doubtlefsdid  not  btftow  fo  much 
Curionty,  and  exquifice  Workmanfhip  and 
Skill  upon  his  Creatures,  to  be  looked  upon  with 
a  carclcfs,  incurious  Eye,  cfpccially  to  have  them 
llightcd  or  contemned  j  but  to  be  admired  by  the 
rational  Part  of  the  World,  to  magnify  his  own 
Power,  Wifdom  and  Goodncfs  throughout  all  the 
World,  and  the  Ages  thereof.  And  therefore  we 
may  look  upon  it  as  a  great  Error,  not  to  anfwer 
thoVe  Ends  of  the  infinite  Creator^  but  rather  to 
oppofe  and  affront  thcni.  On  the  contrary,  my 
Text  commends  G  O  D's  Works,  not  only  for  be- 
ing great,  but  alfo  approves  of  thofc  curious  and 
ingenious  Enquirers,  that /f<'^'  them  onf^  or  pry  into 
them.  And  the  more  we  pry  into,  and  difcover  of 
them,  the  greater  and  more  glorious  we  find  tiicm 
to  be,  the  more  worthy  of,  and  the  more  cxprelly 
to  proclaim  their  great  Creator. 

Commendable  then  are  the  Refcarches,  which 
many  amongll  us  have,  of  late  Years,  made  into 
the  Works  of  Nature,  more  than  hath  been  done 
in  fome  Ages  before.  And  therefore  when  we  are 
asked,  Cui  Bono  ^  To  what  Purpofe  fuch  Enqui- 
ries, fuch  Pains,  fuch  Expcnce?  The  Anfwer  h 
eafy.  It  is  to  anfwer  the  Ends  lor  which  GOD 
beftowed  fo  much  Art,  Wifdom  and  Power  about 
them,  as  well  as  given  us  Scnfes  to  view  and  fur- 
vey  them  j  and  an  Underdanding  and  Curiolity 
to  fearch  into  them  :  It  is  to  follow  and  trace 
him,  when  and  whither  he  leads  us,  that  we  may 

fee 


4^8        God's  JVorks  are  mantfefl.    Book  XL 

fee  and  admire  his  Handy-work  our  felves,  and  fct 
it  forth  to  others,  that  they  may  fee,  admire  and 
praife  it  alfo-  I  fhall  then  conclude  this  Inference 
with  what  Elihu  recommends,  Job  xxxvi.  24,  zf. 
Remember  that  thou  magnify  his  Work^  which  Men 
behold.  Every  Man  may  fee  it^  Men  may  behold  it 
afar  off. 


CHAP.    III. 

That  God' J  Works  are  manifeji  to  all:  Whence 
the  IJnreafonablenefs  of  Infidelity. 

TH  E  concluding  Words  of  the  preceding  Chap- 
ter fuggefts  a  third  Inference,  that  the  Works 
of  GOD  are  fo  vifiblc  to  all  the  World,  and  with- 
al fuch  manifeft  Indications  of  the  Being,  and  At- 
tributes of  the  infinite  Creator,  that  they  plainly 
argue  the  Vilenefs  ^and  Perverfnefs  of  the  Atheifl, 
and  leave  him  inexcufable.  For  it  is  a  fign  a  Man 
is  a  wilful,  perverfe  Atheift,  that  will  impute  fo 
glorious  a  Work,  as  the  Creation  is,  to  any  Thing, 
yea,  a  mere  Nothing  (as  Chance  is)  rather  than  to 
GOD  {a).     'Tis  a  fign  the  Man  is  wilfully  blind, 

that 


(4)  Galen  having  taken  notice  of  the  neat  Diftribution  of 
the  Nerves  to  the  Mufcles,  and  other  Parts  of  the  Face, 
cries  out,  Hu  enlm  forturiA  funt  opera  !  C&terum  turn  omn't- 
hus  [partibus]  imm'tttt,  tantofque  eJJ'e  fingulos  [nervos]  mag- 
fiitudme,  quanta partkuh  erat  neceJJ'e;  haud  fcto  an  hom'innm 
(it  fohriorum  ad  'Fortunam  opificem  id  revocare.  jilioqui  quid 
tandem  erit,  quod  cum  Providentid  c/  Arte  efficitur  ?  Omnino 
enitn  hoc  ei  contrarium  eJj'e  debet,  quod  Cafu  ac  Fortuito  fit. 
And  afterwards,  H£C  quidem  atque  ejufmodi  Artis  fcil.  ac  Sa- 
pientt£  opera  ejfe  dicemns,  ft  modo  Fortune  tribuenda  funt  qu£ 

funt 


Chap.  III.  Gods  JVorksare  fnanifeJL        419^ 

that  he  is  under  the  Power  of  the  Devil,  under 
the  Government  of  Prejudice,  Lu(l,  and  PafTion, 
not  right  Rcafon,  that  will  not  difcern  what  eicry 
one  can  fee ^  wh.it  every  Man  m.iy  behold  afar  ojf^ 
even  the  Exilknce  and  Attributes  of  the  CRE- 
ATOR from  his  Works.  For  as  there  is  no  Speech 
or  Language  where  their  Voice  is  not  heard,  their 
Line  is  gone  out  through  all  the  Earth,  and  their 
JVords  to  the  End  of  the  IVorld :  So  all,  even  the 
barbarous  Nations,  that  never  heard  of  GOD, 
have  from  thefe  his  Works  inferred  the  Exiflencc 
of  a  Deity,  and  paid  their  Homages  to  fome  Deity, 
although  they  have  been  under  great  Miftakes  in 
their  Notions  and  Conclufions  about  him.  But 
however,  this  fhews  how  naturally  and  univerfally 
all  Mankind  agree,  in  deducing  their  Belief  of  a 
God  from  the  Contemplation  of  his  Works,  or  as 
even  Epicurus  himfelf,  in  I'uUy  (b)  faith,  from  a 
Notion  that  Nature  it  felf  hath  imprinted  upon  the 
Minds  of  Men.  For,  faith  he,  ivhat  Nation  is 
there,  or  ivhat  kind  of  Men,  that  ivithout  any  Teach- 
ing or  lnflru6lions,  have  not  a  kind  of  jinticipation^ 
or  preconceived  Notion  of  a  Deity  ? 
-  An  Atheill  therefore  (if  ever  there  was'  any 
fuch)  may  juftly  be  eftecmed  a  Moniler  among 
rational  Beings  j  a  Thing  hard  to  be  met  with  in 


funt  contrar'ia;  fietque  jam  qttcd  in  proverhih lluvti 

f urf urn  fluent ;  fi  opera  qu&  nullum  halent  neque  ornamentum 
neque  rationem,  neque  tnodum  Artis  ejje ;  conirana  vero  For- 
tum  duxenmui,&:c.     Galen,  ubi  lupra.   L.  ii.  c.  7. 

(^)  Pr'imum  ejje  Deos,  quod  in  omnium  animts,S)iC.  And  a 
little  after.  Cum  enim  non  indituto  aliquo,  aut  more,  a»t 
lege  fit  cpiuio  conflituta,  maneatque  ad  unum  ommum  f.rwi*' 
conftnfio,  inielli^i  necejft  ejl,  ejje  Deos,  quontam  injnas  tcrum 
vel  poiiiis  if'natas  cogntiiones  halemus.  De  quo  Mutem  imnt- 
um  Nittura  conj'entit,  id  verum  ejje  necejji  eji.  Ejje  igitur  Vt- 
et  conjinndum  eji.     Cicer.  dc  Nat.  Deor.  L.  i.  c.  16,  17. 

ihe 


430        God'sWorks  aremmiifeft.     Book  XI. 

the  whole  Tribe  of  Mankind;  an  Oppofer  of  all 
the  World  {c)\  a  Rebel  againft  human  Natureand 
Reafon,  as  well  as  againft  his  GOD. 

But  above  all,  monftrous  is  this,  or  would  be^ 
in  fuch  as  have  heard  of  GOD,  who  have  had  the 
Benefit  of  the  clear  Gofpel-Revelation.  And  ftill 
more  monftrous  this  would  be,  in  one  born  and 
baptized  in  the  Chriftian  Church,  that  hath  ftudi- 
ed  Nature,  and  pried  farther  than  others  into  God's 
Works.  For  fuch  an  one  (if  it  be  pofHble  for 
fuch  to  be)  to  deny  the  Exiftence,  or  any  of  the 
Attributes  of  GOD,  would  be  a  great  Argument 
of  the  infinite  Inconvenience  of  thofe  Sins  of  In- 
temperance, Luft,  and  Riot,  that  have  made  the 
Man  abandon  his  Reafon,  his  Senfcs,  yea,  I  had 
almoft  faid  his  very  human  Nature  [d\  to  engage 
him  thus  to  deny  the  Being  of  G  O  D. 

So  alfo  it  is  much  the  fame  monftrous  Infideli- 
ty, at  leaft  betrays  the  fame  atheiftical  Mind,  to 
deny  GOD's  Providence,  Care  and  Government 
of  the  World,  or  (which  is  a  Spawn  of  the  fame 
Epicurean  Principles)  to  deny  Final  Caufes  (e)  in 
God's  Works  of  Creation ;  or  with  the  Profane 
in  PfaL  Ixxiii.  ii.   to  fay.  How  doth  God  know^ 


(c)  The   Atheift  in   denying   a   God,  doth,  as   Plutarch 

faith,  endeavour immobilia  movere^  e?  helium  inferre 

non  tantum  longo  tempori,  fed  cr  multis  hominibus,  gentibus, 
inr  familiis,  qum  rellgtojus  Deormn  cultus,  quafi  divino  furore 
correptas,  tenuit.     Plutar.  de  Ifide. 

(d)  See  before  Note  {b). 

{e)  Galen  having  I'ubftantially  refuted  the  Epicurean  Princi- 
ples of  Afclepiadei,  by  iLewing  his  Ignorance  in  Anatomy 
and  Philolophy,  and  by  Demonl^rating  all  the  Caujes  to  be 
evidently  in  the  Works  of  Nature,  viz.  Final,  Efficient,  In- 
flrumental.  Material  And  Formal  Caufes,  concludes  thus  againft 
his  fortuitous  Atoms,  ex  quibus  intelligi  potefl  :  Conditorem 
npfirum  in  formandis  particulis  unum  hunc  fequi  fcopum,  nem- 
pe  tit  quod  melius  ejl  eligat.     Galen,  de  Uf.  Part.  L.  6.  c.  13. 

And 


Chap.  IV.  Fear  and  Obedience  God's  Due.  43 1 

And  is  there  Knowledge  in  the  mofl  High  ?  For  as  the 
witty  and  eloquent  Sahian  faith  (/"j,  7hey  that  af- 
firm nothing  is  jecn  by  GO  /),  w;7/,  in  all  Probabi- 
lity, take  away  the   Sub  fiance^  as  well  as  Sight  of 

Cod. •  But  what  Jo  great  Madnc/s,  faith  he,  as 

that  when  a  Man  doth  not  deny  G  (J  D  to  be  the  Cre- 
ator of  all  Things^  he  fjotild  deny  him  to  be  the  Go'vet" 
nourofthcm  ?  Or  when  heconfejjeth  him  to  be  the  Mak- 
er^ he fliould fay^  GOD  neglecieth  what  he  hath  fo 
made  ? 

{/')   DeGubtm.  Dei.  L.  4.  p.  1 14.  meo  Libra  ;  alfo  L.  7.  c.  14. 


CHAP.    IV. 

That  G  o  Ds  JForh  ought  to  excite  us  to  Fear 
and  Obedience  to  God. 

Since  the  Works  of  the  Creation  are  all  of  them 
fomany  Demonlhationsof  the  infinite  Wifdom 
and  Power  of  God,  they  may  ferve  to  us  as  fo  ma- 
ny Arguments  exciting  us  to  the  conftant  Fear  of 
God.,  and  to  a  Heady,  hearty  Obedience  to  all  his 
Laws.     And  thus  we  may  make  thefe  Works  as 
ferviccable  to  our  fpiritual  Intcrell,  as  they  all  arc 
to  our  Life,  and  temporal  liuerelt.     For  if  when- 
ever wc  fee  them,  wc  would  confidcr  that  thefe  arc 
the  Works  of  our  iiifinice  l.ord-ind  Mafler^  to  whom 
we  arc  to  be  accountable  for  all  our  Thoughts, 
Words  and  Works,  and  that  in  thefe  wc  may  fee 
his  infinite  Power  and  Wifdom  j  this  would  check 
us  in  Sinning,  and  excite  us  to  ferve  and  pleafe  him 
who  is  above  all  Controul,  and  who  hath  our  Life 
and  whole  Happinefs  in  his  Power.     After  this  man- 
ner GOD  himfelf  argues  with  his  own  foolifj  Peo- 
ple^ and  without  Under  ft  anding^  who  had  Eyes,  and 

faw 


432.      Thankfutnefs  ts  God's  T>ue.    Book  XL 

fawnot^  and  had  Ears^  andkeardnot^  Jer.v.  zi,!!* 
Fear  ye  not  me  ?  faith  the  Lord :  will  ye  not  tremble 
at  my  Pr e fence ^  which  have  placed  the  Sand  for  the 
Bound  of  the  Sea^  by  a  perpetual  Decree^  that  it  can- 
not pafs  it  y  and  though  the  JVaves  thereof  tofs  them- 
felves^  yet  can  they  not  prevail  -,  though  they  roar^  yet 
can  they  not  pafs  over  it  ? 

This  was  an  Argument  that  the  moft  ignorant, 
ilupid  Wretches  could  not  but  apprehend  5  that  a 
Being  that  had  fo  vail  and  unruly  an  Element,  as 
the  Sea,  abfolutely  at  his  Command,  ought  to  be 
feared  and  obeyed  j  and  that  he  ought  to  be  confi- 
dered  as  the  Sovereign  Lord  of  the  World,  on  whom 
the  World's  Profperity  and  Happinefs  did  wholly 
depend ;  v.  24.  Neither  fay  they  in  their  Hearts- 
let  us  now  fear  the  Lord  our  God^  that  giveth  Rain^ 
both  the  former  and  the  latter  in  his  Seafon :  He  re" 
ferveth  unto  us  the  appointed  Weeks  of  the  Harvefi. 


C  H  A  P.    V. 

That  G  o  dV  Works  ought  to  excite  us  to 
Thankfiilnefs. 

AS  the Demonftrations which  GOD  hath  giv- 
en of  his  infinite  Power  and  Wifdom  fhould 
excite  us  to  Fear  and  Obedience  5  fo  I  {hall  fhew  in 
this  Chapter,  that  the  Demonftrations  which  he 
hath  given  of  his  infinite  Goodnefs  in  his  Works, 
may  excite  us  to  due  Thankfulnefs  and  Praife.  .  It 
appears  throughout  the  foregoing  Survey,  what 
Kindnefs  GOD  hath  fhewn  to  his  Creatures  in 
providing  every  Thing  conducing  to  their  Life, 
Profperity,  and  Happinefs  {a)  >  how  they  are  all 

contrived 


{a)  Si  pauca  qms  ttbi    donnffet  jugera,    accepijje   te   diceres 
henekcium :    immeajd    terrarum   Ui'e   patemitttn  fpaua  ncga; 

tjfe 


chap.  V.    Thankftihiefs  is  God's  T>ue.       43  3 

contrived  and  made  in  the  bell  Manner,  placed  in 
the  fitted  Places  of  the  World  for  their  Habitati- 
on and  Comfort ;  accoutered  in  the  bell  Manner, 
and  accommodated  with  every,  even  ail  the  minu- 
ted Things  that  may  minifter  to  their  Health,  Hap- 
pinefs,Omce,  Occafions,and  Bufmefs  in  the  World. 
Upon  which  Account,  Thankfulnefs  and  Praifc 
is  fo  reafonable,  fo  jull  a  Debt  to  the  Creator^  that 
the  Pfalmijl  calleth  upon  all  the  Creatures  to  praife 
God,  in  Pfalm  cxlviii.  Praife  him  all  his  Angels^ 
Praife  him  allhisPIoJls  j  Sun^  Moon^  Stars  of  Light ^ 
Heavcjis  of  Heavens^  and  Waters  above  the  Heavens.' 
The  Reafon  given  for  which  is,  f.  f,6.  For  he  com- 
manded^ and  they  were  created -y  he  hath  alfo  efiabiifljed 
them  forever  and  ever  j  he  bath  made  a  Decree  which 
they  fn all  not  pafs.  And  not  thefe  Celedials  alone, 
but  the  Creatures  of  the  Earth  and  Waters  too, 
even  the  Meteors,  Fire  and Hail^  Snoiv  and  Vapours^ 
Jiormy  J^^inds  fulfilling  his  Word.  Yea,  the  very 
Mountains  and  Hills^  Trees^  Beajis^  and  all  Cattle^ 
creeping  "Things^  and  fying  Fonvl.  But  in  a  particu- 
lar manner,  all  the  Ranks  and  Orders,  all  the  Ages 
and  Sexes  of  Mankind  are  charged  with  this  Duty  ; 
Let  them  praife  the  Name  of  the  Lord^  for  his  Name 
alone  is  excellent  j  his  Glory  is  above  the  Earth  and 
Heavens^  f.i^. 


ejfe  beneficium  ?  Si  pecuniam  tibi  aliquis  donaverit, bcneji' 

cmm  vocabis  :  to:  metalla  defodit,  lot  flutnina  emifit  in  drat 
fuper  qu£  decurrunt  fola  aurum  vehemia  :  argentt,  tris,  ferri 
immane  pondus  omnibus  locis  obrutum,  cujus  invejli^aridi  li.i 
facultatem  dedtt, —  ne^as  te  accepijje  bene/icium  ?  Si  dornus  ti- 
bi donetur,  in  qua  marmoris  aliquid  refplendeat,  &cc.  Num  me- 
diocre tnunus  vocabis  ?  Ingens  tibi  danjcilium,  fine  ullo  incen- 
diiy  aut  runiA  metu  Jlruxit,  in  quo  vides  non  tenues  cruftas 
fed  in  terras  lapidis  preiioflfifni  woles,  8<C.  negas  te  uilurt 
tnunus  accepiffef  Et  cum  ijla  qux  habes  t?iaj(no  tflpnes,  quod  tfi 
ingrati  hominis,  nulit  debere  te  juduas  f  Vnde  tibi  ijhtm  quern 
trahis  fpiritum  !  Unde  ijlam,  per  quarn  duftus  vin  tut.  difponn 
dtque  ordinas,  lucem  f  &i<:.     Scnec.  de  Binef.  L   4    c.  d. 

Ff  And 


^^^  Homage  andWorJhif  God'sT>ue.  Book  XI, 

And  great  Reafon  there  is  we  fliould  be  excited  to 
true  and  unfeigned  Thankfulnels  and  Praife  {h)  to 
this  our  great  Benefii6tor,  if  w'e  refle£t  upon  what 
hath  been  fhewn  in  the  preceding  Survey,  that  the 
Creator  hath  done  for  Man  alone,  without  any  re- 
gard to  the  refl  of  the  Creatures,  which  fome  have 
held  were  made  for  the  Sake  of  Man.  Let  us  but 
refleft  upon  the  Excellence  and  Immortality  of  our 
Soulj  the  incomparable  Contrivance,  and  curious 
Strudure  of  our  Body  j  and  the  Care  and  Caution 
taken  for  the  Security  and  Happinefs  of  our  State, 
and  we  fhall  find,  that  among  the  whole  Race  of 
Beings,  Man  hath  efpecial  Reafon  to  magnify  the 
Creator's  Goodnefs,  and  with  fuitabie  ardent  Affe- 
dions  to  be  thankful  unto  him. 


iy)  Tempefi'tvum  t'tbi  jam  fuer'tt,  qui  in  hifce  libris  verfaris 
confiderare,  in  utram  Familiam  recipi  malts,  Platonicamne  ac 
Hippocraticam,  z^  alio  rum  virorum,  qui  Nature  opera  miran-^ 
tttr ;  an  eorum  qui  ea  infe6iantur ,  quod  non  per  Pedes  natura 
confiituit  effiuere  Excrementa.  Of  which  having  told  a  Story 
of  an  Acquaintance  of  his  that  blamed  Nature  on  this  Ac- 
count ,  he  then  goes  on ,  At  vero  fi  de  hujufmodi  \pecu- 
dibus  piura  verba  fecero,  melioris  mentis  homtnes  merito  mi- 
hi  forte  fuccenfeant,  dicantque  me  polluere  facrum  fermonemt 
quern  ego  C  O  N  D  ITO  R  I S  nofiri  verum  Hymnum  componOy 

exifiimoque  in  eo  veram  ejfe  pietatem, ut  fi  noverim  ipfe 

primus,  deinde  zir  aliis  expofuerim,  qu£nam  fit  ipfius  Sapiential 
qui  Virtus,  qu&  Bonitaf.  &iuod  enim  cultu  conveniente  exor- 
naverit  omnia,  nuUiqtie  bona  inviderit,  id  perfe5lijfim&  Boni- 
tatis  Jpecimen  ejj'e  fiatua;  ^  hac  quidem  ratione  ejuf  Bonitas 
Jiymnis  nobis  efi  celebranda.  Hoc  autem  omne  invenijj'e  quo 
pacio  omnia  potiffimitm  adornarentur,  fumm&  SapientiA  efi : 
ejfeciffe  autem  omnia,  quA  voluftf  Virtutis  eft  inviilA,  Galen. 
deUr.  Part.  L,  3.  c.  10. 


CHAP. 


Chap.  VI.  435- 

CHAP.   VI. 

That  we  ought  to  pay  God  all  due  Homair^e  and 
fVor/hijp^  particularly  that  oft  he  Lords  T>ay. 

FOR  a  Conclufion  of  thefe  Lc(5l:urcs,  the  lad 
Thing  I  {hall  infer,  from  the  foregoing  De- 
monflration  of  the  Being  and  Attributes  of  G  O  D, 
fhall  be,  that  we  ought  to  pay  GO  D  all  that  Ho- 
mage and  IVorf.Hp  which  his  Right  of  Creation  and 
Dominion  entitle  him  unto,  and  his  great  Mercies 
call  for  'from  us.  And  forafmuch  as  the  Creator 
appointed,  from  the  very  Creation,  one  Day  in 
fcven  to  his  Service,  it  will  not  therefore  be  impro- 
per to  fay  lomething  upon  that  Subjeft  :  And  if  I 
infift  fomewhat  particularly  and  largely  thereon,  the 
Congruity  thereof  to  the  Dcfign  of  thefe  Lec- 
tures, and  the  foregoing  Demonllration,  together 
with  the  too  great  Inadvertency  about,  and  Neg- 
led:  of  this  ancient,  univerl'al,  and  molt  reafona- 
ble  and  necelTary  Duty,  will,  I  hope,  plead  my 
Excufe.  But  that  I  may  fay  no  more  than  is  necef- 
fary  on  this  Point,  I  fhall  confine  my  felf  to  two 
Things,  the  Time  God  hath  taken,  and  xhcBufwefs 
then  to  be  performed. 

I.  The  Time  is  one  Day  infeven,  and  one  of  the 
ancientefl:  Appointments  it  is  which  GOD  gave 
to  the  World.  For  as  foon  as  GO  D  had  finilhed 
his  fix  Days  Works  of  Creation,  it  is  faid,  Gen.  \\, 
Zj  ■^.  Oe  rejled OH  the fcuentb  Diy  from  all  his  IVork 
which  he  had  made.  And  GOD  blejfed  the  fe'venth 
Day^  and  fan^lificd  it,  hecauje  that  in  it  he  had  rejied 
from  all  his  IVork.    This  San6biiication  {a),  and 


{a  ^"Ip  Ufibus  div'tnis  accommodavit,  a  communi  Cf  fro- 
fano  ufu  jegrigavit,  in  ufum  facrum  ad  cultum  Deidtjlinavit. 
Kirch.  Concord,  p.  133O.  Deflinari  ad  aluiuid,  Hacrari,  ixc. 
Buxtorf.  in  Verbo. 

F  f  2  blcfling 


43^         Antiquity  of  the  Sabbath.  Book  XL 

blefling  the  Seventh  Day,  was  fetting  it'apart,  as  a  i 
Day  of  Diftin6lion  from  the  reft  of  the  Week-  ' 
Days,-  and  appropriating  it  to  holy  Ufes  and  Pur- 
pofes,  namely,  the  Commemoration  of  that  great 
Work  of  the  Creation,  and  paying  Homage  and 
Worship  to  that  infinite  Being,  who  was  the  Ef- 
fedor  of  it. 

This  Day,  thus  confecrated  from  the  Beginning, 
for  the  Celebration  of  the  r^jtiV/^y  '^kciov  the  World's 
Birth-Day^  as  Philo  calls  it,  was  probably  in  fome 
meafure  forgotten  in  the  following  wicked  Ages, 
which  God  complains  of,  Gen.  vi,  f.  and  fo  after 
the  Flood  likewife.  But  after  the  Return  out  of 
JEgypt^  when  GOD  fettled  thtjewijlj  Polity,  he 
was  pleafed  to  renew  this  Day,  and  to  eftablifh  it 
for  a  perpetual  ftanding  Law.  And  accordingly  it 
was  obferved  down  to  our  bleiTed  S  A  V I O  U  R's 
Time,  countenanced,  and  ftri6tly  obferved  by  our 
great  LORD  and  Mailer  himfelf,  and  his  Apo- 
Itles  and  Difciplcs  in,  and  after  his  Time  $  and  al- 
though for  good  Reafons  the  Day  was  changed  by 
them,  yet  a  feventh  Day  hath  been  conftantly  ob- 
ferved in  all  Ages  of  Chriftianity,  down  to  our 
prefent  Time. 

Thus  we  have  a  Day  appointed  by  G  O  D  him- 
felf, and  obferved  throughout  all  Ages ,  except 
fome  few  perhaps,  which  deferve  not  to  be  brought 
into  Example. 

And  a  wife  Defignation  of  Time  this  is,  well 
becoming  the  divine  Care  and  Precaution  j  ferving 
for  jthe  recruiting  our  Bodies,  and  difpatching  our 
Affiiirs,  and  at  the  fame  Time  to  keep  up  a  Spiri- 
tual Temper  of  Mind.  For  by  allowing  fix  Days 
to  labour,  the  Poor  hath  Time  to  earn  his  Bread, 
the  Man  of  Bufinefs  Time  to  difpatch  his  Affairs, 
and  every  Man  Time  for  the  Work  of  hisrefpec- 
tive  Calling.  But  had  there  been  more,  or  all  our 
Time  allotted  to  Labour  and  Bufinefs,  and  none  to 

reft 


QhNl.AfeveHtb^Day  a  "jL^'tfc  Appointment.  437 

reft  and  recruit,  our  Bodies  and  Spirits  would  have 
been  too  much  fatigued  and  wafted,  and  our  Minds 
have  been  too  long  engaged  about  worldly  Mntters, 
To  as  to  have  forgotten  divine  Things.  Butthc  in- 
finitely wife  Ruler  of  the  World,  having  taken 
the  feventh  Part  of  our  Time  to  his  own  Service, 
hath  prevented  thefc  Inconvenienciesj  hath  given 
a  Relaxation  to  our  felves  j  and  Eafe  and  Refrefh- 
ment  to  our  wearied  Beafts,  to  poor  fatigued  Slaves, 
and  fuch  as  are  under  the  Bondage  of  avaritious, 
cruel  Mafters.  And  this  is  oneReafon  Mofes  gives 
of  the  Refervation  and  Reft  on  the  Seventh  Day, 
Dciit.s.  13,14,  ij-.  Six  Days  pjalt  thou  labour^  and 
do  all  thy  Work  -,  but  the  Seventh  is  the  Sabbath 
of  the  LO RD  thy  GOD;  in  it  thou  /Jjalt  not 
do  any  Work^  thou,  nor  thy  Children,  Servants, 
Cattel,  or  Stranger,  that  thy  Man  Scyjant  and 
Alciid  Servant  may  refl  as  well  as  thou.  Jnd  re- 
member^ that  thou  wajl  a  Servant,  &cc.  therefore  the 
Lord  thy  God  commanded  thee  to  keep  the  Sabbath 
Day.  That  carnal,  greedy  People,  fo  bent  upon 
Gain,  without  luch  a  Precept,  would  have  fcarcs 
favoured  their  own  Bodies,  much  lefs  have  had 
Mercy  upon  their  poor  Bonds-men  and  Beafts, 
but  by  this  wife  Proviiion,  this  great  Burden  was 
taken  oft'.  But  on  the  other  hand,  as  a  longer 
Liberty  would  too  much  have  robbed  the  Maftei's 
Time,  and  bred  Idlenefs,  fo  by  this  wife  Provifi- 
on,  of  only  one  Day  of  Reft,  to  fix  of  Labour, 
that  Inconvenience  was  alfo  prevented. 

Thus  the  wile  Governour  of  the  World,  hath 
taken  Care  for  the  Difpatch  of  Bu(inefs.  But  then  as 
too  long  Engagement  about  worldly  Matters, would 
take  oft"  Mens  Minds  from  God  and  divme  Mat- 
ters, fo  by  this  Refervation  of  every  Seventh  Day, 
that  great  Inconvenience  is  prevented  alfoj  all  be- 
ing then  bound  to  worfhip  their  great  Lord  and 
Mafter,  to  pay  their  Homages,  and  Acknowledg- 

F  f  5  mcnts 


^3  8  Lord's  T>ay  muft  he  remember' d.  Book  XI. 

ments  to  their  infinitely  kind  Benefa61:or  5  and  in  a 
word,  to  exercife  themfelves  in  divine,  religious 
Bufinefs,  and  fo  keep  up  that  fpiritual  Temper  of 
Mind,  that  a  perpetual,  or  too  long  Application 
to  the  World  would  deiboy. 

This,  as  it  was  a  good  Reafon  for  the  Order  of 
a  Sabbath  to  the  Jews ;  fo  is  as  good  a  Reafon  for 
our  Saviour's  Continuance  of  the  like  Time  in  the 
Chriftian  Church. 

And  a  Law  this  is,  becoming  the  infinitely  wife 
Creator  and  Confervator  of  the  World,  a  Law, 
not  only  of  great  Ufe  to  the  perpetuating  the  Re- 
membrance of  thofegreateft  of  God's  Mercies  then 
commemorated,  but  alfo  exadly  adapted  to  the 
Life,  Occafions,  and  State  of  Man  j  of  Man  liv- 
ing in  this,  and  a-kin  to  another  World :  A  Law 
well  calculated  to  the  Difpatch  of  our  Affairs,  with- 
out hurting  our  Bodies  or  Minds.  And  fince  the 
Law  is  fo  wife  and  good,  we  have  great  Reafon 
then  to  pra61:ife  carefully  the  Duties  incumbent  up- 
on us j- which  will  fall  under  the  Confideration  of 
the 

IL  Thing  I  propofed,  the  Bufinefs  of  the  Day, 
which  God  hath  referved  to  himfelf.  And  there 
are  two  Things  enjoyned  in  the  Commandment,  a 
CeJJation  from  Labour  and  worldly  Bufinefs,  and 
ih-M^e.  remember  to  keep  the  Day  holy. 

I .  There  muft  be  a  Ceflation  from  worldly  Bu- 
finefs, or  a  Reft  from  Labour,  as  the  Word  Sab- 
bath (b)  fignifies.  Six  Days  thou  Jhalt  do  all  thy 
fFork^  but  the  Se'venth  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy 
GOD  (not thy  Day  but  his)  in  ivhich  neither  thou^ 
mr  any  belonging  to  thee^  Jhall  do  any  IVork.  1  n  wh  ich 
Injun6tion  it  is  obfervable,  how  exprefs  and  parti- 
cular this  Commandment  is,  more  than  others,  in 
ordering  all  Sorts  of  Perfons  to  ceafe  from  Work. 


1.  We 


Chap.  VI.  Lord's  T)ay  mufl  be  remember'' d.  ^n) 

I.  We  mud  remember  to  keep  the  Day  holy. 
Which  Remembrance  is  another  Thing  alfo  in  this, 
more  than  in  the  other  Commandments,  and  im- 
plies, 

ly?,  That  there  is  great  Danger  of  our  forget- 
ting, neglcfting,  or  being  hindrcd  from  keeping 
the  Day  holy,  cither  by  the  Infirmity  and  Carna- 
lity of  our  own  Nature,  or  from  the  Avocations 
of  the  World. 

2/>',  That  the  keeping  it  holy,  is  a  Duty  of  more 
than  ordinary  Confequence  and  Necedity.  And 
of  greatefl:  Confequence  this  is, 

/;>y?.  To  perpetuate  the  Remembrance  of  thofe 
grand  Works  of  G  O  D  commemorated  on  that 
Day  i  in  the  firft  Ages  of  the  World,  the  Crea- 
tion j  in  the  middle  Ages,  the  Creation  and  De- 
livery from  jEgypt ',  and  under  Chriflianity,  the 
Creation  and  Redemption  by  Chrift.  Which  Mer- 
cies, without  fuch  frequent  Occaiions,  would  be 
ready  to  be  forgotten,  or  difregarded,  in  fo  Jong 
a  Tradt  of  Time,  as  the  World  harh  already  Hood, 
and  may,  by  God's  Mercy  ftill  Hand. 

Secondly^  To  keep  up  a  fbiritual  Temper  of  Mind, 
by  thofe  frequent  weekly  Exercifcs  of  Religion,  as 
hath  been  already  mcntion'd. 

Thirdly^  To  procure  GOD's  BlcHing  upon  the 
Labours  and  Bufinefs  of  our  fix  Days,  which  we  can 
never  expc6l  fliould  be  profperous,  if  we  are  nc^ 
gligent  of  GOD's  Time.  For  how  can  wp  ex- 
pea  GOD's  Blefling  upon  a  Week  fo  ill  begun, 
with  a  Negled,  or  Abufe  of  GOD's  firrt  Day? 
And  therefore  if  we  become  unprofperous  in  the 
World)  if  Loflcs,  Troubles  or  Dangers  befall  us, 
let  us  reflcd  how  we  have  fpcnt  the  Lord's  Day  j 
whether  we  have  not  wholly  neglected  it,  or  abu- 
fed  it  in  Riot,  or  made  it  a  Day  for  taking  Jour.' 
neys,  for  more  private  Bufinefs,  and  Ids  fcancja- 
lous  Labour,  as  the  Cuilom  of  too  many  is. 

r  f  4  Thuj 


440  Lord'sDay  how  to  be  celebrated.  Book  XI. 

Thus  having  fhewn  what  Reafon  there  is  to 
remember  to  keep  holy  the  Day  dedicated  to  GOD, 
I  fhall  confider  how  we  are  to  keep  it  holy,  and 
fo  conclude.  Now  the  Way  to  keep  it  holy,  is 
not  by  bare  refting  from  Work  j  for  that,  as  a 
Father  faith,  is  Sabbatum  Bourn  (^  Afmorum^  a 
Sabbath  of  Beajls :  But  holy  Afts  are  the  proper 
Bufinefs  for  a  holy  Day,  celebrated  by  rational  Be- 
ings. Among  all  which,  the  grand,  principal, 
and  mofl-  univerfally  praelis'd,  is  the  Publick  IVor- 
fiip  of  GOD,  the  aflembling  at  the  publick  Place 
of  his  Worfhip,  to  pay  (with  our  Fellow- Creatures) 
our  Homages,  Thanks,  and  Praifes  to  the  infinite 
Creator  and  Redeemer  of  the  World.  This  as  it  is 
the  moft  reafonable  Service,  and  proper  Bufinefs 
for  this  Day,  fo  is  what  hath  been  the  Praftice  of 
all  Ages.  It  was  as  early  as  Cain  and  Abel's  Days, 
Gen.  iv.  3.  what  was  pra6lis'd  by  religious  Perfons 
in  the  following  Ages,  till  the  giving  of  the  Law} 
and  at  the  giving  of  that,  God  was  pleas'd  to  or- 
der Places,  and  his  particular  VVorfiiip,  as  well  as 
the  feventh  Day.  The  Tabernacle  and  Temple 
were  appointed  by  God's  exprefs  Command  j  be- 
fides  which,  there  were  Synagogues  all  over  the 
Nation  ;  fo  that  in  our  Saviour's  Time,  every 
great  Town  or  Village  had  one,  or  more  in  it, 
and  'jerufalem  460,  or  more  {c). 

The  Worfhip  of  thele  Places,  our  blefied  SA- 
VIOUR was  a  conftant  and  diligent  frequenter  of. 
'Tis  faid,  He  'went  about  all  the  Cities  and  Villages^ 
'Teaching  in  their  Synagogues^  and  Preaching,  and 
Healing,  6cc.  Mat.  ix.  ^f^  And  St.  Luke  report- 
eth  it  as  his  conflant  Cuftom  or  Pradice,  Luke  iv. 
16.  And  as  his  Ciiflom  was,  he  lijent  into  the  Syna* 
gogue  on  the  Sabbath- Day. 


(c)  Vid.  Lightfoot's  Works,  Vol:  a,  p.  35.  and  646. 

Having 


Chap.VI.  TublkkJVorJhipnot indifferent.  441 

Having  thus  mcntion'U  tlie  Prr<61icc  of  CHRIST, 
it  is  not  ncccniiry  1  flioulii  fay  much  of  the  Pra* 
6lice  of  his  Jpojlles^  and  the  following  purer  Ages 
of  Chriftianity,  who,  in  llioit,  as  their  Duty  was, 
dili<2,cntly  follow'd  their  great  Mallei's  Example. 
1'hcy  did  not  tbrnk  it  enough  to  read  and  pray.,  and 
praife  God  at  Home,  but  'made  Confcieuce  of  appear- 
iiig  in  the  publick  AJfemhlies,  from  which  nothing  hut 
Sicknefs  and  abfolute  Neceffity  did  detain  them  5  and 
if  Sick,  or  in  Prifon,  or  under  Banifiment,  nothing 
troubled  them  more,  than  that  they  could  not  come  to 
Church,  and  joyn  their  Dcjotions  to  the  common  Ser- 
"vices.  If  Perjecntion  at  any  Time  forc'd  them  to 
keep  a  little  Clofe  j  yet  no  fooncr  was  there  the  leajl 
Alitigation,  but  they  prefently  return  d  to  their  open 
Duty,  and  publickly  met  all  together.  No  trivial 
Pretences,  no  light  Excufes  were  then  admitted  for 
any  ones  Abfence  from  the  Congregation,  but  accord- 
ing  to  the  A^erkof  the  Cauje,  fever e  Cenfures  were 
pafs'd  upon  them,  6vc.  to  exprefs  it  in  the  Words 
of  one  of  our  bell  Antiquaries  (<r/). 

The  publick  IVorfnp  of  GOD  then,  is  not  a 
Matter  of  Indifference,  which  Men  have  in  their 
own  Power  to  do,  or  omit  as  they  pleafej  neither 
is  it  enough  to  read,  pray,  or  praife  God  at  Home, 
(unlefs  ibme  inevitable  Neceffity  hindereth  j)  bc» 
caufc  the  appearing  in  GOD's  Houfe,  on  his  Day, 
is  an  A6t  ot  Homage  and  Fealty,  due  to  the  CRE- 
ATOR, a  Right  of  Sovereignty  we  pay  him.  And 
the  with-holdmg  thofc  Rights  and  Dues  from 
GOD,  is  a  kind  of  rejecting  GOD,  a  difowning 
his  Sovereignty,  and  a  withdrawing  our  Obedi- 
ence and  Service.  And  this  was  the  very  Reafon 
why  [he  Profanation  of  the  Sabbath  was  punilh'd 
with  Death  among  the  Jews,  the  Sabbath  being  a 


{d)  Dr.  r-vc'i  Pr;>   Qhrljl.  Pir.  i.  c.  7. 

Sign, 


442'  TrofanationoftheSahbathy^c.  Book XI. 

Sign,  or  Badge  of  the  GOD  they  own'd  and 
worfhipp'd.  {e)  Thus  Exod.  xxxi.  15.  My  Sab- 
baths ye  jhall  keep  j  for  it  is  a  SIGN  between  me 
and  you^  throughout  your  Generations ;  that  ye  may 
know  that  I  am  the  LORD^  that  doth  fanBify  you  j 
or  as  the  Original  may  be  render'd,  a  Sign  to  ac- 
knowledge^ that  I  Jehovah  am  your  SanSiifier^  or 
your  God :  For  as  our  learned  Mede  obferves,  to  be 
the  San5lifier  of  a  People^  and  to  be  their  God,  is  all 
one.  So  likewife  very  expreflly  in  Ezek.  xx.  20. 
Hallow  my  Sabbaths^  and  they  Jhall  be  a  Sign  be" 


(e)  At  this  Day  it  is  cuflomary  for  Servants  to  wear 
the  Livery  of  their  Mailers,  and  others  to  bear  Badges  of 
their  Order,  Profeffion,  Servility,  c/c  So  in  former  Ages, 
and  divers  Countries,  it  was  ulual  to  bear  Badges,  Mark? 
and  Signs  on  divers  Occafions.  In  ETLek.  ix.  4.  A  Murk  was 
to  be  fet  on  the  Forehead  of  thofe  that  lamented  the  Abofnina- 
thns  of  the  City.  The  like  was  to  be  lonatupon  them  in 
Rev.  vii.  3,  and  ix.  4.  So  the  WorfliipperFof  the  Beaft,  Rev. 
xiii.  16.  were  to  receive  a  x'^^Vf^'^f  -^  Mark  in  their  right 
Hind,  on  their  Foreheads.  Thole  pt^a^ay/K.*?*,  1><p^yihi;,  Bad- 
ges, &c.  were  very  common.  Soldiers  and  Slaves  bare  them 
in  their  Arms  or  Foreheads;  fuch  as  were  matriculated  in 
the  Heterix,  or  Companies,  bare  the  Badge  or  Mark  of  their 
Company;  and  whoever  lifted  himfelf  into  the  Society  of 
any  of  the  feveral  Gods,  received  a  ;t«g^7^of,  or  a  Mark  in 
his  Body,  (commonly  made  with  red-hot  Needles,  or  fome 
burning  in  the  Flefli,)  of  the  God  he  had  lifted  himfelf  un- 
der. And  after  Chriftianity  was  planted,  the  Chriftians  had 
alfo  their  Sign  of  the  Crofs.  And  not  only  Marks  in  their 
Flefii,  Badges  on  their  Cloaths,  o'c.  were  qfual;  but  alfo 
the  Dedication  of  Days  to  their  imaginary  Deities.  Not 
to  fpeak  of  their  Feftivals,  crc.  the  Days  of  the  Week  were 
all  dedicated  to  fome  of  their  Deities.  Among  the  Romans, 
Sunday  and  Monday,  to  the  Sun  and  Moon;  Tuefday  to 
Mars,  Wednefday  to  Mercury,  &c.  So  our  Saxon  Ance- 
ftors  did  the  fame  ;  Sunday  and  Monday,  (as  the  Romans 
did,)  to  the  Sun  and  Moon;  Tuefday  to  Tuyfco;  Wednef- 
day to  Woden ;  Thurfday  to  Thor ;  Friday  to  Friga ;  and  Sa- 
turday to  Seater :  An  Account  of  which  Deities,  with  the 
Figures  under  which  they  were  worfhipp'd,  may  be  met 
with  in  our  learned  Verflegan.    Chap.  3.  p.  68. 

tween 


Chap. VI.  NcceJJityofTiihVtckJVorjh'tp.  443 

tiveen  me  and  you,  that  ye  may  know  that  J  am  the 
LORD  your  GOD  -,  or  rather  as  before,  to  ac* 
knowledge  that  I  JEHOVAH  am  your  GOD. 

The  Sabbath  being  thus  a  Sign,   a  Mark,   or 
Badge,  to  acknowledge  God  to  be  their  God,  it 
follows,    that   a   Neglcd   or   Contempt  of  that 
Day,   redounded  to  GOD  j    to  flight  that,    was 
flighting  Godj    to  profane  that,    was  to  affront 
Godj  for  the  Punifliment  of  which.  What  more 
equitable  Penalty  than  Death?    And  although  un- 
der Chriftianity,   the  Punifliment  is  not  made  Ca- 
pital,   yet  have  we  no  lels  Reafon  for  the  flridt 
Obfervance  of  this  holy  Day,  than  the  Jews,  but 
rather  greater  Rcafons.     For  the  GOD  we  wor- 
fliip,    is  the  fame:    If  after  fix  Days  Labour,  he 
was,  by  the  Seventh,   own'd  to  be  GOD,   the 
Creator -y  no  lefs  is  he  by  our  Chriftian  Lord's  Day: 
If  by  the  Celebration  of  the  Sabbath,  the  Remem- 
brance of  their  Deliverance  from   the  ./Egyptian 
Bondage  was  kep^up,   and  GOD  acknowledged 
to  be  the  Effcder  thereof  i  we  Chriftians  have  a 
greater  Deliverance,  wc  own  our  Deliverance  from 
Sin  and  Satan,   wrought  by  a  greater  Redeemer 
than  Mofes,  even  the  blcfled  JESUS,  whofc  Re- 
furrcdion,  and  the  Completion  of  our  Redemp- 
tion   thereby,    was    pcrform'd   on   the   Chriflian 
Lord's- Day. 

And  now  to  fum  up,  and  conclude  thefc  In- 
ferences, and  fo  put  an  End  to  this  Part  of  my 
Survey :  Since  it  appears,  that  the  Works  of  the 
LORD  arc  fo  great,  fo  wifely  contriv'd,  fo  accu- 
rately made,  as  to  deferve  to  be  enquir'd  into  -, 
fince  they  are  alfo  fo  manifeft  Demonllrations  of 
the  Creator's  Being  and  Attributes,  that  all  the 
World  is  fcnfible  thereof,  to  the  great  Reproach 
of  Atheifm  :  What  remaineth  ?  But  that  we  Icar 
and  obey  {o  great  and  tremendous  a  Ikmg  j  that 
we  be  truly  thankful  for,  and  magnify  and  prailc 

his 


444  ^^^  Conclujion.  'Book  XI. 

his  infinite  Mercy,  manifefted  to  us  in  his  Works, 
And  forafmuch  as  he  hath  appointed  a  Day  on 
iPurpofe,  from  the  Beginning,  for  thefe  Services, 
that  we  may  weekly  meet  together,  commemorate 
^nd  celebrate  the  great  Work  of  Creation,  that 
isve  may  pay  our  A£ls  of  Devotion,  Worfhip,  Ho- 
mage iind  Fealty  to  him  5  and  fince  this  is  a  wife 
and  excellent  Diftribution  of  our  Time,  What 
fliould  we  do,  but  confcientioufly  and  faithfully 
pay  GOD  thefe  his  Rights  and  Dues  ?  And  as 
carefully  and  diligently  manage  GOD's  Time  and 
Difcharge  his  Buimefs  then,  as  we  do  our  own 
Upon  our  fix  Days  5  particularly  that  with  the 
pious  Pfalmiji^  IVe  love  the  Habitation  of  God's 
Houfe^  and  the  Place  where  his  Honour  dwelleth  -, 
and  therefore  take  up  his  good  Refolution  in  Pfal. 
V.  7.  with  which  I  fhall  conclude  >  But  as  for  me^ 
J  will  come  into  thine  Houfe  in  the  Multitude  of  thy 
Mercy ^  and  in  thy  Fear  will  I  worfjjip  towards  thy 
holy  Temple. 

Now  to  the  fame  infinite  GOD,  the  omni- 
potent Creator  and  Preferver  of  the  W^orld,  the 
moft  gracious  Redeemer,  Sandtifier,  and  Infpirer 
of  Mankind,  be  all  Honour,  Praife  and  Thanks, 
now  and  ever.     Amen. 


H 


F.W.jJ 


m^Si^^M^ 


A 


TABLE 


O  F    T  H  E 


Principal  Matters  contained  in  this" 
BOOK. 


A'  Pages 

ABHinence  unufual      ii  r 
Age  of  Man  in  all  Ages 
or  the  World  lyz 

Aged  Perfons  173 

Ages  of  Learning  and  Igno- 
rance 172. 
Air  4 
—^Innate  lii 
— Neceffary  to  Vegetable- 
Life  9 
— VelTels  in  Vegetables  406 
— Bladder  of  Fiflres  401 
•^Pump,  Experiments  in  it  5 
— Ule  in  enlightning  the 

World  Tz 

—Heat  under  the  Line,  and 
in  Lat.  81.  13 

Alee  and  Machlis  317 

Aloe  Americana  410 

Amphibious  Oeatures  157 
Anatomy  comparative  3r8 
Anger  307 

Animals  in  general  84 

— In  Particular  iCo 

— Places  dellroy'd  by  vile 

ones  56 

Animalcules  of  the  Waters 

186  J87  401 
— In  Pepper- Water  368 

Ant  111  37 1 

Antipathy  135 

Aqueous  Humour  of  the  Rye 
repair'd  ic6 

Aiabians  17^ 

Archytas's  Dove        ij6  176 


Art  and  Nature  compar'd 

Page  4z6 
Armature  of  Animals  23S 
Arteries  '301 

Arts,  by  whom  invented  17<5 
Afcent  of  Liquors.  ji 

Afckpiades  160  190  430 

Afpera  Arteria  in  Birds  341 
Afs  free  from  Lice  377 

Atniofphcre  4 

Attratftion  31  40  5^ 

Auditory  Nerves  riS 

Augullus  Gaefar's  Height  io<> 
Augullus  King  of  Poland  igt 
Aurtrian- Wells,  how  made  ^6 

B 

BAck-bone  k^o 

Badges,  their  Antiquity 
441 
Balance  of  Animals 
Balls  on  Vegetables 
Bat 
Beaver 
Bees 
Beetles 
Bcjuco-Tree 
Bembsbury-Camp 
Birch-Tree 


168 

^34387 
S3i<J 

316 
231  240 

3<^3 


Birds 

—Bills 

— Boyancy 

— lu^ 

— Incubation 


191 


4^3 

64 

213 

333 
34.4 
34t>' 
IM  342 
35i 


341 


— A  wonderful  Inll in (51  of  one 
232 

6  -M-;a- 


The   TABLE. 


—Migration  Page  347 

—Motion  164 

—Necks  and  Legs     165  34^ 
•—Rapacious  is<5 

—Stomachs  34f 

Births,  Burials,  &c.  174 

Blood,  its  Contrivance 

20I  32.9 
Blood-Hound  104 

Bluftiing,  how  caufed       307 
Bohaques  iii 

Bonafus  ^4'^ 

Bones  ftrudure,  &c. 

159  Z94  300 
Brachmans  169 

Brain  319 

Branches  of  Vegetables    418 
Bread  i8j 

Breafts  ^SS 

Breath  ftiort  on  high  Moun- 
tains 6 
Bredon-hill                         64 
Breezes,  Sea  and  Land  18  19 
Briar-Balls                        39° 
Brutes  out-do  Man  in  fome 
Things                      80  85 
Bulbous  Plants                  4" 
Butterflies  Colours           365 
—White  ones           37°  37^ 
C 

CAbbage  Excrefcences  249 
Cadews  234 

Camel  314 

Canales  Semicirculares      l^^ 
Capillary  Plants  have  Seed 

410 
Cardamine  414 

Carotid  Arteries  311 

Carps  7 

Cartes  vindicated  271 

Caffada  Plant  58 

Cafes  on  Willow  and  other 
Vegetables  387 

Caftor  198  316 

Caterpillars  241  39J 

Caves  bellowing  130 

— Goutiers  and  others  64  67 
Celandine  42-0 

z 


Camaeleon  Pages  91  240 
Chance  189  194  313  435 
Cheep's  Height  290 

Chickens  210 

Children  numerous  178 

China  279 

Chyle  200 

Circulation  of  the  Blood  re- 

ftor'd  145 

Clafpers  419 

Clocks  Variation  under  the 

iSquinodlial  39 

Clock-work,  its  Invention 

17J 
Cloathing  of  Animals  214 
Clouds  20  49  74 

Cold,  how  provided  againft  in 
the  northern  Regions    217 
Colours  felt  143 

Colymbi  3^5 

Combs  of  Bees,  &c.  232 
Coneys  229 

Confent  of  Parts,  whence  305 
Cormorants  Eye  104 

Cortex  Peruvianus  421 

Countenance,  whence  its  va- 
riation arifes  308 
Cranes  208 
Cricket  •  365 
—Mole  2.33»3^J 
Crocodile  238  243 
Crofs-Bill  193 
Crow  307 
Cryftalline  Humour  104 
Cuntur  of  Peru  169 
Cup  of  a  Pepper-Corn  367 
D 

DAndelion  412 

Dangerous  Things  not 
eafily  difcover'd  266 

Daniel  270 

Day  and  Night  45 

Days  of  the  Week  436 

Dead  Perfons  found  in  the 

fame  Pofture  as  alive      24 
Deaf  Perfons  cured  by  a  Fe- 
ver 304 
— Underftand  by  the  Motion 
of 


The  T  A  B  L  E. 


of  the  Lips  Page  1 1 3 

—Hear  by  ihc  Help  ot  a  Noilc 

116 

Death-Watch  59 

Deer,  Worms  in  their  Heads 

379 
Degree,  its  Meafurc  43 

Defcent  of  heavy  Bodies  31 
Dellru(flion  of  Places  by  vile 

Animals  SS 

Dialecfts  309 

Diamonds  grow  64 

Diaftole  of  the  Heart  147 
Digel^ion  189 

Difeafes  fometimes  ufeful  304 
Diftribution  of  the  Earth  and 

Waters  is  well  47 

Dittany  410 

Divers  131 

Dog-Fidi  ZC9 

Dogs  197,  204 

Dolphin  238 

Douckers  355 

Drebell's  fubmarinc  Ship  5 
Drink  afforded  by  Plants  422 
Dromedary  199,  324 

Drowned    Perfons    reviving 

Ducklings  naturally  run  to  the 
Wntx  168,  18S 

Ducks  Bills  193,205 

Dugs  255 

Dung  a  guard  to  Animals  242 
E. 

EAgle  206,230,347 

—Wooden  one  of  Re- 
giomontanui  276,356 

Ear,  outer  in  divers  Animals 
115,  117 
—  inward  120 

—in  the  Womb  120 

— Confent  with  other  Parts 
128 
— EfFedsof  its  Lofs         u8 
— Mulclcs  119 

— Wax  II  r 

Earth-worm  223,393,399 
Earwig  3<i.: 


Eds 
tggs 
—  Cicatnciiia  and 


Pjge  20} 

35« 
Trcddics 

—  Of  Inferts  well  laid  up  38* 

—  due  Number  laid  251 
Egypt  famed  for  Art  269 
Elephant  256,316,  323 
Elcphantiafis  398 
Queen  /:/;~di#//»'$  Height  290 
Elk  316 
Elm  Leaves,  a  Scarab  bred 


,   therein 

l^phcmeron 

Epicurus 

Erea  Vifion 

Evaporations 

—  howcaufed 

Excellence  of  God's 


250 

182,234,  247 

160,  19.0 

III 

35 
48 

Works 

87 

103 

93 

lOf 

X06 
107 


Eye 

—  of  Birds  and  Fifiics 

—  Monocular 

—  Shining  or  Feline 

—  Wounds  of  it  cured 
Eyc-hds,  Struaure,c;'c. 

F. 

FAce  308,  309 

Farcy  cured  58 

Fearful   Animals   couragious 
when  they  haveYoung  208, 

Feathers  221,334,336 

Feeding  the  Young  255 

Feeling  141 

Fern-feed  410,414 

Feet  163,206,233,338 

Figure  of  Man's  Body      288 
Fingers  183 

Fiflies  Agreement  with  Birds, 
103,  341,402 


——Boyancy  whence 
-^Lowfy 
—Motion,  erf. 

Teeth 

Flowers 
Fleih-FIy,  cT-f. 
FJy  of  Iron 


10 
378 
40} 

195 

407 

»48 

275 

Flying 


The  TABLE. 


Flying  Page  338 

— Of  Man  2.67  337 

Fostus,  Blood's  Circulation  in 
it  153 

Folding  of  Leaves  and  Flow- 
ers 407 
Food  of  Animals      179,254 
Fool,  Obfervables  in  one  o- 
pened                           329 
Foot                         285,316 
Foraraen  Ovale  154, 157,  326 
Foffiks  63 
Fouritains  where  found      65 
—  brigine     23,25,51,75 
Fox .                                204 
Froedlicius's  Obfervations  on 
Mount  Carpathus          131 
Frogs                         I 63 > 3^5 

'Rain  ^4S 

The  great  Froft  218 

Frniits,  where  Infe<fts  hatch  3  7  5 , 
——communicate  with    the 
Root  405^ 

Fuci,  Fungi,  Cfc   and  their 
Seed  414 

G. 

GAlens  Arguments  againft 
Chance  26,428,430 
— his  Hymns  to  God  425,  434 
Galli  Sylveftres  212,229 
Galls  388 

Gafcoigne  Knight  134 

Gems,  and  Stories 


—  of  Vegetables 

Generation 

— — j5iquivocal 

-^ —  Of  Infeds 

Grenius  of  Man 

Giants. 

Gifts  of  Man  are 


of  them 
311 

407 
244, 145 


244,  380 

374 
264 
289 
of  God 
263,  268 
—r- to  be  improved  281 
Gill's  of  Fifties  401 

Gizzard  199,  345 

Giama  242 

Glands  196 

Glaffes  broken  with  the  Voice 
135 


Glaucus  209 

Gnat  191, 367 

Generation        375?  383 

Goat  tame  and  wild  3  r  7 

Graftioppers  363 

Gratitude  from  Seneca       432 
Gravity  31 

Green,   Anne,    revived  after 
being  hanged  156 

Green  Scum  on  the  Waters 
187 
Grotta  delli  Serpi  398 

Grottos  67 

— Podpetfchio  68 

Growth  of  Grain  fpeedy  in 
the  frigid  Zone  184 

Gryllctalpa  233,  365 

Guira  Tangeima  232 

Gullet  196 

Guns  heard  afar  off  133 

— Shot,  its  Velocity  28 

Guts  200 

Gymnofophills  269 

H 

HAbitatioiis  of  Animals 
226 
Hair  220 

Hapd  282  298 

— Writing  308 

Hanged  Perfons  reviving  146 
Hang-Neft  232 

Hare  242 

Hawks  206 

Head  of  Birds  340 

Headlefs  People  89 

Hearing  113 

— How  perform'd     124  342 
Heart  298  325 

— Of  the  Lamprey  300 

— Situation  in  Quadrupeds 

3^^ 

Heat  Subterraneous  49 

— Of  the  torrid  Zone    17  50 

— Of  our  Bodies  17 

—And  Cold  not  Effects,  but 

Caufes  of  the  Variations 

of  the  Winds  ij 

Heavy  Bodies  defcent        31 

Hedge- 


The  T  A  B  L  E. 


Hedge-hog  139 

Hemlock  58 

Heron  256,  347 

Hills  run  Eatt  and  Weft     74 
Hollanders  faw  the  Sun  foon- 
cr  than  ordinary  near  the 
Pole  13 

Homer  afcribes  Men's  En- 
dowments to  God         163 
Honeywood  Mrs.  Mary  175 
Hop-ltrngs  Ufe 
Vifible  Horizon 
Hornets  ipij 

Horfe-Fly 
Hurtful  Creatures  few 


Hyaena 
Hydrocanthari 
I. 


J 


40  s 
183 

^57 
148 

170, 

205 
3^3 

194 


Aws 

Ichneumon-Fly  575,  379, 
385,388 

Wafp         37i>384.  38s 

Henry  Jenkins  Age  173 

Ignorant  Ages  271 

Impofthume    unufually    dif- 

charged  30Z 

Incubation  253,  351 

Inclinations  of  Men  263 
Incus  Auris  123 

Infant's  Eat  in  the  Womb  120 
Inferiour  Creatures  cared  for 
58,213, 2j8 
Infers  359 

*—— Antenna  361,362 

•— -  Care   of    their   Young 
207, 129,373 
*'■     'Conveyance  from  Place 

to  Place  fmgular  364 

■  '■       Cornea  and  Eyes     359 

—  ■       Male  and  Female  how 

known  363 

—  Mouth  189,193,233 
*  ■' -  Nidification  383 
'  Poiles  366 
— —  Sagacity  369 
r— Shape  359 


Inftindl    203,114,119,231 
137 

Intercoftal  Mufclcs  151 

Nerves  318,  330 

Invention  265 

of  the  AnciciUs       276 

Job  269 

Joints  161 

Iron  in  the  Foreft  of  Dean  63 
Iflands,  why  warmer  than  the 
Continents  49 

IflTue  numerous  178 

July  396 

Ivy  418 

K. 

Klfling,  whence  it  affecfts 
306 
Knives,  o'c.   fwallowcd  and 
difcharged  301 

L. 

LAbyrinthofiheEar    127 
Ladeals  200 

Lakes  2r7 

Larynx  148 

Laughter,  howcaufed      306 
Learned  Men  273 

Ages  272 

Leaves  of  Vegetables       250 
■  InfeAs  bred   in    them 

250,  376 
io6,  298,316,338 


3S 

377 

8 

S 

173 


Legs 

Levity 

Lice 

Life  in  Vacuo 

in  compreflfed  Air 

iti  Length 

Caufcof  long  Life 

— —  Proportion  to  Death  176 
Light  12,26 

—— its  Velocity  28,29 

Expanfion  and  Extent  30 

l^ikeneis  of  Men  308 

Lion's  Bones  318 

Liilning,  what  it  doth      ia6 
Lord's- Day  ^-j^e 

Why  Capital  among  the 

Jews  to  prophanc  it      443 

Lungs  i4s,  r^o 

C  g  Fun 


The  T  A  B  L  E. 


Full  of  Duft 

151 

of  Birds 

346 

Luxury 

M 

310 

A  TAggots  in  Sheeps 
IVJL  fes,  Cows  Back, 

No- 

378 

Magnet 

274 

Magnus  Orbis 

33 

Males  and  Females  Propor- 

tions 

175 

Malleus  auris,  by  whom  dif- 

covered 

123 

Man 

X70 

Whether  all  Things 

made 

Mulcles  158,194,198 

——Equilibrations  oi  thofe 

of  the  Eye  96 

■  Triangular  153 

Mulick,  by  whom  invented 

266 

EfFeSs  134 

MuftardSeed  411 


for  him 
Mandevilhy  Sir  J&hn 
Manfor 
Marfh-Trefoil 
Marriagcs>  Births  and 

als 
Mafti  cation 

Medicine  57 

— —  Local 
Memory 
Metallick  Trades, 

invented 
Mice  212 

Migration  of  Birds 
Milk 
Minerals    and  Metak 


8,9i.i99»^05 


N 


55 
89 

278 

421 

Buri- 

174 
196 
.  4^0 
421 
262 
by  whom 
166 

_220 

347 

grow 
63 
415 
319 
u6 
311 
365 
158 


Mifleltoe 
Mole 

Ear 

Money 

Moths  Colours 

Motion  of  Animals 

—  of  the  Terraqueous  Globe 

43 

Motory-Nerves  of  the  Eye 

106 

Mountains  and  Valleys  70 
— —  Their  Riches  and  Pover- 
ty 75 
Mouth  189 
——  Whence  affedled  by  the 
Sight                            307 


N. 

Eck  of  Beafts 
Nerves  in  Birds 
205 
Man 


m 


Different 

Beafts 
Fifth  Pair 

Water-Newt 
Nidicating  Membrane 
Nidificaiion 
Nidiots  or  Niditts 
Nodurnal  Animals  Eyes 


322 
Bills 

,344 
and 


3^8,330 
306 
163 
109 
232 
191 
100 
Northern    Nations  ,    fpeedy 
Growth  of  Vegetables  there 
184 
— —  Proviiions  againft  their 
Cold  217 

Noftrils  137 

Noxious  Creatures      56,82, 
252 
— —  Remedies  againft  them 
57 
Nutmegs  416 

O. 
^Ak-Apples  and  Galls  38J 
Objetfts,   how  painted 
on  the  Retina  iir 

Obfervatory  at  Pekin  in  Chi- 
na 279 
Odours  J37 
Old  Perfons                     172 
Opium                             421 
Opoffum                   206,208 
Original  of  Nations  and  Arts 
276 
Orkney  Ifiands  218 
Os  Orbicularc,  by  whom  dif^ 
covered  124 

Oftrich 


o 


The  T  A  B  L  E. 


Ollrich  Pages  ZS9  353  354 
Ottclc's  Age  aad  Beard  1 7  3 
Otter  316 

Oyl-Bag  334 

P. 

PArrots  19^ 
y^thiopian        zo8 

ParVagum  3^8 

PafTions  and  AfFedions     330 
PcdinatedWork  in  Birds  Eyes 
103 
Pedoral  Mufcles  337 

Pendulums  Variation    under 
the  Line  39 

Pericardium  in  Man  andBeafts 
185,317 
Perpetual  Motion  267 

Perlpiration  inlenfible  119 
Phaeton  in  a  Ring  367 

Phalaenae, Generation  of  fome 
of  them  zij,  376 

Pharmacy  57 

Phryganeae  234 

Pigeons  Incubation  253 

Pimpernel  Flowers  412. 

Place  of  Animals  166 

Plague,  its  Caufe  16 

Prevented  or  cured  by 

the  Winds  ibid. 

-        Sore  difcharged  unufual- 

ly  302 

Planets  Motion  round  their 

Axes  33 

Figure  39 

Plants,  no  Tranfmutation  of 

them  409 

■         Poyfonous  58 

Plexus  Cervicalis  318 

Plumb-Stones,  the  Danger  of 

fwallowmg  them  301 

Polling  of  the  Body        18 1 

Polygamy  unnatural         175 

Pofture  of  Man  i8i 

Poyfon  397 

Preening    and    Drcffing    of 

Birds  334 

Printing,  its  Invention 

^1S  ^78 


Pronunciation  Pages  309 
Propagation  of  Mankind  174 
Providence  divine,  Objcifli- 

ons  againft  it  anfwer'd  55 
Pulices  Aquatici  186 

Pumps,  caufe  why  Water  ri- 

feth  in  them  ii 

Pupil  of  the  Eye  99  100 
Pythagoras  169 

Q 

Quadrupeds  31  j 

Quail  Migration  and 
iucngth  350 

R 

RAin,  how  made         ro 
•  —Its  Ufe  ibid 

— Moft  about  the  ^Equinoxes 

IX, 

— More  in  the  Hills  than 

Vales  78 

— Bloody,  and  other  preter- 
natural 13  Z45 
— Of  divers  Places  13  79 
Rapacious  Birds  339 
Rattles,  Inventions  of  them 
Z76 
Rattle-Snake  57  39<5 
Rats  108  zzo 
Raven  183  Z05 
Refracflions  13  Z84 
The  Reformation  Z78 
Reptiles  393 
Refpiration  145 
—Of  watery  Animals  7 
— ill  Vegetables  406 
— In  comprelTed  Air  5 
— In  rarify'd  Air-  6 
— Ufes  145 
Rete  mirabilc  3zz 
Ribs  ijz  161 
Rivers  Origin  75 
— Changing  the  Hair  zz4 
-—Long  Tradl  of  fome  51 
Rotten-Wood,  its  ufc  to  the 
northern  People  405 
Royal  Society  vindicated  4x6 
Rumination               100  3Z4 


G  6  1 


RuHies, 


The  T  A  B  L  E. 


Ruftics,  Animals  bred  in  tjiem 
Page  349 
S 

SAgacity  of  Animals  about 
Food  202. 

Salamander  241 

Saltnefs  of  the  Sea  400 

Skeleton  of  Sexes  different 

I  (jo 
Scolopendra  396 

Sea-Calf  ^S7  3^S 

Sea-Pie  193 

Secretion  300 

Security  of  the  Body  againft 

Evils  ibid 

Seed  of  Vegetables   437,  &c. 
Self-Prefervation  238 

Semination  412 

The  five  Senfes  85 

Senfitive  Plants  412 

Serpents  394 

Shark  57  143 

Shells  239 

Sight,  its  Accuracy  in  fome 
87 
— Acuated  by  Difeafe       304 
—Why  not  double  with  two 
Eyes  94 

Silk-Worms  385 

Skin  299 

Sky,  why  azure  12 

Sleep  procur'd  58 

—Prejudicial  after  Sun-rifing 
46 
Smellen  Cave  130 

SmeHing  137  204 

Smoak  emitted  through  the 

Ears  123 

Snails  91  no  395  399 

Snakes  394 

Snipes  192 

Snow,  its  Ufe  24 

Soils  and  Mould?  61 

Sound  in  Air  rarify'd  and 

condcns'd  130 

—In  Italy,  and  other  Places 

133 
r-On  the  Tops  of  high 


Mountains       Page  131 
—Velocity  28  133 

Soul  261 

Speaking-Trumpet  129 

Specifick  Medicines  422 

Spiders  Eyes  90 

— Darting  their  Webs  364 
— Textrine  Art  235  384 
— Poyfon  236 

Spinning,  by  whom  invented 

Springs  Origine  23  51  76 
— Where  found  ^S  11 

Squaring  the  Circle  266 

Squatina  209 

Squillulse  Aquaticae  190  364 
Squunk  or  Stonk  242 

Staladites  "64 

Stapes  Auris,  by  whom  found 
out  123 

Stature,  Size,  and  Shape  of 
Man  288  290 

Sting  of  Bees,  Sec.  240 

Stoicks  Arguments  for  a  De- 
ity in  Tully  2  37  44  54 
99  108  rzo  137  144  159 
167  177  180  182  203  207 
220  241  264  282  297  298 
Stomach  197  324 

— Of  Birds  345 

— Animals  found  in  it  379 
Stones  eaten  by  Worms 

192  247 
Storm  in  1703  245^ 

Strata  of  the  Earth  63 

Straw-Worms  234 

Strong  Men  291 

Subterraneous  Trees,  &c.  i  r 
Sucking  209  25J 

Summer  if  cold,  why  wet  22 
Sun's  Diftance  from  the 

Earth  29  30 

— Motion  round  its  own 

Axis  33 

— Standing  ftill,  &c.  44  45 
Swallows  and  Swifts  339  349 
Swans  Afpera  Arteria  341 
Swine,  205  212  254  319 

Sword- 


The   T  A  B  L  E. 


Sword-Fiflies  Eye  icj 

Sycophantick-l'lants         415 

Syraculian  Sot  351 

T 

TAbon  or  Tapun  Bird 
3S3 
Tadpole  163 

Tail* of  Birds  337 

Tarantula's  Bite  13s 

Taftc  14^ 

—Cenfent  with  the  Smell  141 
Tears  108  307 

Teeth  193 

Tdefcopes,  Invention  of 

them  Z7  5 

— Long  ones  39 

Tents,  their  Inventer       266 
Terraqueous  Globe  balanced 

48 
—Bulk  and  Motions  43 

»— Figure  39 

—Situation  and  Diftribution 
4647 
•— Objecflions  againft  its  Stru- 
dure  anfwer'd  47  70  80 
— Caufe  of  Its  Sphaericity  40 
Thankfulnels  to  God  from 

Seneca  54  81  216  433 

Thirties  ufeful  in  making 

Glafs  405 

Thornback  loi 

Tides  400 

Tong-tail'd  Titmou'"c       231 
Tongue  149  295 

—Its  Lofs  149 

Tortoife  158  211  224239  325 
Trades,  Inventors  of  them, 

&c.  266 

Tranfmutation  of  Plants  409 
Trees  delight  in  various  Soils 
6r 
—how  nouriflied  ibid 

Tronningholm  Gardiner  ijf 
Tuba  F.ultachian^  122 

The  hot  Tuefday  17 

Tunicks  of  the  Eye,  why 

lin'd  with  black  96 

Turnep  Excrefccnces       249 


Tympsnum  of  the  Ear 

Page  123 
V 

V  Alleys  and  Mountains  73 
Vapours  what,  and 
how  rais'd  20  48 

—Quantity  rais'd  35 

—How  precipitated  22 

Variety  of  I'hings  for  the 

World's  Ufe  5  3  181  404420 
Vegetables  404 

Vegetation  61 

Veins  298 

Ventriloquous  Perfons      149 
Vertue,  its  great  Ufe  and 

Benefit  83 

Veficulae  of  the  Lungs  whe- 
ther mufculous  ijr 
Velpae-Ichneumons  228  363 
371  38s 
V)pers                        394  397 
— Cloathing                        224 
Vifcera                              298 
Vifion  double  95 
— Erecft                              lie 
Unilons                             13^ 
Voice                                308 
Volcano's                           <58 
Upminftcr  Regifter           174 
—how  much  above  the  Sea  51 
Ufeful  Creatures  moll  plenti- 
ful                                 169 
—Things  fooneft  difcover'd 
1(56 
W 

WAnderingJew         173 
Wafps  Nidification 

191  233  M7  3% 
Waters  400 

—Forcible  Eruptions  of  them 

Waterwirh  of  Jamaica  423 
Weather  heavy  and  dark  20 
— Prefages  of  it  50412 

Wells  how  dug  in  Aurtria, 

W'hales  401 

Wheal  181 

T!-R.ainino: 


The  T  A  B  L  E. 


—Raining  it  Page  144 

Whifpering-Places  119 

Wild- Pine  4Zi 

Dr.  Willis's  Reprefentation  of 
Refpiration  145 

Winds  14 

—Healthful  15  16 

—The  Author's  Obfervations 

19 
^-Trade-Winds  41 

—The  Produdt,  not  caufe  of 

Heat  and  Cold  15 

Wind-Pipe  in  divers  Animals 
149 
Wings  of  Birds  335 

—Of  Infeds  365 

Winter,  the  Prefervation  of 

Aninoals  therein  tii 

Wifdom,  where  feated  319 
Wood  2,Z7 

Woodcocks  191  20J 

Wood-Peckers    193  339  342. 


Works  of  Nature  and  Art 

compar'd        Pages  38  367 
World  vifible  and  invifible 

41 
— Beginning  afferted  by  Ari- 
flotle  177 

—Kept  clean  183 

Worms  in  the  Flefli         378 
—In  the  Guts  380 

— In  other  Parts  ibid 

Wornils  378 

Worfliip  ,of  God  441 

Wry- Neck  2x5  i^z 

Y 

YOlk  of  the  Egg  its  Ufe 
351 
Young  taken  Care  of       207 
—In  a  certain  Number 

168  t^z 
Z 
'TF  Irchnitzer  Sea  68 


FINIS. 


V^OOl^S  printed  for  W I  lli  am  and 
John  Innys. 

MR.  Derham's  Aftro-Theology :  Or,  A  DcmonHration 
of  the  Being  and  Attributes  of  God,  from  a  Suivey 
of  the  Heavens,  illuthated  with  Copper-Plates.  The  Third 
Edition,  Odavo,  17 19. 

The  Wifdom  of  God  manifeftcd  in  the  Works  of  the 
Creation.  In  Two  Parts,  viz.  The  Heavenly  Bodies,  Ele- 
ments, Meteors,  Follils,  Vegetables,  Animals,  Beafts,  Birds, 
Fifties,  and  Infers)  more  particularly  in  the  Body  of  the 
Earth,  its  Figure,  Motion  andConfiftency  in  the  admirable 
Strudure  of  the  Bodies  of  Man,  and  other  Animals ;  as  alfo 
in  their  Generation,  &c.  With  Anfwers  to  fome  Objecftions. 
By  John  Ray,  late  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.  The  Se- 
venth Edition,  Od:ivo,  1717. 

Three  Phyfico-Theological  Difcourfes,  concerning, 

I.  The  Primitive  Chaos,  and  Creation  of  the  World.  II.  The 
general  Deluge,  its  Caufes  and  EfFeds.  HI.  The  Difluluti- 
on  of  the  World,  and  future  Conflagration.  Wherein  are 
largely  difcuffed  the  Production  and  Ufe  of  Mountains ;  the 
Original  of  Fountains,  of  formed  Stones,  and  Sea  Fifties 
Bones  and  Shells  found  in  the  Earth  ;  the  EfFeds  of  parti- 
cular Floods,  and  Inundations  of  the  Sei,  the  Eruptions  of 
Vulcano's;  the  Nature  and  Caufes  of  Earthquakes.  Alfo  an 
Hiftorical  Account  of  thofe  two  Lite  remarkable  ones  in  Ja- 
maica and  England.  With  Pra<51ical  Inferences.  The  Third 
Edition.  lUuftrated  with  Copper-Plarcs,  and  much  more 
enlarged  than  the  former  Editions,  from  the  Author's  own 
Manufcripts,  Odlavo,  17 13. 

Philofophical  Letters  between  the  late  learned  Mr.  Ray, 
and  feveral  of  his  ingenious  Correfpondents,  Natives  and 
Foreigners.  To  which  are  added  thofe  of  Francis  Willuph- 
by,  Efq;  the  whole  conJifting  of  many  curious  Difcovcries 
and  Improvements  in  the  Hiftory  of  Quadrupeds,  Birds 
Fifties,  Infeas,  Plants,  Fofliles,  Fountains,  &c.  Pubhihed 
by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Derham,  Odtavo.   17 18. 

Perfualive  to  a  Holy  Life,  from  the  Happinefs  which  at- 
tends it  both  in  this  World,  and  in  the  World  to  come. 

Synopfis  Methodica  Avium  &  Pifcium,  opus  poflhumum 
quod  vivus  recenfuit  &  pcrfecit  iple  inligmnimus  Au:hor;  in 
quo,  multas  fpecies,  in  iplius  Ornithologia  6c  Ichthyologii 
defideratas,  adjecit,  Methodumque  (uam  Fiicium  naturse  ma- 
jgisconvenientcm  reddit.  Cum  Appendices  Iconibus.  E- 
dente  W.  Derham.  0<ffavo,  1713. 

Philofophical  Tranfadfions,  giving  fome  Account  of  tho 
prefent  l^ndertakings,  Studies  and  Labours  of  the  in<'eni- 

^  ous 


Books  printed  for  W.  aud  J.  I  n  n  y  s. 

ous,  in  many  confukrable  Parts  cf  World.  Continued  and 
pnblifKed  by  Edm.  Hailey,  J.  V.  D.  Savillian  Profeflbr  of 
Geom.  Oxon.  and  Reg.  Soc.  Seer.  Quarto.  Where  may 
be  had  complet  Seats,  or  fmgle  Numbers. 

Opticks:  Or,  A  Treatife  of  the  Reflexions,  Refradions, 
Inflexions  and  Colours  of  Light.  By  Sir  Ifaac  Newton,  Knt. 
The  Second  Edition,  with  Additions,  Odtavo,  17 17. 

A  Treatife  of  Algebra,  in  Two  Books :  The  firft  treating 
of  the  Arithmetical,  and  the  fecond  of  the  Geometrieal 
Part.     By  Philip  Ronayne,  Gent.  Odavo,  1717. 

The  Lives  of  the  French,  Italian,  and  German  Philofo- 
phers,  late  Members  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  in 
Paris.  Together  with  Abftrads  of  the  choiceft  Pieces  com- 
municated by  them  to  that  illufttious  Society.  To  which  is 
added  the  Preface  of  the  ingenious  Monfieur  Fontenelle, 
Secretary  and  Author  of  the  Hiftory  of  the  faid  Academy, 
GXavo,  1717. 

Dr.  Robert  Hooke's  pofthumous  Works,  in  which  the 
prefent  Deficiency  of  Natural  Philofophy  is  difcourfed  of ; 
with  the  Methods  of  rendring  it  more  certain  and  beneficial, 
&c.     Publifh'd  by  Richard  Waller,  Efq;  Folio. 

Botanick  Effays  in  Two  Parts.  The  firft  containing,  The 
Strufture  of  the  Flowers,  and  the  Frudification  of  Plants, 
with  their  various  Diftributions  into  Method.  And  the  fe- 
cond, the  Generation  of  Plants,  with  their  Sexes,  and  Man- 
ner of  impregnating  the  Seed:  Alfo,  concerning  the  Ani- 
malcula  in  Semine  Mafculino.  Together  with  the  Nourifti- 
ment  of  Plants,  and  Circulation  of  the  Sap  in  all  Seafons, 
analogous  to  that  of  the  Blood  in  Animals,  with  many  cu- 
rious Remarks,  and  feveral  Difcoveries  and  Improvements, 
adorned  with  Figures.  By  Patrick  Blair,  M,  D.  Fellow  of 
the  Royal  Society,  Odavo,  nzo. 

Mr.  Martin's  Diicourfeof  Natural  Religion,  Odavo,  1710. 
His  Differtation  on  the  7^*^  Verle  of  the  5*^'^  Chap- 
ter of  St.  Johns  firft  Epiftle,    There  are  three  that  bare  Record 
in  Heaven y^c.  Odavo,   1719- 

His  Defence  of  the  Teftimony  given  to  our  Sa- 
viour by  Jofephus,  Odavo,  1719. 

■  His  Examination  of  Mr.  Emlyn's  Anfwer  to  his 

Differtation  on  St.  John,  &c.  Odavo,  17:9. 

Dr.  Sennet's  Difcourfe  on  the  Trinity,  Odavo,  17 18. 

...   His  Diredions  for  ftudying  Divinity,  Odavo,  17 19^ 
—  Difcourfe  of  Schifm,  Odavo,  17 18. 

Pious   Thoughts,   by  the  late  Archbilhop  of  Cambray, 
Odavo,  1719. 

Mr.  Bragg's  pradical  Obfervations  on  the  Parables  and  Mi- 
racles of  ourblefTed  Saviour.  Four  Volumes,  Odavo,  17 19. 


■  I 
DATE  DUE 

■^^ 

■ 

^^f^e^^^ 

un    J 

/"   \ 

^ 

y^ 

■"■** 

iiiii_niiniiim 

GAYLORD 

L 

PRINTED  IN  U    S    A. 

•'^  »»>•». «-     , 


^*^ 


»    *-    n 


^^ 


Ia*^ 


7-. 


V/ 


4^x 


^ 


^^     ^.Z*'*;;-/  ^/?5<^  ^..6««>i:  ^n^r^f/c^J 


