Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


E.BIBL.RADCL. 


^xo    «-.    "no- 


THE  BRIDGEWATER  TREATISES 

ON  THE  POWER  WISDOM  AND  GOODNESS  OF  GOD 
AS  MANIFESTED  IN  THE  CREATION 


TREATISE  VII 

ON  THE  HISTORY  HABITS  AND  INSTINCTS  OF  ANIMALS 

BY  THE  REV.  WILLIAM  KIRBY.  M.A. 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES 
VOL  I 


THE  BRIDGEWATER  TREATISES 

ON  THE  POWER  WISDOM  AND  GOODNESS  OF  GOD 
AS  MANIFESTED  IN  THE  CREATION 


TREATISE  VII 

ON  THE  HISTORY  HABITS  AND  INSTINCTS  OF  ANIMALS 
BY  THE  REV.  WILLIAM  KIRBY,  M.A. 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES 
VOL  I 


*'  c'est,  la  bible  a  la  main,  que  nous  dbyons  entrbr  dans 
lb  temple  acguste  db  la  nature,  pour  bien  comprbndrb 
la  vqix  du  cr^teur.'*  gaede. 


ON  THE 

POWER  WISDOM  AND  GOODNESS  OF  GOD 

AS  MANIFESTED  IN  THE  CREATION 

OF  ANIMALS  AND  IN  THEIR  HISTORY  HABITS 

AND  INSTINCTS 

REV.  WILLIAM  KIRBY,  M.A.  F.R.S.  etc. 

HECTOK  OF  BARHAM. 


LONDON 

WILLIAM  PICKERING 

18,15 


C.  WHITTINGHAM,  TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY   LANK. 


TO  THE  RIGHT  HONOCBABLE 


CHARLES, 


BARON    FARNBOROUGH, 


.»« 


KKIGHT  GKAKD  CROSS  OF  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  BATH,  ▲  MEMBER  OF  HIS  MAJESTY  S 
MOST  HONOURABLE  PRIVY  COUNCIL,  AND  ONE  OF  THE  TRUSTEES 

OF  THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM^ 


THE  FOLLOWING  TREATISE, 


BY  HIS  PERMISSION, 


IS  RESPECTFULLY  INSCRIBED* 


BY  HIS  LORDSHIP'S  OBLIGED  AND  OBEDIENT  SERVANT, 


THE  AUTHOR. 


VOL.  I. 


NOTICE. 

The  series  of  Treatises,  of  which  the  present  is  one^  is 
published  under  the  following  circumstances  : 

The  Right  Honourable  and  Reverend  Francis 
Henry,  !Earl  of  Bridgewater,  died  in  the  month  of 
February,  1829 ;  and  by  his  last  Will  and  Testament,  bear- 
ing date  the  25th  of  February,  1825,  he  directed  certain 
Trustees  therein  named  to  invest  in  the  public  funds  the 
sum  of  Eight  thousand  pounds  sterling;  this  sum,  with 
the  accruing  dividends  thereon,  to  be  held  at  the  disposal 
of  the  President,  for  the  time  being,  of  the  Royal  Society 
of  London,  to  be  paid  to  the  person  or  persons  nominated 
by  him.  The  Testator  further  directed,  that  the  person  or 
persons  selected  by  the  said  President  should  be  appointed 
to  write,  print,  and  publish  one  thousand  copies  of  a  work 
On  the  Power,  Wisdom,  and  Goodness  of  God,  as  mani- 
fested in  the  Creation ;  illustrating  such  work  by  all  reason- 
able arguments,  as  for  instance  the  variety  and  formation  of 
God's  creatures  in  the  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  king- 
doms ;  the  effect  of  digestion,  and  thereby  of  conversion  ; 
the  construction  of  the  hand  of  mail,  and  an  infinite  variety 
of  other  arguments:  as  also  by  discoveries  ancient  and 
modem,  in  arts,  sciences,  and  the  whole  extent  of  literature. 
He  desired,  moreover;  that  the  profits  arising  from  the  sale 
of  the  works  so  published  should  be  paid  to  the  authors  of 
the  works. 


Vlll 

The  late  President  of  the  Royal  Society,  Davies  Gilbert, 
Esq.  requested  the  assistance  of  his  Grace  the  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury  and  of  the  Bishop  of  London,  in  determining 
upon  the  best  mode  of  carrying  into  effect  the  intentions  of 
the  Testator.  Acting  with  their  advice,  and  with  the  con- 
cuiTence  of  a  nobleman  immediately  connected  with  the 
deceased,  Mr.  Davies  Gilbert  appointed  the  following  eight 
gentlemen  to  write  separate  Treatises  on  the  different 
branches  of  the  subject  as  here  stated : 

THE  REV.  THOMAS  CHALMERS,  D.D. 

VROVK880R  OF  DmillTY  IN  TRB  UmTMllirr  0»  B»INBimOll« 

ON  THE  POWER,  WISDOM,  ANB  GOODNESS  OP  GOD 

AS  MANIFESTED  IN  THE  ADAPTATION 

OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE  TO  THE  MORAL   AND 

INTELLECTUAL  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN. 


JOHN  KIDD,  M.D.  F.R.S. 

Kpoiuf  rnovcssos  or  m edicinb  in  thb  VMirnoRtr  op  oxvord. 

ON  THE  ADAPTATION  OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE  TO   THE 

PHYSICAL  CONDITION  OF  MAN, 


THE  REV.  WILLIAM  WHEWELL,  M.  A.  F.R.S. 

PILLOW  OP  TBINITT  COLLBGB,  CAMBBIOGB. 

ASTRONOMY  AND  GENERAL  PHYSICS  CONSIDERED  WITH 
REFERENCE  TO  NATURAL  THEOLOGY. 


SIR  CHARLES  BELL,  K.G.H.  F.R.S.  L.&E. 

THE  HAND :    ITS  MECHANISM  AND  VITAL  ENDOWMENTS 

AS  EVINCING  DESIGN. 


PETER   MARK   ROGET,   M.D. 

PBLLOW  OP  AND  8BCBKTARY  TO  TUB  ROYAL  SOCIKTY. 

ON  ANIMAL  AND  VEGETABLE  PHYSIOLOGY. 


IX 

THE  REV.  WILLIAM  BUCKLAND,  D.  D.  F.  R.  8. 

CANON  OP  CBBI8T  CHURCH,  AND  PROPIUttOR  OP  CBOLOGT  IN  TBR 

VNITIRSITY  OP  OXFORD. 

ON  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY. 


THE  REV.  WILLIAM  KIRB Y,  M.  A.  F.  R.  S. 

ON  THE  HISTORY,  HABITS,  AND  INSTINCTS  OF  ANIMALS. 


WILLIAM  PROUT,  M.  D.  F.  R.  8. 

CHEMI3TRY,  METEOROLOGY,  AND  THE  FUNCTION  OF 
DIGESTION,  CONSIDERED  WITH  REFERENCE  TO 

NATURAL  THEOLOGY. 


His  Royal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  Presi- 
dent of  the  Royal  Society,  having  desired  that  no  unneces- 
sary del^y  should  take  place  in  the  publication  of  the 
above  mentioned  treatises,  they  will  appear  at  short  inter- 
vals, as  they  are  ready  for  publication. 


CONTENTS 
OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


Paart 


e' 


Explanation  OF  Plates    xii 

Introduction    • xvii 

Chap.  I.  Creation  of  Animals    1 

II.  Greographical  Distribution  of  Ditto 43 

Migrations  of  Ditto 88 

Local  Distribution  of  Ditto ]  30 

III.  General  Functions  and  Instincts  of  Ditto 138 

lY.  Functions  and  Instincts.     Infusories   145 

V. Polypes 164 

VI. RadiaHes    192 

VII. Tunicaries 218 

VIII. Bivalve  Molluscans  .  233 

IX. Univalve  Molluscans  266 

X. Cephalopods    303 

XI. Worms    318 

XII. Annelidans 331 

Appendix   349 

Notes  and  Illustrations 364 


EXPLANA'nON  OF  THE  PLATES. 


VOLUME  I. 


} 


153 


PLATE  I.     Infusqmes. 

Fig.  1.  a.  Enchelis  Pupa    , 

b.  Alimentary  canal  and  stomach 

2.  E^spkora  Naias 156 

3.  a.  h>  c*.  4\  liotifera  vulgajpis  ,,,  ^  ,,..«.««..•  •      153 

4.  Bacillaria  multipunctata  ,.«. ,.     350 

5.  Cleopatra > 350 

6.  Diseocephalus  Rotator  • 349,  ii.  97 

PLATE  I.  B.     Infusories. 

Fig.  1 .   Vorticella  cothurnata    ,  •     350 

2.  a.  b,  Zoobotryon  pelluciduin 351 

Worms. 

3.  Botryocephalus  bicolor 327 

4.  Diplozoon  paradoxum • . .  •  •     357 

a.  Ditto,  Baturml  size. 

b.  b.  Mouths  and  oral  suckers. 

c.  c.  Caudal  plates  and  suckers. 

5.  Diplostomum  volvens • 330 

6.  Eye  of  a  perch  infested  by  Diplostoma, 

PLATE  II.     Polypes. 

Fig.  1 .  Madrepora  muricata 180 

2.  Sertularia  volubilis    • 169 

a.  a.  Ovaries. 


SXFLAKATION  OF  THE  PLATES. 


XIU 


Page 

Fig.  3.    CeUaria  onraia 169 

4.   a.  Fungiapaiellmfi9f,n»diu[«At^ 

b.  Ditto,  upper  nde. 

PLATE  III.    Radiaries. 

Fio*  1  •  Cephea  mo$aica • 197 

a.  a.  Ann3  of  ditto. 

2.  Schinus  esculentxLs^  poftion  of  tb«  sbeip 

shown  exteroally. 
a,  a.  a.  Groves. 
bn  b.  Alleys. 

c,  c.  The  iateial  groves. 
d*  The  intermediate  ouq. 

3.  Inside  of  the  same  shell. 

a.  a.  The  dentated  suture. 

b.  The  middle  ridge  marked  out  on  each 
side  i^to  transverse  pieces. 

c.  c.  The  alleys,  with  pores  for  the  suckers. 

d.  One  of  the  frames^  to  which  the  jaws 
are  fixed. 

4.  Spines  of  Echinus  ddarU^ 

a.  Muscular  fibres  inserted  in  the  base  of 
the  spine»  and  surrounding  the  ball  and  [ 
socket  joint. 

b.  The  muscular  capsule  laid  open,  and  the 
muscles  attached  to  the  base  of  the  spine 
turned  back. 

.  c.  The  origins  of  the  Inuscles  surrounding 

the  ball  or  tubercle. 
d.  One  of  the  tubercles. 

5.  One  of  the  suckers  of  E.  €seulentus, 

a.  The  sucker ;  the  pore  in  tb^  centre  is 
supposed  to  be  a  spiracle  connecteid 
with  the  respiration  of  the  animal. 

b.  The  stalk  of  the  sucker. 

6.  The  suture  of  a  portion  of  the  alleys  at  the 

lateral   grove,   in   which   the    transverse 
pieces  are  convex. 


XIV 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES. 


Fio.  7.  The  suture  of  a  portion  of  the  lateral  grove 
uniting  with  the  above,  in  which  the  trans- 
verse pieces  are  concave. 

8.  Suture  of  the  intermediate  grove  divided  at 

the  ridge  (Fig.  3.  b.).  Teeth  obtusan- 
gular. 

9.  A   circular  space  round  the   mouth,   co- 

vered with  little  oblong  scales.  In  the 
centre  is  the  mouth  with  its  five  converg- 
ing teeth. 

10.  Outside  of  one  of  the  five  pyramidal  jaws, 

in  which  the  teeth  are  planted, 
a.  The  jaw.     b.  The  tooth. 

11.  Inside  of  ditto  :  a.  the  jaw,  consisting  in- 

ternally of  two  triangular  transversely 
fuiTOwed,  and  probably  molary  plates. 

12.  A  little  bristle,  terminating  in  a  knob  with 

three  awns,  planted  amongst  the  spines 
on  the  shell,  and,  according  to  Cuvier,' 
a  species  of  Polype  (Pedicellaria). 

13.  Another  Pedicellaria?   expanded    like   a 

tripetalous  blossom. 

14.  One  of  the  spines  of  Echinus  esculentus. 


Page 


V208— 211 


PLATE  III.  B.     Crinoi DEANS. 

Fig.  1.  Pentacrinus  Asteria vol.  ii.  13 

2.  Portion  of  ditto,  exhibiting  the  suckers  on  the 

under  side  of  the  fingers 12 

PLATE  IV.    Tunicaries. 

Fig.   1 .   Cinthia  Momus 230 

2.  Salpa  cyanogastra 223 

3.  Pyrysoma  giganteum 227 

4.  Cephalitis  Bowdichii 222 

5.  Clavellina  borealis 230 


*  Regn.  An,  iii.  297. 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES.  XV 

PLATE   V.       BlVALVB    MoLLUttCANft. 

Pbkc 

Fig.  1.  Solen  Siliqua 240 

a.  The  foot.     b.  The  shell. 

N.B.  The  two  figures  in  outline  shew  varia- 
tions in  shape  assumed  by  the  foot,  under 
different  circumstances. 

2.  Anomia  Cepa  , . ,' 262 

a.  The  tendon,     b.  The  aperture  of  the  upper 

valve  through  which  it  passes. 

3.  Anomia  Epkippiwn. 
a.  Aperture. 

4.  Terebratula 263 

a.  Aperture  of  the  lower  valve  through  which 

the  tendon  passes. 

5.  Trigonia  margaritacea     264 

a.  Foot  formed  for  leaping. 

6.  b.  b.  Valves  of  the  shell. 

Pteropod  and  Heteropod  MolluScans. 

6.  Cliodites  fusiformis ^ 

7.  Polycera  capensis 

8.  Pterotrachea  rufa     

PLATE  VL     Univalve  Molluscans. 


I    267 


Fig.  1 .    Voluta  (Bthiopicaf  to  shew  the  animal 282 

a.  The  eye,  shewing  iris  and  pupil. 
5.  The  right  hand  tentacle. 

c.  The  proboscis  exserted. 

d.  The  frontal  margin  of  the  head. 

e.  The  respiratory  tube  or  siphuncle. 

f.  Appendage  at  its  base.     Analogous  to  the 
crus  infundibuli  in  Nautilus  ?  *     Owen. 

g-g*  The  two  gills,  of  which  the  right  hand  one 

has  but  one  series  of  laminae. 
h.  Termination  of  the  alimentary  canal. 

*  Owen's  Mem,  on  Naut,  Pompil.  t,  v.  h. 


XVl  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES. 

Page 
1. 1.  The  nght  hand  iMurgtn  of  the  mantle. 
A.  The  male  organ. 
/.  /.  The  foot. 
Fio.  2.  lanthina 291 

a.  The  mouth,  composed  of  two  vertical  cartila- 
ginous lipsy  minutely  toothed  at  the  margin. 

b.  The  shell. 

c.  The  ajr-vesicles  forming  an  out-rigger* 

PLATE  VIL    Cemalopods. 

Fig.  1.  Loligo  cardioptera. 

2.  i^rulea prototffpu$    «•.«•,«••• 316 

a.  The  shell. 

3.  Ocypu$  unguiculattLS.^    • «.*••. 308 

a.  The  suckers. 

b.  The  armsi. 

PLATE  VIIL  Annelidans. 

Pig.  1 .  Peripatus  Juliformis « 347 

2.  Anterior  extremity  of  do. 

a.  Mouth. 

b.  b.  Eyes. 

c.  c.  First  pair  of  legs. 

a.  Bdella  mloHca  336 

a.  Anterior  sucker. 

b.  Posterior  do. 

c.  Reproductive  organs. 

4.  Lycoris  cegyptia  .  •  • .    •  •  •  • 347 

'  Referred  to  by  mistake  as  aa  Octrrpns,  SOB. 


_    A 

3i     PUtil. 

s 

Qlnjjinaujjjn, 

3    a 

J.e 

3  1 

7 

2. 

\ 

.  1 


Zrf. 


PU:    III 


">      fl--« 


"''is. 


i.-..t       // 


\: 


f 


"^fl^a^^fy^s^^mZi  CM-Cwtij  id 


Pkti   VII 


&n<Zni  h  SlSlMmnviUl. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  Works  <rf  God  and  the  Word  of  God 
may  be  called  the  two  doors  which  open  into 
the  temple  of  Troth ;  and,  as  both  proceed 
from  the  same  Almighty  and  Omniscient 
Author,  they  cannot,  if  rightly  interpreted, 
contradict  each  other,  but  must  mutually 
illustrate  and  confirm,  "  though  each  in  dif- 
ferent sort  and  manner,"  the  same  truths. 
Doubtless  it  was  with  this  conviction  upon 
his  mind,  that  the  learned  Professor,*  from 
whom  I  have  borrowed  my  motto,  expresses 
his  opinion — ^that  in  order  rightly  to  under- 
stand the  voice  of  God  in  nature,  we  ought  to 
enter  her  temple  with  the  Bible  in  our  hands. 
The  prescribed  object  of  the  several  trea- 
tises, of  which  the  present  forms  one,  is  the 
illustration  of  the  Power,  Wisdom,  and  Good- 

^  The  pious  Heinrich  Moritz  Gaede,  Prdessor  .of  Natural 
History  in  the  University  of  Liege. 


XVIH  INTRODUCTION. 

ness  of  the  Deity,  as  manifested  in  the  Works 
of  Creation;  but  it  is  not  only  directed  that 
these  primary  attributes  should  be  proved 
by  all  reasonable  arguments  derived  from 
physical  objects,  but  also  by  discoveries 
ancient  and  modem,  and  the  whole  extent  of 
literature.  As  the  Holy  Scriptures  form  the 
most  interesting  portion,  in  every  respect, 
of  ancient  literature ;  and  it  has  always  been 
the  habit  of  the  author  of  the  present  treatise 
to  unite  the  study  of  the  word  of  God  with 
that  of  his  works  ;  *  he  trusts  he  shall  not  be 
deemed  to  have  stepped  out  of  the  record, 
where  he  has  copiously  drawn  fi'om  the 
sacred  fountains,  provided  the  main  tenor  of 
his  argument  is  in  accordance  with  the  brief 
put  into  his  hands. 

Those  who  are  disposed  to  unite  the  study 
of  scripture  with  that  of  nature,  should  always 
bear  in  mind  the  caution  before  alluded  to, 
that  all  depends  upon  the  right  interpretation, 
either  of  the  written  word  or  created  sub- 
stance. They  who  study  the  word  of  God, 
and  they  who  study  his  works,  are  equally 
liable  to  error;  nor  will  talents,  even  of  the 

1  See  Manographia  Apum  Anglice,  i.  2,  and  Introd.  to  Ent.  i. 
Pref.  xiii.  &c. 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 


highest   order,    always   secure    a    man   from 
falling  into  it.     The  love  of  truth,  and  of  its 
Almighty  Author,  is  the  only  sure  guide  that 
will  conduct  the  aspirant  to  its  purest  foun- 
tains.   High  intellectual  powers  are  a  glorious 
gift  of  God,  which,  when  associated  with  the 
qualities  just  named,  lead  to  results  as  glorious, 
and  to  the  light  of  real  unsophisticated  know- 
ledge.    But  knowledge  puffeth  up,  and  if  it 
stetnds    alone,   there   is   great   danger   of  its 
leading  its  possessor  into  a  kind  of  self-wor- 
ship, and  from  thence  to  self-delusion,  and  the 
love  of  hypothesis. 

It  is  much  to  be  lamented  that  many  bright 
lights  in  science,  some  from  leaning  too  much 
to  their  own  understanding,  and  others,  pro- 
bably froin  having  Religion  shown  to  them, 
not  with  her  own  winning  features,  nor  in  her 
own  simple  dress,  but  with  a  distorted  aspect, 
and  decked  meretriciously,  so  that  she  appears 
what  she  is  not,  without  further  inquiry  and 
without  consulting  her  genuine  records,  have 
rejected  her  and  fallen  into  grievous  errors. 
To  them  might  be  applied  our  Saviour*s 
words.  Ye  do  err  not  knowing  the  Scriptures. 
These  observations  apply  particularly  to  two 
of  the    most    eminent    philosophers    of   the 


XX  INTRODUCTION* 

present  age,  one  for  the  depth  of  his  know- 
ledge in  astronomy  and  general  physics  ;  and 
the  other  in  zoology.  It  will  be  easily  seen 
that  I  allude  to  La  Place  and  Lamarck,  both 
of  whom,  from  their  disregard  of  the  word  of 
Grod,  and  from  seeking  too  exclusively  their 
own  glory,  have  fellen  into  errors  of  no  small 
magnitade.  It  is  singular,  and  worthy  of 
observation,  that  both  have  based  their  hypo- 
thesis upon  a  similar  foundation.  La  Place 
says,  **  An  attentive  inspection  of  the  solar 
system  evinces  the  necessity  of  some  central 
paramount  force,  in  order  to  maintain  the 
entire  system  together,  and  secure  the  regu- 
larity of  its  motions."^  One  would  expect 
from  these  remarks,  that  he  was  about  to 
enforce  the  necessity  of  acknowledging  the 
necessary  existence  of  an  intelHgent  pa^- 
mount  central  B^ng,  whose  goings  forth  were 
co-extensive  with  the  universe  of  systems,  to 
create  them  at  first,  and  then  maintain  their 
several  motions  and  revolutions,  so  as  to 
prevent  them  from  becoming  eccentric  and 
interfering  with  each  other,*  thus — Upholding 
all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power.     But 

1  System  of  the  Woild,  E.  Tr.  ii.  330. 
*  Ibid.  Appendixy  concluding  note. 


INTRODUCTION,  XXI 

no — when  he  asks  the  question,  What  is  the 
primitive  cause?*  instead  of  answering  it 
immediately,  he  refers  the  reader  for  his 
hypothesis  to  a  concluding  note,  in  which 
we  find  that  this  primitive  cause,  instead  of 
the  Deity,  is  a  nebulosity  originally  so  diffuse, 
that  its  existence  can  with  difficulty  be  con- 
ceived.* To  produce  a  system  like  ours,  one 
of  these  wandering  masses  of  nebulous  matter 
distributed  through  the  immensity  of  the 
heavens,^  is  converted  into  a  brilliant  nucleus, 
with  an  atmosphere  originally  extending 
beyond  the  orbits  of  all  its  planets,  and  then 
gradually  contracting  itself,  but  at  its  suc- 
cessive limits  leaving  zones  of  vapours,  which, 
by  their  condensation,  formed  the  several 
planets  and  their  sateUites,  including  the 
rings  of  Saturn ! !  * 

It  is  grievous  to  see  talents  of  the  very 
highest  order,  and  to  which  Natural  Phi- 
losophy, in  other  respects,  is  so  deeply 
indebted,  forsaking  the  Ens  JEntium,  the 
God  of  Gods,  and  ascribing  the  creation  of 
the  universe  of  worlds  to  a  cause  which, 
according  to  his  own   confession,  is  all  but 

1  System  of  the  World,  E.  Tr.  ii.  328. 

2  Ibid  357.  3  Ibid.  332.  *  Ibid,  358. 

VOL.  I.  C 


XXll  INTRODUCTION. 

a  non-entity.  He  speaks,  indeed,  of  a 
Supreme  Intelligence,  but  it  is  as  Newton's 
god, — ^whom  he  blames  for  attributing  the 
admirable  arrangement  of  the  sun,  of  the 
planets,  and  of  the  comets,  to  ian  Intelligent 
and  Almighty  Being,* — and  of  an  Author 
of  Nature j  not,  however,  a;s  iJie  pn^serviir 
and  upholder  of  the  universe,*  but  as  per- 
petuiBtUy  receding,  according  as  the  boundaries 
of  our  knowledge  are  extended;*  thus  expel- 
ling,  as  it  were,  the  Deity  from  all  care  or 
concern  about  his  own  world. 

While  the  philosopher  thus  becaoM  vain 
in  his  imaginationSj  the  naturalist  attempted 
to  account  for  the  production  of  all  the  various 
forms  and  structures  of  plants  and  animak 
upon  similar  principles.  Lamarck,  distin- 
guished by  the  variety  of  his  talents  and 
attainments,  by  the  acuteness  of  his  intellect, 
by  the  clearness  of  his  conceptions,  and 
remarkable  for  his  intimate  acquaintance  with 
his  subject,  thus  expresses  his  opinion  as  to 
the  origin  of  the  present  system  of  organized 
beings.  "  We  know,  by  observation,  that 
the  most  simple  organizations,  whether  vege* 

1  System  of  the  World,  E.  Tr.  ii.  331. 
«  Ibid.  332.  5  Ibid.  333. 


IICTRODUCTIOW.  xxiu 

table  or  animal,  are  never  met  with  but  in 
minute  gelatinous  bodies,  very  supple  and 
delicate ;  in  a  word,  only  in  frail  bodies  almost 
without  eonsist^ice  and  mostly  transparent/' 
These  minute  bodies  he  supposes  nature 
forms,  in  the  waters,  by  the  power  of  attrac- 
tion; and  that  next,  subtle  and  expansive 
fluids,  such  as  caloric  and  electricity,  pene- 
trate these  bodies,  and  enlarge  the  interstice^ 
of  their  agglutinated  molecules,  so  as  to  form 
utricular  cavities,  and  so  produce  irritability 
and  life.  Mowed  by  .  power  of  absorption, 
by  which  Aey  derive  nutriment  ii»,„  with- 
out/ 

The  production  of  a  new  organ  in  one  of 
these,  so  formed,  animal  bodies,  he  ascribes 
to  a  new  wanty  which  continues  to  stimulate ; 
and  of  a  new  movement  which  that  want 
produces  and  cherishes.'  He  next  relates 
how  this  can  be  effected.  Body,  he  observes, 
beii^  essentially  constituted  of  cellular  tissue, 
this  tissue  is  in  some  sort  the  matrix,  from 
the  modification  of  which  by  the  fluids  put 
in  motion  by  the  stimulus  of  desire,  mem- 
branes,  fibres,   vascular    canals,   and    divers 

'  Anim.  sans  V^tehr.  i.  174.  *  Ibid,  181. 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

organs,  gradually  appear ;  parts  are  strength- 
ened and  solidified ;  ^  and  thus  progressively 
new  parts  and  organs  are  formed,  and  more 
and  more  perfect  organizations  produced ;  and 
thus,  by  consequence,  in  the  lapse  of  ages  a 
monad  becomes  a  man ! ! ! 

The  great  object  both  of  La  Place  and 
Lamarck  seems  to  be  to  ascribe  all  the  works 
of  creation  to  second  causes ;  and  to  account 
for  the  production  of  all  the  visible  universe, 
and  the  furniture  of  our  own  globe,  without 
the  intervention  of  a  Jirst.  Both  begin  the 
work  by  introducing  nebulosities  or  masses  of 
matter  scarcely  amounting  to  real  entities^ 
and  proceed  as  if  they  had  agreed  together 
upon  the  modus  operandi. 

As  Lamarck's  hypothesis  relates  particu- 
larly to  the  animal  kingdom,  I  shall  make 
a  few  observations  upon  it,  calculated  to 
prove  its  utter  irrationality. 

When,  indeed,  one  reads  the  above  account 
of  the  mode  by  which,  according  to  our 
author  s  hjrpothesis,  the  first  vegetable  and 
animal  forms  were  produced,  we  can  scarcely 
help  tliinking  that  we  have  before  us  a  receipt 

'^  Anim.  sans  Vertebr.  i.  184. 


INTRODUCTION-  XXV 

for  making  the  organized  beings  at  the  foot 
of  the  scale  in  either  class — amass  of  irritable 
matter  formed  by  attraction^  and  a  repulsive 
principle  to  introduce  into  it  and  form  a  cel- 
lular tissue,  are  the  only  ingredients  necessary* 
Mix  them,  and  you  have  an  animal  which 
begins  to  absorb  fluid,  and  move  about  as 
a  monad  or  a  vibrio,  multiplies  itself  by 
scissions  or  germes,  one  of  which  being 
stimulated  by  a  want  to  take  its  food  by  a 
mouth,  its  fluids  move  obediently  towards  its 
anterior  extremity,  and  in  time  a  mouth  is 
obtained ;  in  another  generation,  a  more 
talented  individual  discovering  that  one  or 
more  stomachs  and  other  intestines  would  be 
a  convenient  addition  to  a  mouth,  the  fluids 
immediately  take  a  contrary  direction,  and  at 
length  this  wish  is  accomplished  ;  next  a 
nervous  collar  round  the  gullet  is  acquired, 
and  this  centre  of  sensation  being  gained, 
the  usuial  organs  of  the  senses  of  course 
follow.     But  enough  of  this. 

Let  any  one  examine  the  whole  organi- 
zation and  structure,  both  internal  and  ex- 
ternal, of  any  animal,  and  he  will  find  that  it 
forms  ^  whole  J  in  which  the  different  organs 
and   members   have   a   mutual    relation   and 


XXVI  INTRODUCTION. 

dependence,  and  that  if  one  is  supposed  to  be 
abstracted,  the  whole  is  put  out  of  order  and 
cannot  fulfill  its  evident  functions.  If  we 
select,  as  a  well  known  instance,  the  Hive-bee 
for  an  example.  Its  long  tongue  is  specially 
formed  to  collect  honey ;  its  honey  stomach  to 
receive  and  elaborate  it  either  for  regurgitation, 
or  for  the  formation  of  wax ;  and  other  organs 
or  pores  are  added,  by  which  the  latter  can  be 
transmitted  to  the  wax  pockets  under  its  abdo- 
men ;  connected  witli  these,  are  its  means  and 
instruments  to  build  its  cells,  either  for  store 
cells  to  contain  its  honey  and  bee-bread,  or  its 
young  fepood,  such  as  the  form  of  its  jaws, 
and  the  structure  and  furniture  of  its  hind 
legs.  Now  here  are  a  number  of  organs  and 
parts  that  must  have  been  contemporary,  since 
one  is  evidently  constructed  with  a  view  to 
the  other :  and  the  whole  oi^anization  and 
structure  of  the  whole  body  forming  the 
societies  of  these  wonder-working  beings,  that 
I  mean,  of  the  males,  females,  and  workers, 
is  so  nicely  adjusted,  as  to  concur  exactly  in 
producing  the  end  that  an  intelligent  Creator 
intended,  and  directing  each  to  that  function 
and  office  which  he  devolved  upon  them,  and 
to  exerdse  which  he  adapted  them.    Were  we 


INTRODUCTION.  JCXVll 

to  go  thrQugh  the  whole  animal  kingdom,  the 
same  mutual  relation  and  dependence  between 
the  different  parts  and  oi^ans  of  the  structure 
aod  their  funetions  would  be  found. 

Can  any  one  in  his  rational  senses  believe 
£qt  a  moqi^it  that  all  these  adaptations  of  one 
organ  to  ajiother,  and  of  the  whole  structure 
to  a  particular  fiinction^  resulted  originally 
fmm  the  wants  of  a  senseless  animal  living  by 
absorption,  and  whose  body  consisted  merely 
of  callular  ti£»3ue,  which  in  the  lapse .  of  ages, 
and  m  an  infinity  of  successive  generations 
by  the  motions  of  its  fluids,  directed  here  and 
jthiei^,  produced  this  beautiful  and  harmonious 
system  of  organs  all  subservient  to  one  pur- 
pose ;  and  which  in  numerous  instances  vary 
their  functions  and  organs,  but  still  preserving 
their  mutual  dep^deace,  by  passing  through 
three  different  states  of  existence- 
Lamarck's  great  error,  and  that  of  many 
others  of  his  compatriots,  is  materialism ;  he 
seems  to  have  no  faith  in  any  thing  but  body, 
attributing  every  thing  to  a  physical,  and 
sc^cely  any  thing  to  a  metaphysical  cause. 
Even  when,  in  words,  he  admits  the  being 
of  a  God,  he  employs  the  whole  strength  of 
his  intellect  to  prove  that  he  had  nothing  to 


XXVIU  INTRODUCTION, 

do  with  the  works  of  creation.  Thus  he  ex- 
cludes the  Deity  from  the  government  of  the 
world  that  he  has  created,  putting  nature  in 
his  place;  and  with  respect  to  the  noblest 
and  last  formed  of  his  creatures  into  whom  he 
himself  breathed  the  breath  of  Ufe ;  he  cer- 
tainly admits  him  to  be  the  most  perfect  of 
animals,  but  instead  of  a  son  of  God,  the 
root  of  his  genealogical  tree,  according  to 
him,  is  an  animalcule,  a  creature  without 
sense  or  voluntary  motion,  or  internal  or 
external  organs,  at  least  in  his  idea — no 
wonder  therefore  that  he  considers  his  intel- 
lectual powers,  not  as  indicating  a  spiritual 
substance  derived  from  heaven  though  re- 
sident in  his  body,  but  merely  as  the  result 
of  his  organization,*  and  ascribes  to  him  in 
the  place  of  a  soul,  a  certain  interior  senti- 
ment j  upon  the  discovery  of  which  he  prides 
himself.^  In  one  of  his  latest  descriptions  of 
it,  he  thus  describes  the  office  of  this  internal 
Sisntiment :  "  Every  action  of  an  intelligent 
individual,  whether  it  be  a  movement  or  a 
thought,  or  an  act  amongst  the  thoughts,  is 

•  0  r  * 

1  N.  Diet.  D'Hist,  Nat,  xvi.  Artie.  Intelligencey  344.  comp. 
Ibid.  Artie.  Idee,  78,  80. 

2  Jind.  332. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX 

necessarily  preceded  by  a  want  of  that  which 
has  power  to  excite  such  action.     This  want 
felt  immediately  moves  the  internal  sentiment, 
and  in  the  same  instant,  that  sentiment  directs 
the  disposeable  portion  of  the  nervous  fluid, 
either  upon  the  muscles  of  that  part  of  the 
body  which  is  to  act,  or  upon  the  part  of  the 
organ   of  intelligence,  where   are   impressed 
the  ideas  which  should  be  rendered  present 
to  the  mind,  for  the  execution  of  the  intel- 
lectual act  which  the  want  demands."*     In 
feet  Lamarck  sees  nothing  in   the  universe 
hut  bodies,  whence  he  confounds   sensation 
with  intellect.     Our  eyes  certainly  shew  us 
nothing  but   bodies — their  actions   and   mo- 
tions, their  structure,  their  form  and  colour; 
our  ears  the  sounds  they  produce ;  our  touch 
their   degree   of  resistance,    or    comparative 
softness  or  hardness ;  our  smell  their  scent ; 
our  taste  their  flavour ;  but  though  our  senses 
can  conduct  us  no  further,  we  find  a  very 
active  substance  in  full  power  within  us  that 
can.     At  a  very  early  period  of  life  we  feel 
a  wish  to  know  something  further  concerning 
the   objects   to   which    our  senses   introduce 

.  t      ^  N.  Diet.  D'Hist.  Nat.  xvi.  Artie.  Intelligence,  360*. 


XXX  INTIWDUCTION. 

US,  which  often  generates,  a  restless  desire  in 
the  mind  to  gain  informaldon  concerning 
the  causes  and  origin  of  those  things  pec* 
ceived  by  them ;  now  this  is  the  result  of 
thouyht^  and  thought  is  no  body,  and  though 
the  thinking  essence  inhabits  a  body^  yet 
we  cannot  help  feeling  that  our  thoughts 
are  an  attribute  of  an  immateriaL  substance* 
Thought,  discursive  and  excursive  thought, 
liiat  is  not  confined  to  the  contemi^atLon  of 
the  things  of  earth,  thing*  that  are  inuncr 
diately  about  us,  but  can  elevate  itself  to 
heaven,  and  the  heavenly  bodies,  not  only  to 
those  of  our  own  system,  but  can  take  flights 
beyoiid  the  bounds  of  time  and  space,  aiui 
enter  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  contem- 
plate Him  who  sitteth  upon  the  cherubim,  the 
throne  of  his  Deity.  Thought,  that  not  only 
b^olds  things  present,  however  distant  and 
removed  from  sense,  but  can  contemplate  the 
days  of  old  and  the  years  of  many  gene- 
rations, can  carry  us  back  to  hail  with  the 
angelic  choirs,  the  birth-day  of  nature  and 
of  the  world  that  we  inhabit ;  or  looking  into 
the  abyss  of  futurity,  can  anticipate  the 
termination  of  our  present  mixed  scene — 
chequered  with  light  and  darkness,  good  and 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXI 

eril — suid  the  beginning  of  that  eternal  sab- 
bath which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God 
in  the  heavenly  kingdom  of  Christ :  thought 
that  can  not  only  taJke  these  flights,  and  ex* 
ercise  herself  in  these  heavenly  musings ;  but 
accompanied  as  she  is,  in  our  favoured  race, 
with  the  gift  of  speech  can  reaison  upon  them 
with  a  fellow  mind,  and  by  such  discussion 
often  elicit  sparks  of  truth,  that  may  be  useftd 
to  enlighten  mankind.  Who  can  believe  that 
such  a  feculty,  so  divine  and  god-like  and 
t^iritual,  can  be  the  mere  result  of  organi- 
zation ?  That  any  juxta-position  of  material 
molecules,  of  whatever  nature,  from  whatever 
source  derived,  in  whatever  order  and  form 
arranged,  and  wherever  placed,  could  generate 
thought,  and  reflexion,  and  reasoning  powers ; 
could  acquire  and  store  up  ideas  and  notions 
as  weD  concerning  metaphysical  as  physical 
essences  may  as  safely  be  pronounced  impos- 
sible, as  that  matter  and  spirit  should  be 
homogeneous.  Though  the  intellectual  part 
acts  by  the  brain  and  nerves,  yet  the  brain 
and  nerves,  however  ample,  however  de- 
veloped, are  not  the  intellect,  nor  an  intel- 
lectual substance,  but  only  its  instrument, 
fitted  for  the  passage  of  the  prime  messenger 


XXXU  INTRODUCTION. 

of  the  soul,  the  nervous  fluid  or  power,  to 
every  motive  organ.  It  is  a  substance  calcu- 
lated to  convey  instantaneously  that  subtile 
agent,  by  which  spirit  can  act  upon  body, 
wherever  the  soul  bids  it  to  go  and  enables 
it  to  act.  When  death  separates  the  intel- 
lectual and  spiritual  from  the  material  part, 
the  introduction  of  a  fluid  homogeneous  with 
the  nervous,  or  related  to  it  by  a  galvanic 
battery  can  put  the  nerves  in  action,  lift  the 
eye-lids,  move  the  limbs,  but  though  the 
action  of  the  intellectual  part  may  thus  be 
imitated,  in  newly  deceased  persons,  still 
there  are  no  signs  of  returning  intelligence ; 
there  is  no  life,  no  voluntary  action,  not. a 
trace  of  the  spiritual  agent  that  has  been 
summoned  from  its  dwelling.  Whence  it 
follows,  that  though  the  organization  is  that 
by  which  the  intellectual  and  governing 
power  manifests  its  presence  and  inhabitation, 
still  it  is  evidently  something  distinct  from 
and  independent  of  it. 

Mr.  Lyell  has  so  fully  considered  that  part 
of  Lamarck's  hypothesis  which  relates  par- 
ticularly to  the  transmutation  of  species,  and 
so  satisfactorily  proved  their  general  stability, 
that  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  enter  more 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXlll 

particularly  into  that  subject,  I  must  therefore 
refer  the  reader  to  that  portion  of  his  work/ 

Let  us  lastly  enquire,  to  whom  or  what, 
according  to  our  author,   God  has  given  up 
the  reins ;  whom  he  has  appointed  his  vice- 
roy in  the  government  of  the  universe.    Na- 
ture is  tlie  second  power  who  sits  on  this 
viceregal  throne,  governing  the  physical  uni- 
verse, whom  we  should  expect  to  be  superior 
in  intellect  and  power  to  angel   and   arch- 
angel— but  no — ^he  defines  her  to  be — "  An 
order   of  things   composed   of  objects   inde- 
pendent of  matter,  which  are  determined  by 
the.  observation   of   bodies,    and    the   whole 
amount   of  which   constitutes    a   power  un- 
alterable in  its  essence,    governed  in  all  its 
acts,  and  constantly  acting  upon  all  parts  of 
the  physical  universe/'*     And  again.  Nature 
he  affirms   consists   of  non-physical   objects^ 
which   are   neither  beings,   nor    bodies,   nor 
matter*     It  is  composed  of  motion ;  of  laws 
of  every  description ;  and  has  perpetually  at 
its  disposal  space  and  time/ 

With  respect  to  the  agency  of  this  vice- 

1  Principles  of  Geology  y  ii.  c.  1,  2. 

«  N.  Diet.  D'Hist.  Nat.  xxn.  Art.  Nature,  377. 

3  Ibid. 


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

gerent  of  Deity,  he  observes  that  Nature  is 
a  blind  power  without  intelligence  which  acts 
necessarily.*  That  matter  is  her  sole  domain, 
of  which  however  she  can  neither  create  nor 
destroy  a  single  atom^  though  she  modifies 
it  continually  in  every  way  and  under  every 
form, — and  causes  the  existence  of  all  bodies 
of  which  matter  is  essentially  the  base;— 
and  that  in  our  globe  it  is  she  that  has 
immediately  given  existence  to  vegetables,  to 
animals,  as  well  as  to  other  bodies  that  are 
there  to  be  met  with.* 

From  these  statements,  though  he  appears 
to  admit  the  existence  of  a  Deity,  and  that 
he  is  the  primary  author  of  all  things,  yet  he 
considers  him  as  having  delegated  his  power 
to  nature  as  his  vicegerent,  to  whose  disposal 
he  has  left  all  material  subsistences,  and  who, 
according  to  him,  is  the  real  creator  of  all 
the  forms  and  beings  that  exist,  and  who 
maintains  the  physical  universe  in  its  present 
state.  It  is  not  quite  clear  what  opinion  he 
held  with  respect  to  the  creation  of  matter, 
as  he  no  where  expressly  ascribes  it  to  God ; 
though,  since  he  excludes  nature  from  it,  we 

1  N.  Diet.  D*Hist.  Nat.  xxii.  Art.  Nature,  364. 

2  Ibid.  369,  376. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

may  infer,  unless  he  thought  it  to  be  eternal, 
that  he  meant  it  should  be  ascribed  to  the 
Deity ;  but,  if  such  was  his  opinion,  he  ought 
to  have  stated  it  distinctly  and  broadly ; 
which  he  certainly  would  have  done  had  he 
felt  any  anxiety  to  prevent  misrepresentation. 
As  it  is,  his  God  is  an  exact  counterpart 
of  the  God  of  Epicurus,  who  leaving  all  to 
nature  or  chance,  takes  no  further  care  or 
thought  for  the  worlds  to  which  he  had  given 
being. 

But  what  is  this  mighty  and  next  to  omni- 
potent power. 

This  ^eat-grandmother  of  all  creatures  bred. 
Great  Nature  ever  young,  but  full  of  eld ; 
Still  moving,  yet  immoved  from  her  sted ; 
Unseen  of  any,  yet  of  all  beheld  ; 
Thus  sitting  in  her  throne 

as  quaintly  sings  our  great  bard  of  allegory.* 

Now  this  great-grandmother  of  the  whole 
creation,  who,  according  to  oar  author,  takes 
aU  trouble  off  the  hands  of  the  God  of  Gods, 
sitting  as  it  were  in  his  throne,  and  directing 
and  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  her 
power, — ^what  is  she?     Is  she  not  at  least 

*  Faerie  Queene,  B.  vii.  c.  vii.  st.  13. 


XXXyi  INTRODUCTION. 

a  secondary  spirit,  co-extensive  with  the  phy- 
sical universe  which  she  forms,  and  the  limits 
of  which  alone  terminate  her  action?  This 
the  various  and  wonderful  operations  attri- 
buted to  her  by  this  her  worshipper  would 
proclaim  her  to  be.  How  then  are  we  sur- 
prised and  astonished  when  studying  and 
weighing  every  scruple  of  his  definitions  of 
this  his  great  Diana  of  Ephesus,  and  casting 
them  up,  we  find  at  the  foot  of  the  account 
that  she  literally  amounts  to  nothing.  That 
she  is  a  compound  of  attributes  without  any 
subsistence  to  hang  them  upon.  His  primary 
character  of  her,  on  which  he  insists  in  ever}" 
part  of  his  works,  declares  her  to  be  an  Order 
of  Things.  What  idea  does  tliis  phrase 
convey  to  the  mind  ?  That  of  things  arranged 
and  acting  in  a  certain  order.  But  no — this 
is  not  his  meaning.  She  is  an  order  of  things 
composed  of  objects  independent  of  matter. 
These  objects  are  all  metaphysical,  and  are 
neither  beings,  nor  bodies,  nor  matter.  But 
if  she  is  not  a  being,  she  can  have  no  exist- 
ence. Yes,  says  our  author,  she  is  composed 
of  motion.  But  what  is  motion  considered 
abstractedly,  without  reference  to  the  mover 
or  the  moved  ?     Like  its  negative  restj  it  is 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVU 

nothing.  He,  Whose  goings  forth  have  been 
from  of  oldy  from  everlasting  j  is  the  First 
Mover,  and  the  motion  which  he  hath  gene- 
rated in  his  physical  universe,  was  commu- 
nicated by  Him  to  existences,  which  he  had 
created  and  formed  to  execute  his  will,  and 
by  them  to  others,  and  so  propagated,  as  it 
were,  from  hand  to  hand,  according  to  his 
laws,  till  the  universe  was  in  motion  gene- 
rally, and  in  all  its  systems  and  their  several 
members.  The  Deity,  at  once  the  centre 
and  circumference  of  creation,  going  forth 
incessantly,  aU  the  systems  that  form  the 
physical  universe,  severally  concatenated  into 
one  great  system,  responding  to  his  action, 
and  revolving  round  and  contained  in  that 
central  and  circumferential  fountain  of  ever- 
flowing  light  and  glory,*  that  Spiritual  Sun 
of  the  whole  universe  of  systems,  of  which 
every  sun  of  every  system  is  a  type  and 
symbol.  To  Him  be  ascribed  the  Glory, 
and  the  Power,  and  the  Kingdom,  in  stecula 
mculorum^  Amen. 

Another  object  which  Lamarck  considers 
as  constitutii^  nature,  is   Law.      But  law 

^  Dens  omnium  capax,  Herm.  Pastor ,  1.  ii.  Mand.  1.  Iren. 
Adv,  Hares,  1.  ii.  c.  55. 

VOL-  I.  d 


XXrvnU  INTRODUCTION. 

considered  abstractedly  is  also  nothing.  It 
may  exist  in  the  Divine  counsels,  but  till  it 
is  promulgated,  and  powers  appointed  and 
empowered  who  can  enforce  it;  as  likewise 
other  objects  brought  into  existence  upon 
which  it  can  act,  or  that  can  obey  it ;  it  is 
a  word  without  power  or  effect.  As  in  order 
to  motion  there  must  be  a  mover  and  some- 
thing to  be  moved,  so  in  order  to  a  potential 
law,  as  well  as  a  promulgator,  there  must  be 
a  being  to  enforce  it  and  another  to  obey  it. 

With  regard  to  his  third  ingredient,  space 
and  timCy  the  theatre  and  limit  of  Nature  s 
operations ;  they  give  her  no  subsistence,  she 
still  remains  a  nonentity;  therefore,  as  de- 
fined by  our  author,  she  is  nothing^  and  can 
do  nothing. 

But  although  nature,  as  defined  by  La- 
marck, consists  merely  of  abstract  qualities, 
independent  of  any  essence  or  being,  and 
therefore  can  neither  form  any  thing,  nor 
operate  upon  what  is  already  formed;  yet 
would  I  by  no  means  be  understood  as  con- 
tending that  there  are  no  ihter-agents  he- 
tween  God  and  the  visible  material  world  by 
which  he  acts  upon  it,  and  as  it  were  takes 
hold  of  it ;  by  which  he  has  commenced  and 


INTRODUCTION,  XXXIX 

still  maintains  motion  in  it  and  its  parts ; 
causing  it  to  observe  certain  general  and  local 
laws ;  and  upholds,  in  the  whole  and  every 
part,  those  several  powers  and  operations  that 
have  been  thus  produced;  that  action  and 
counteraction  every  where  observable,  by 
which  all  things  are  maintained  in  their 
places ;  observe  their  regular  motions  and 
revolutions ;  and  exhibit  all  those  phenomena 
that  are  produced  under  certain  circum- 
stances. Whatever  names  philosophers  have 
used  to  designate  such  powers,  they  have  a 
real  substance  and  being,  and  are  a  something 
that  can  act  and  operate,  and  impart  a  mo- 
mentum. 

Lord  Verulam's  two  hands  of  nature, 
whereby  she  chiefly  worketh,*  heat  and  cold, 
synonymous,  according  to  some,  with  positive 
and  negative  electricity  ;*  the  plastic  nature 
of  Cudworth,  and  some  of  the  ancients ;  the 
spirit  of  nature  of  Dr.  Henry  More;^  and  the 
ether  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  all  seem  to  ex- 
press or  imply  an  agency  between  the  Deity 
and  the  visible  world,  directed  by  him.     At- 

1  Bacon's  Works,  iii.  Nat,  Hist.  Cent.  i.  p.  69. 
«  See  Lit.  Gaz.  January  7,  1835,  p.  43. 
»  See  Vol.  II.  p.  254. 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

traction  and  repulsion  ;  centripetal  and  cen- 
trifugal  forceSj  or  universal  gravitation^  all 
imply  a  power  or  powers  in  action,  that  are 
something  more  than  names  and  nonentities, 
that  are  moving  in  two  directions,  and  consist 
of  antagonist  forces. 

If  we  consult  Holy  Scripture  with  the 
view  of  ascertaining  whether  any  or  what 
terms  are  therein  employed  to  express  the 
same  powers,  we  shall  find  that  generally 
speaking,  the  word  heaven,  or  the  heavens, 
and  s3rmbolically  the  cherubim,  are  used  for 
that  purpose.  But  upon  this  subject,  which 
has  considerable  bearing  upon  the  doctrine  of 
instinct,  I  shall  enlarge  in  a  subsequent  part 
of  this  introduction. 

Having  stated  Lamarck's  hypothesis  with 
respect  to  nature,  the  Goddess  which  he 
worshipped,  and  which  he  decked  with  divine 
attributes  and  divine  power,  I  shaU,  as  briefly 
as  possible,  give  some  account  of  his  theory 
of  life.  Life  indeed  is  a  subject  that  hath 
puzzled,  doth  puzzle,  and  will  puzzle .  philoso- 
phers and  physiologists,  probably  till  time 
shall  be  no  more.  Thus  much,  however, 
may  be  predicated  of  it,  that  both  in  the 
vegetable  and  animal,  like  heat,  it  is  a  radiant 


INTRODUCTIOir.  xli 

principle,  shewing  itself  by  successive  de- 
▼elopements  for  a  limited  period,  varying 
according  to  the  species,  when  it  begins  to 
decline  and  finally  is  extinguished :  that  some- 
times also,  like  heat,  as  in  the  seed  of  the 
vegetable  and  egg  of  the  animal,  it  is  latent, 
not  manifesting  itself  by  developement,  till  it 
is  submitted  to  the  action  of  imponderable 
fluids,  conveyed  by  moisture  or  incubation. 

But  to  return  to  our  author.  **  We  have 
seen,"  says  he,  "  that  the  life  which  we  remark 
in  certain  bodies,  in  some  sort  resembled  na- 
ture, insomuch  that  it  is  not  a  being,  but  an 
order  of  things  animated  by  movements;  which 
has  also  its  power,  its  feculties,  and  which 
exercises  them  necessarily  while  it  exists.* 
He  also  ascribes  these  vital  movements  to  an 
existing  cause.  Speaking  of  the  imponder- 
able incoercible  fluids,  and  specifying  heat, 
electricity,  the  magnetic  fluid,  ficc.  to  which 
lie  is  inclined  to  add  light,  he  says,  it  is 
certain  that  without  them,  or  certain  of  them, 
the  phenomenon  of  life  could  not  be  produced 
in  any  body.*  Now,  though  heat,  electricity, 
&c.  are  necessary  to  put  the  principle  of  life 

*  A  film,  sans  Vert^br,  i.  321.  ^  /^j^,  \^  43, 


xlii  IHTRODUCTIOK. 

in  motion^  they  evidently  do  not  impart  it* 
The  seed  of  a  vegetable,  or  the  egg  of  a  bird 
have  each  of  them,  if  I  may  so  speak,  a 
punctum  MlienSj  2l  radiating  principle,  which, 
nnder  c^tain  drcomstances,  they  can  retain 
in  a  latent  state,  for  a  considerable  time ;  but 
if  once  that  principle  is  extinct,  no  application 
of  heat,  or  electricity,  under  any  form,  can 
revive  it,  so  as  to  conunence  any  develope- 
ment  of  the  germe  it  animated.  Experiments 
have  been  made  upon  human  bodies;  and 
those  of  other  animals,  which,  by  the  applica- 
tion of  galvanism,  after  death,  have  exhibited 
various  muscular  movements,  such  as  lifting 
the  eye*lids,  moving  the  arms  and  legs,  &c. 
but  though  motions  usually  produced  by  the 
will  acting  by  the  nerves  upon  the  muscles 
have  thus  been  generated  by  a  species  of  the 
electric  fluid,  proving  its  affinity  with  the 
nervous  power  or  fluid,  yet  the  subjects  of  the 
experiment,  when  the  action  was  intermitted, 
continued  still  without  life ;  no  return  of  that 
power  or  essence  which  was  fled  for  ever, 
being  effected  by  it,  which  seems  to  render 
it  clear  that  neither  caloric  nor  electricity, 
though  essential  concomitants  of  life,  form  its 
essence. 


INTRODUCTION.  xliii 

I  trust  I  may  render  some  service  to  the 
cause  6f  truth  and  science,  if  I  again  revert 
to  the  subject  which  I  mientioned  at  the 
beginning  of  this  introduction,  I  mean  the 
study  of  the  word  of  God,  together  with  that 
of  his  works,  with  the  view  to  illustrate  one 
by  the  other. 

The  great  and  wonderfiil  genius  before  al- 
luded to,  Lord  Verulam,  who  laid  the  founda- 
tion upon  which  the  proud  structure  of  modem 
philosophy  is  erected,  who  banished  from  sci- 
ence the  visionary  theories  of  the  speculator,* 
and  the  unfounded  dogmas  of  the  bigot,  and 
made  experiment,  and,  as  it  were,  the  anatomy 
of  nature,  the  root  of  true  physical  knowledge ; 
warns  the  philosopher  against  making  holy 
scripture  his  text  book,  for  a  system  of  phi- 
losophy, which  he  says,  is  like  seeking  the 
dead  amongst  the  living.'  I  am  disposed, 
however,  to  think  that  this  illustrious  philo- 
sopher, by  this  observation,  did  not  mean  to 
exclude  all  study  of  the  word  of  God,  with  a 
view  to  discover  what  is  therein  delivered 
concerning  physical  subjects,  for  he  himself 
speaks  of  the  bodt  of  Job,  as  pregnant  with 

^  Idola  Speeds.  '  De  Augment.  Sc.  I.  ix.  c.  1.  ^  3. 


xliv  liffTRODUCTIOHT, 

the  mysteries  of  natural  philosophy  ;*  but  his 
object  was  to  point  out  the  evil  effects  of  a 
superstitious  and  bigotted  adherence  to  the 
letter  of  scripture,  concerning  which  men  were 
very  liable  to  be  mistaken,  and  of  inattenJdkm 
to  its  spirit,  which  is  averse  to  all  persecution, 
so  that  persons  of  a  philosophic  mind  nought 
not  be  interrupted  in  their  investigations  of 
nature,  by  the  clamours  or  menaces  of  niis- 
taken  men. 

In  the  dark  ages,  anterior  to  the  Refor- 
mation, superstition  occupied  the  seat  of  true 
and  rational  religion.  Ye  do  err  not  know- 
ing the  Scriptures,  was  an  observation  almost 
universally  applicable.  The  armed  hand  of 
authority  was  lifted  up  against  all  such  as 
endeavoured  to  interpret  either  Scripture  or 
nature  upon  just  and  rational  principles. 
Every  such  effort  was  rejected,  was  repro- 
bated ex  cathedra,  and  persecuted  as  a  dan- 
gerous and  pestilent  heresy :  thus  every 
avenue  to  the  discovery  of  truth,  either  in 
religion  or  science,  was  attempted  to  be 
closed.  This  evil  spirit  it  was  that  pro- 
scribed   the    system    of    Copernicus,    and, 

1   Ubi  supr,  1.  ix.  c.  1,  §  47,  cd.  1740. 


INTRODUCTION.  xIy 

because  it  ajq^red  contrary  to  the  letter 
of  Scnpture,  persecuted  Galileo  for  affirming 
that  the  earth  moved  round  the  sun.  Lord 
Yerulam  clearly  saw  the  evil  consequences 
that  would  result  to  the  cause  of  true  phi- 
losophy, if  the  sober  study  of  nature,  and 
all  experimental  research  into  the  works  of 
creation,  were  to  be  denounced  as  impious, 
because  of  some  seeming  discordance  with 
the  letter  of  Scripture,  or  because  a  narrow- 
minded  theologian  could  not  discern  where 
the  writers  of  the  Bible  adopted  popular 
phraseology,  in  condescension  to  the  innocent 
prejudices  and  uninformed  understandings  of 
those  to  whom  they  addressed  themselves ; 
and  he  therefore  employed  all  the  energy  of 
his  powerful  mind  to  persuade  the  learned 
theologian,  that  for  the  discovery  of  physical 
truth  we  must  have  recourse  to  induction 
from  experiment  and  soberly  conducted  in- 
vestigation  of  physical  phenomena,  while  for 
gpiritual  we  should  seek  to  draw  living 
waters  from  the  fountain  of  life  contained 
in  Scripture.  The  Bible  was  nbt  intended 
to  make  us  philosophers,  but  to  make  us  wise 
unto  salvation. 

But  it  does  not  follow,  because  we  are  to 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION. 

seek  for  religious  truth  principally  in  the 
Bible,  that  we  can  derive  none  from  the  study 
of  natural  objects ;  nor,  on  the  contrary, 
because  we  are  not  to  go  to  the  Bible  for 
a  system  of  philosophy,  that  no  philosophical 
truths  are  contained  in  it.  The  Scripture 
expressly  declares  that  the  invisible  things 
of  God  may  be  understood  by  the  things 
that  are  made — and  if  we  may  have  recourse 
to  the  works  of  creation  as  well  as  to  reve- 
lation to  lead  us  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
Creator,  we  may,  on  the  other  hand,  by 
parity  of  reason,  without  meriting  any  repre- 
hension, inquire  into  what  God  has  revealed 
in  Scripture  concerning  the  physical  world 
and  its  phenomena.  Lord  Bacon  himsdf 
observes,  that  Philosophy  is  given  to  Religion 
as  a  most  faithful  handmaid ;  since  Religion 
declares  the  will  of  God,  and  Philosophy 
manifests  his  power, — and  he  applies  to  this 
our  Saviour  s  reproof  of  the  Jews.  Ye  do 
err  not  knowing  the  Scriptures  nor  .  the 
power  of  God.  That  is,  ye  have  not  endea- 
voured to  know  him  by  a  right  mode  -of 
studying  either  his  word  or  his  works.  The 
study  of  both  is  necessary  to  the  right  under- 
standing of  either — we  cannot  rightly  under- 


INTRODUCTIOIC-  xlvii 

stand  Grod's  word  without  a  knowledge  of 
his  worksj  and  perpetual  appeal  is  made  to 
his  works  in  his  word ;  neither  can  we  per- 
fectly  understand  his  works  without  the  know- 
ledge of  his  word. 

The   penetrating  mind   of  Bacon  clearly 

perceived,    that  if  supposed    statements    of 

Scripture  were  made  the  sole  test  by  which 

philosophical  systems  were  to  be  tried,  there 

was  an  end  of  all  progress  in  science,  no  use 

in  making  experiments,  or  pursuing  a  course 

of  inductive  reasoning.      And  this  was  the 

temper  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived ;  light 

was  beginning  to  spring  up,  and  because  it 

was  novel,  it  was  thought  to  be  heretical  and 

subversive  of  Scripture.      But  men's  minds 

are  now  much   altered  in  this  respect,   and 

there  is  no  danger  of  persecution  on  account 

of  heterodoxy  either  in  religion  or  philosophy. 

In  fact  the  tide  seems  turned  the  other  way, 

and  a  clamour  is  sometimes  raised   against 

persons   who   consult  the   revealed  word   of 

God  on  points  connected  with  philosophy  and 

science.     But  surely  if  the  Scriptures  are,  as 

we  believe,  a  revelation  from  the  Creator  of 

that  world  concerning  which  we  philosophize, 

and    if    some    parts    of    them    do    contain 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION. 

mysteries  of  natural  philosophy,  as  Bacon 
himself  contends  they  do,  some  respect  and 
deference  are  due  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
some  aUowance  may  be  claimed  by  those  who 
appeal  to  it  on  any  point  of  science,  even  if 
their  appeal  originates  in  a  misconception  and 
ioiisinterpretation  of  any  part  of  it ;  the  same 
allowance  as  is  made  for  those,  and  they  are 
many,  who  misinterpret  nature. 

In  the  observations  here  made  upon  some 
dicta  of  the  illustrious  sage,  who,  unless  we 
admit  his  venerable  namesake.  Friar  Bacon, 
to  a  share  in  that  distinction,  may  be  termed 
the  first  founder  of  modem  pUlosophy,  I 
have  not  the  most  distant  thought  of  detract- 
ing from  the  splendour  of  his  merits,  or  of 
deducting  any  thing  from  the  amount  of  the 
vast  debt  which  science  owes  him ;  but,  as 
I  have  before  observed,  mankind,  from  the 
earliest  ages,  have  been  prone  almost  to 
idolize  those  to  whom  they  were  indebted  for 
any  weighty  benefits,  or  to  whom  they 
looked  up  as  inventors  of  useful  arts,  or 
masters  of  hitherto  occult  sciences.  Gratis 
tude,  indeed,  demands  that  great  and  original 
geniuses,  whom  God  has  enriched  with  extra- 
ordinary talents,  by  the  due  exercise  of  which 


INTRODUCTION.  xlix 

they  have  become  benefactors  of  the  human 
race,  should  be  loved  and  valued  highly  for 
their  sCTvices ;  but  when  we  look  only  at 
the  instrument,  and  see  not  the  hand  of 
Supreme  Benevolence  that  employs  it  for  our 
benefit,  we  then  overvalue  man  and  under- 
value God  ;  putting  the  former  into  the  place 
of  the  latter,  and  making  an  idol  of  him ; 
and  if  any  vnll  not  worship  this  idol,  a 
clamour  is  raised  against  them,  and  they  are 
almost  persecuted.  Our  great  philosopher 
himself  complains  of  this  tendency  to  over^ 
value  individuals  as  the  cause  and  source 
of  great  evils  to  science :  he  considers  it  as 
a  kind  of  fascination  that  bewitches  man- 
kind.^ 

Since  the  time  of  Bacon,  philosophers  and 
inquirers  into  nature  have  for  the  most 
strictly  adhered  to  his  rule,  if  such  it  may 
be  deemed ;  and,  with  the  exception  of  a 
single  sect,  who  perhaps  have  gone  too  far 

1  Rursus  vero  homines  a  progressu  in  scientiis  detinuit,  et 
fere  incantavit  reverentia  anUquitatis,  et  virorum,  qui  in  phi- 

losophia  magni  ha[biti  sunt,  authoritas. Itaque  mirum  non 

est,  si  fascina  ista  antiqnitatis^  et  anthorum,  et  consensus, 
hominum  virtutem  ita  ligaverint,  ut  cum  rebus  ipsis  con- 
suescere  (tanquam  maleficiati)  non  potuerint.  Nov,  Organ. 
1.  i,  aphor,  84, 


1  INTRODUCTION. 

in  an  opposite  direction/  have  made  little 
or  no  inquiry  as  to  what  is  delivered  in 
Scripture  on  physical  subjects,  or  with 
respect  to  the  causes  of  the  various  phe- 
nomena exhibited  in  our  system,  or  in  the 
physical  universe :  but  surely  it  is  a  most 
interesting,  as  well  as  novel  field  of  study, 
for  the  philosopher  to  ascertain  what  has 
really  been  revealed  in  Scripture  on  these 
great  subjects.  The  opinions  of  the  ancients 
upon  this  head  have  been  investigated  and 
canvassed,  and  an  approximation  traced  be- 
tween them,  in  some  respects,  to  those  of 
modem  philosophers :  *  if  the  same  diligence 
was  exercised  upon  the  Scriptures,  we  might 
arrive  at  information  with  regard  to  the  great 
powers  that,  under  God,  rule  the  physical 
universe,  which  it  is  hopeless  to  gain  by  the 
usual  means  of  investigation. 

But  the  great  difficulty  lies  in  the  inter- 
pretation of  those  passages  of  Scripture  that 
relate  to  physical  Phenomena.  Bacon  ofl:en 
repeats  these  words  of  Solomon, — It  is  the 
glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing.  As  Moses, 
when   he   descended   fi-om   the    mount,   was 

^  The  Hutchinsonians. 

«  See  Prof.  Daubeny's  Introd,  to  the  Atomic  Theory,  13. 


INTRODUCTION.  H 

obliged  to  veil  his  face,  because  the  Israelites 
could  not  bear  its  efiulgence ;  ^  so  the  Deity 
was  pleased  to  conceal  many  both  spiritual 
and  physical  truths  under  a  veil  of  figures 
and  allegory,  because  the  prejudices,  igno- 
rance, and  grossness  of  the  bulk  of  the  people 
could  not  bear  them,  but  they  were  written 
for  the  instruction  and  admonition  of  those 
in  every  age  whose  minds  are  liberated  from 
the  misrule  of  prejudice,  and  less  darkened 
by  the  clouds  of  ignorance :  but  still  it 
requires,  and  always  will  require,  much  study 
and  comparison  of  one  part  of  Scripture  with 
another,  to  discover  the  meaning  of  many  of 
those  passages  of  Scripture  which  relate  to 
physical  objects. 

The  Apostle  to  the  Hebrews  observes  that 
the  manner  in  which  God  revealed  himself 
to  the  ancient  world  and  the  Jewish  nation, 
was  by  dividing  his  communications  into 
many  parcels,  delivered  at  different  times;* 
and  by  clothing  them  in  a  variety  of  figures, 
and  imparting  them  under  difierent  circum- 
stances,^  so  that  in  order  to  get  a  correct 
notion  of  them  it  is   necessary  to  compare 

-  1  Exod,  xxxiv.  29,  &c. 
2  Hokyfitpiaq.  '  UoXvrpoTrcuc* 


lii  INTRODUCTIOK. 

one  part  of  scripture  with  anoth^,  and  to 
weigh  well  the  various  figures  under  which 
they  are  concealed,  and  liie  use  of  them  on 
other  occasions;  and  also  to  consider  the 
modes  in  which  they  were  communicated  to 
the  mind  of  the  p4het.  whether  b  a  .isioa 
exhibited  to  him  when  entranced ;  in  a  dream 
when  asleep  ;  or  under  certain  acts,  which  he 
was  commanded,  or  by  immediate  inspiration 
excited,  to  perform.  So  that  if  we  wish  to 
ascertain  the  meaning  of  any  particular 
symbol,  or  of  the  terms  in  which  any  com- 
munication is  made  firom  God  in  Holy 
Scripture ;  we  must  not  be  satisfied  by  study- 
ing merely  the  passage  under  our  eye,  but, 
comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual,  hunt 
out  the  meaning,  as  it  were,  by  considering 
all  those  passages  where  the  same  thing  is 
alluded  to. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  in  all  the  com- 
munications which  it  has  pleased  the  Deity 
to  make  of  his  will  to  mankind,  respect  is 
had  to  the  then  state  of  society,  and  the 
progress  of  knowledge,  arts,  and  civilization 
— flight  was  imparted  to  them  as  they  were 
able  to  bear  it;  they  were  fed  with,  milk 
when  they   could    not  digest   strong   meat. 


INTRODUCTIOK.  liii 

Prejudices  take  usually  so  firm  a  hold  upon 
tilie  bulk  of  any  people,  that  to  attack  them 
directly,  instead  of  opening,  closes  all  the 
avenues  to  the  heart.  Even  the  most  enlight* 
ened  in  some  respects,  in  others  are  often 
under  their  dominion ;  and,  therefore,  it  is 
only  by  imparting  truth  Here  a  little  and 
there  a  little,  as  circumstances  admit,  and 
embroidering  the  veil,  under  which  we  are 
obliged  to  soften  the  effulgence  of  her  light, 
with  varied  imagery,  darkly  shadowing  out 
her  mysteries,  that  a  way  is  prepared  for  her 
final  triumph  and  universal  reception.  She 
is  oflen  A  light  shining  in  a  dark  place, 
gradually  expelling  prejudice  and  error,  and 
shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  dag. 

It  was  not  so  much  necessary  for  the  con- 
version and  reformation  of  mankind  to  make 
them  philosophers  as  to  make  them  believers. 
The  great  bulk  of  mankind  were  ignorant  and 
uniristructed  persons,  whence  in  order  to  win 
their  attention,  it  was  necessary  to  address 
them  in  a  language  which  they  understood, 
and  in  a  phraseology,  with  respect  to  physical 
objects,  to  which  they  were  accustomed,  and 
as  those  objects  appear  to  the  senses.  Thus 
the  moon  is  called  a  great  light,  because  she 

VOL.  I.  e 


liv  INTRODUCTION. 

appears  so  and  is  so  to  us,  though  really  less 
than  the  planets  and  fixed  stars;  the  sun  is 
said  to  rise,  and  other  parallel  expressions, 
which  are  true  with  respect  to  us,  and  to  the 
appearance  of  the  thing,  though  not  with 
respect  to  the  fact  physically  considered. 
When  the  sacred  writers  speak  of  the  Deity 
in  terms  borrowed  from  the  human  figure,  as 
if  he  had  hands,  eyes,  feet,  and  the  like,  and 
as  if  he  was  agitated  by  human  passions,  it  is 
for  the  sake  of  illustrating  the  Divine  attri- 
butes and  proceedings  by  those  passions, 
faculties,  senses,  and  organs  in  man,  by  which 
alone  we  can  gain  any  idea  of  what  may  be 
analogous  to  them  in  the  Divine  Nature. 

But  though  such  condescension  is  shown 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  ignorance  and 
imperfections  of  his  people,  by  adopting,  as 
it  were,  a  phraseology  founded  upon  their 
innocent  errors,  and  those  misapprehensions 
of  things  into  which  they  were  led  by  their 
senses :  it  is  not  thence  to  be  concluded  that 
this  popular  language  pervades  the  whole  of 
the  Holy  Word ;  or  that  it  is  impossible,  or 
even  difficult,  to  distinguish  things  spoken 
ad  captum,  from  statements  relating  to  the 
physical  constitution  of  nature  which  are  to 


INTRODUCTION.  Iv 

be  received  as  spoken  ex  cathedra^  and  as 
dictated  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  should  not 
be  lost  sight  of,  that  the  great  object  of 
Revelation  was  to  reclaim  mankind  from  the 
debasing  worship  of  those  that  werie  not  gods 
by  nature ;  of  those  powers  in  nature,  or  their 
S3anbols,  selected  from  natural  objects,  which 
Grod  employed  and  directed  as  his  agents  in 
tlie .  foraoation  and  government  of  the  globe 
we  inhabit,  and  of  the  whole  universe.  **  But 
we,"  says  Bacon,  "  dedicate  or  erect  no 
capitol  or  pyramid  to  the  pride  of  men ;  but, 
in  the  human  intellect,  lay  the  foundations 
of  a  holy  temple,  an  exemplar  of  the  worlds  * 
This  passage  is  capable  of  an  application  that 
™.y  lead  '„»  into'™  avenue  L-inating  in 
such  a  temple,  which,  though  not  erected 
in  the  human  intellect,  may  enlighten  it  in 
several  points  relating  to  physical  truths  con- 
cerning which  it  is-  now  in  darkness.  The 
Mosaical  tabernacle  and  the  Bolomonian 
temple  were  both  erected  not  after  the 
imaginings  of  the  spirit  of  man ;  but  the 
former  after  a  pattern  which  was  shown  to 
Moses   in  the  mount;*   and  the  latter  after 

1  Nov.  Org,  aphorism.  120. 
*  Exod.  XXV.  40,  xxvi.  30. 


Ivi  INTRODUCTION. 

another  given  by  David  to  Solomon,  which 
it  is  expressly  stated  he  had  hy  the  Spirit i 
and  which  Jehovah  made  him  understand  in 
writing  (or  commit  to  writing)  by  his  hand 
upon  him}  Now,  if  these  holy  places  were 
erected  after  a  pattern  divinely  famished, 
that  pattern  doubtless  was  significant^  and 
intended  to  answer  some  important  purpose. 
The  great  end.  which  the  Deity  had  in  view 
by  the  selection  of  the  Israelitish  nation,  was 
to  prevent  all  knowledge  of  himself,  as  the 
Creator  and  Governor  of  the  world,  from 
being  totally  obliterated  from  the  minds  of 
men,  and  to  keep  alive  the  expectation  of 
the  promised  seed,  who  was  to  effect  the 
great  deliverance  of  mankind  from  the  yoke 
and  consequences,  of  sin,  and  the  dominion 
of  Satan,  Had  it  not  been  for  this  step,  the 
worship  of  those  powers  and  intermediate 
agents  by  which  God  acts  upon  the  earth 
and  the  world  at  large,  and  produces  all  the 
phenomena  observable  in  the  physical  uni- 
verse ;  of  their  symbols ;  or  of  deified  men 
and  women,  would  have  entirely  superseded 
the  worship  of  their  Almighty  Author,  and 

»  1  Chron.  xxviii.  12,  19. 


INTRODUCTION,  Ivii 

tilie  whole  .^arth  would  have  been  so  covered 
by  this  palpable  darkness,  that  no  glimpse  of 
Ught  would  have  been  left  to  foster  the  hope 
and  prove  the  germe  of  a  future  day  of  glory. 
The  great  object,  therefore,  of  the  Godhead 
being  the  assertion  of  his  own  supremacy, 
and  to  proclaim  his  own  agency  by  the 
powers  that  are  known  to  govern  in  nature, 
it  was  to  be  expected  that  a  tabernacle  or 
temple  erected  after  a  pattern  furnished  by 
die  Deity  would  conspicuously  do  tiais. 

But  before  I*  enter  further  into  this  mys- 
terious subject,  it  will  be  proper  to  obviate 
an  objection  that  may  be  alleged,  viz.  that  it 
is  incongruous  and  out  of  place  to  introduce, 
into  a  work  like  the  present,  any  inquiry  into 
the  nature  and  contents  of  the  Jewish  temple, 
especially  the  meaning  of  those  symbolical 
images  placed  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  and 
called  the  Cherubim,  but  when  it  is  further 
considered  that  these  symbols  are  represented 
as  winged  animals  with  four  faces,  and  that 
these  fttces  are  those  of  the  kings  and  rUlers, 
as  it  were,  of  the  animal  kingdom : — namely, 
tlie  ox,  the  chief  amongst  cattle ;  the  lion, 
the  king  of  wild  beasts ;  and  the  eagle,  the 
ruler  of  the  birds  ;  and  lastly,  Man,  who  has 


Iviii  INTRODUCTION. 

all  things  put  under  his  feety — ^there  seems 
to  be  no  slight  connection  between  the  che- 
rubim and  the  animal  creation.  If  we  regard 
the  antitypes  of  these  images  as  exclusively 
metaphysical^  this  argument  will  not  hold ; 
but  if,  as  I  hope  to  prove  from  Scripture, 
they  consist  of  physical  as  well  as  meta- 
physical objects,  by  which  the  Deity  acts 
upon  the  whole  animal  kingdom,  and  par- 
ticularly in  all  instinctive  operations,  I  trust 
I  shall  be  justified  in  entering  so  fully  into 
this  interesting  subject  In  this  inquiry  I 
have  endeavoured  to  guide  myself  entirely 
by  the  word  of  God,  comparing  spi/ritual 
things  with  spiritual;  at  the  same  time  taking 
into  consideration  those  arguments,  where 
the  case  seemed  to  require  it,  that  his  works 
supply. 

The  Jewish  tabernacle,  which,  as  Philo 
calls  it,*  was  a  portable  temple,  every  reader 
of  Scripture  knows  was  divided  into  two 
principal  parts,  or,  according  to  the  apostle 
to  the  Hebrews,  tabernacles;  the  first  of 
which  was  called  the  Holy  Place ;  and  the 
second,  the  Most  Holy  Place,  or  the  Holy 

^  *ltpov  i^priTov.     De  Vita  Mosis;\.  iii. 


INTRODUCTION-  lix 

of  Holies.  This  last  tabernacle  is  expressly 
stated  in  Scripture  to  be  a  figure  of  heaven. 
"  For  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the  holy 
places  made  with  handsy  which  are  the  figures 
of  the  true,  but  into  Heaven  itself,  now  to 
appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.'*^ 
Where  allusion  is  evidently  made  to  the 
annual  entry  of  the  Jewish  high  priest  into 
the  second  tabernacle,  as  representing  Christ's 
entry  into  heaven  itself,  where  the  presence 
of  God  was  manifested.  Now  if  the  second 
tabernacle  represented  the  Heaven  of  Heavens, 
the  first  we  may  conclude,  in  which  the 
ordinary  service  and  worship  of  God  were 
transacted,  was  a  symbol  of  this  world  or  our 
solar  system.* 

If  we  consider  the  fiimiture  of  the  two 
tabernacles,  we  gain  fiirther  instruction  on  the 
subject  we  are  considering.  In  the  first  was 
the  golden  candlestick  with  its  seven  lights, 
the  table,  and  the  shew-bread.  Amongst  the 
Jews,  the  candlestick  seems  to  have  been 
regarded  as  a  kind  of  planetarium,  repre- 
senting the  solar  system,  at  least  those  parts 
of   it    that  were  visible    to    the    unassisted 


1  Heb.  ix.  24.  *  'Aytoi'  Kotr/jiiKov. 


Ix  INTRODUCTION- 

eye.^  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  central 
lamp,  which  appears  to  be  four  times  the  i^ze 
of  the  rest,  is  stated  by  Philo  to  repnesent 
the  min.  The  table  and  the  shew-bread,  in  a 
physical  sense,  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as 
symbolizing  the  earth  and  its  productions,  the 
table  which  God  spreads  and  sets  before  us* 
But  as  well  as  a  physical,  these  things  have 
a  metaphysical  or  spiritual  meaning.  The 
candlestick  symbolizing  the  church  and  its 
ministers,  who  are  characterized  as  ^^  LigktM 
in  the  world,'' ^ — ^the  churches  as  candleirticks, 
and  the  principal  <  ministers  of  Christ  as 
stars.^ 

The  contents  of  the  second  Tabernacle,  or 
Most  Holy  Place,  are  now  to  be  considered ; 
these  were  an  ark  or  chest  containing  the 
two  tables  of  the  decalogue,  over  which  wa« 
placed  a  propitiatory  or  mercy-seat  of  pure 
gold,  at  each  end  of  which,  and  forming  part 
of  the  same  plate,  was  fixed  a  Cherubj  or 
sculptured  image  so  called.  The  directions 
for  the  fabrication  of  these  images  are  not 


^  Joseph.  Antiq.  1.  iii.  c.  7,  comp.  Philo  De  Vita  Mosis\ 
1.  iii.  518,  B.C.  Ed.  Col.  All.  1613. 

2  Philip,  ii.  15.     ^ta^piQ  tv  Kotrfna. 

3  Revel,  i.  20. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixi 

aecompanied  by  any  description  of  them. 
They  are  ^oken  of  as  objects  well  known 
to  the  Jews  ;  but  in  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel, 
they  are  described  as  each  having  four  faces 
and  four  wings ;  the  faces  were  those  of  a 
man  and  a  lion  on  the  right  side  ;  the  fece  of 
an  ox  on  the  left  side ;  and  the  £atce  of  an 
eagle ;  with  regard  to  their  wings,  two  were 
stretched  upwards,  and  two  covered  their 
bodies.  Many  other  particulars  are  men- 
tioned by  the  prophet,  which  I  shall  not  here 
enlarge  upon.^ 

A  great  variety  of  opinions  have  been 
held,  both  in  ancient  and  modem  times, 
concerning  the  meaning  of  these  symbols, 
and  what  they  aBe  designed  to  represent, 
some  of  which  I  shall  mention  in  another 
place.  By  most  modem  theologians  they 
seem  to  be  regarded  as  angels  of  the  highest 
rank.  The  first  mention  of  them  in  Holy 
Scriptures  is  upon  the  occasion  of  the  ex- 
pulsion x>f  our  first  parents  from  Paradise; 
"  And  he  drove  out  the  man  ;  and  he  placed 
at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  cheruhims^ 
and  a  flaming  sword  which  turned  every  way^ 

1  Ezek.  i.  6,  10,  11. 


Ixii  INTRODUCTION. 

to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life^^  The 
word  which  m  our  translation  is  rendered 
placed^  means  properly  caused  to  dwells  or 
placed  in  a  tabernacle,^  and  it  was  on  this 
account  probably  tliat  in  the  Septuagint  trans- 
lation^  the  expression  is  referred  to  Adam. 
'^  And  he  cast  out  Adam,  and  caused  him 
to  dwell  opposite  the  garden  of  Eden.  And 
he  placed  in  order  the  cherubim,  and  the 
flaming  sword  which  turned  to  keep  the  way 
of  the  tree  of  lifer*  The  word  in  quration 
is  used  by  Jeremiah  to  denote  God's  presence 
in  his  tabernacle  in  Shiloh.*  It  may  be  re- 
marked also  that,  in  the  original,  the  phrase 
is  not  simply  that  God  placed  cherubim  at 
the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  but,  as  is 
evident  from  the  particles  prefixed  to  it,  that 
he  placed  there  the  cherubim,  namely,  such 
objects  as  were  generally  called  by  that  name, 
and  were  familiar  to  the  Jews.  Had .  God 
given  it  in  commission  to  angelic  beings  to 
keep  watch  and  ward  at  the  gate  of  Paradise, 


1  Genes,  iii.  24.  «  Heb.  pa^» 

'  Gr.  Kai  £{c/3aX£  rov  Aiafi,  /cat   KariaKurtv  avroy  airtyayri 
Tit  irapadeitrti  rrig  rpvi^riQ*  Kai  era^e  ra  -^tpa^ifiy  Kai  rriy  ^\oyiyriy 

4  Jerem.  vii.  12. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixili 

it  would  surely  have  been  said  upon  this,  as 
upon  other  occasions,  that  he  sent  them. 
When  we  reflect  that  these  mystic  beings, 
when  only  sculptured  images,  were  symbols 
of  the  divine  presence,  and  that  Grod  mani* 
fested  himself  in  his  tabernacle  and  in  his 
temple  by  a  cloud  and  glory  when  the  work 
was  finished  according  to  the  pattern,  and 
the  cherubim  with  the  ait  and  mercy-seat 
were  in  their  places,^  surely  some  suspicion 
must  enter  our  minds  that  these  cherubim, 
before  the  gates  of  Paradise,  might  be  sta- 
tioned there  for  purposes  connected  with  the 
worship  of  God  after  the  fall.  Indications  of 
this  are  discoverable  in  other  passages,  as 
where  it  is  said  of  Cain  and  Abel,  that  they 
brought  an  offering  unto  the  Lord ;  a  term 
implying  that  sacrifices  were  not  offered  in 
any  place,  according  to  the  &ncy  of  the 
worshipper.  Again,  after  the  murder  and 
martyrdom  of  righteous  Abel  by  his  brother  s 
hand,  and  the  divine  sentence  passed  upon 
the  latter,  he  says,  "  Behold^  thou  hast  driven 
me  out  this  day  from  the  face  of  the  earthy 
and  from  thy  face  shall  I  he  hid'^^     And 

1  Exod.  xl.  18—38.     2  Chron.  v.  7—14. 

2  Genes,  iv.  14. 


Ixiv  INTRODUCTION. 

it  is  subsequently  stated,  *'  And  Cain  weiit 
out  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."*  From 
these  passages  it  seems  to  follow  evidently 
that  God  was  present,  in  some  restricted"  sense, 
in  one  particular  place,  by  departing  from 
which  Cain  was  hid  from  his  face,  whatever 
was  intended  by  that  expression.  In  this 
local  sense,  a  temple  or  tabernacle  dedicated 
to  his  worship,  as  prescribed  by  himself,  might 
be  called  his  presence ;  or  in  a  still  more 
peculiar  sense,  it  might  be  so  denominated, 
if  in  its  sanctuary  it  contained  any  symbolical 
representation  of  God's  universal  dominion^ 
and  of  his  action  every  where ;  or  if  any  cloud 
or  irradiation  of  his  glory  was  there  mani- 
fested to  his  worshippers.* 

With  regard  to  the  flaming  sword,  which 
our  translation  seems  to  put  into  the  hands  - 
of  the  cherubic  watch,  and  which  Milton  has 
so  finely  paraphrased : 

And  on  the  east  side  of  the  garden  place, 
Where  entrance  up  from  Eden  easiest  climbs^ 
Cherubic  watch,  and  of  a  sword  the  flame 
Wide-waving,  all  approach  far  off  to  fright 
And  guard  all  passage  to  the  tree  of  life. 

1  Genes,  iv.  16.  «  Exod.  xl.  34—38. 


INTRODUCTION.  IxV 

And  again. 

They  looking  back  all  th'  eastern  side  beheld 
Of  Paradise  so  late  their  happy  seat, 
Wav'd  over  by  that  flaming  brand,  the  gate 
With  dreadful  faces  throng'd,  and  fiery  arms. 

The  words  in  the  original  may  either  be  un^ 
derstood  metaphorically  of  a  flame  like  a 
Bword,  or  it  may  be  trandiated  a  consuming 
flame,  a  flame  of  burning  heat ;  the  original 
word^  often  signifying  an  exhausting  and 
violent  heat.  The  word  which  we  translate 
turned  every  way^  is  in  Hithpael,  and  signifios 
an  action  upon  itself;  it  is  used  in  the  same 
conjugation  in  other  passages,  where  the  sense 
seems  to  be  that  of  revolving  or  rolling.* 
Ezekiel  in  his  vision  of  the  cherubim,  de- 
scribing the  fire  that  preceded  their  appear- 
ance, says  that  it  infolded  itself.* 

The  last  words  of  the  passage  in  question, 
to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life,  admit  of 
two  opposite  interpretations — either  to  shut 
it  up  from  all  access,  or  to  prevent  it  from 
being  wholly  closed.  Perhaps  the  following 
interpretation — that  the    end   for   which   the 

1  Heb.  a"jn  *  Heb.  nDDnnon 

'  Judges  vii.  13.     Job.  xxxvii.  12. 
*  Ezek.  i.  4.    Heb.  nnpVn»  tt?« 


Ixvi  INTRODUCTION. 

cherubim  and  flaming  sword  were  placed  at 
the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  was  to  close 
for  ever  the  way  to  the  old  tree  of  life,  and 
also  to  open  the  way  to  one  better  suited  to 
man's  altered  circumstances  and  situation — 
will  reconcile  both  interpretations.  As  soon 
as  man  was  expelled  from  Paradise,  the 
original  covenant  was  ended,  and  he  was  eat 
off  from  all  the  means  of  grace  and  spiritual 
life  that  it  held  forth ;  and  therefore  it  might 
be  expected  that  his  merciful  and  beneficent 
Creator  would,  in  pursuance  of  the  great 
scheme  of  salvation,  through  the  promised 
seed  of  the  woman,  which  he  had  thrown  out 
to  him  as  an  anchor  of  hope,  would  supply 
him  with  other  means  suited  to  his  fallen 
state,  by  which  he  might  be  renewed  unto 
holiness,  and  gradually  nourished  in  grace, 
so  as  at  last  to  be  prepared  to  undergo  the 
sentence  passed  upon  him  with  a  prospect 
before  him  of  entering  into  that  rest  that 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. 

Having,  I  trust,  not  upon  slight  gi^ounds, 
made  it  appear  probable,  that  the  cherubim,  by 
the  Deity  himself,  were  placed  in  the  original 
temple  or  tabernacle,  and  were  intimately  con- 
nected with  that  form  of  worship  which  was 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixvii 

instituted  by  him  in  consequence  of  that  sad 
event,  the  fall  of  man  from  his  primeval  state 
of  holiness  and  happiness ;  I  shall  next  en- 
deavour to  ascertain  what  these  multiform 
images  represented*  But  I  must  first  premise 
a  few  observations  upon  the  legitimate  mode  of 
collecting  truths  of  this  description  from  Holy 
Scripture,  and!  must  here  recall  to  the  reader  s 
recollection  the  observation  of  Solomon  before 
quoted — It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a 
tUng,  A  number  of  important  truths  are 
delivered  in  Holy  Writ,  which  are  veiled 
truths,  which  we  shall  never  discover  if  we 
adhere  to  the  letter j  and  content  ourselves 
with  admiring  the  richness  and  beauty  of  the 
setting,  without  paying  any  attention  to  the 
gem  it  encircles  or  conceals.  Some  writers 
require  a  clear,  distinct,  and  explicit  state- 
ment, before  they  will  admit  any  thing  as 
revealed  in  Scripture,  be  the  circumstantial 
evidence  of  the  fact  ever  so  strong.  For  in- 
stance some  eminent  theologians  deny  the 
Divine  origin  of  sacrifices j  because  no  com- 
mand of  God  to  Adam  or  Noah  to  offer  them 
is  recorded  to  have  been  given ;  yet  one 
should  think  the  practice  of  righteous  Abel, 
and  of  Noah,  perfect  in  his  generations,  and 


Ixviii  INTHODUCTION. 

God's  acceptance  of  their  respective  sacri^ 
fices/  was  a  sufficient  proof  that  this  was  no 
act  of  will-worship,  but  one  of  obedience  to  a 
Divine  institution.  The  circumstance  that 
God  clothed  Adam  and  Eve  in  the  skins  of 
beasts,  proves  that  beastB  had  been  slain, 
which  were  most  probably  offered  up  as 
victims  representing  the  great  atonement,  the 
promised  seed — and  the  clothing  of  them  in 
their  skins  was  an  indication  that  they  wanted 
garments,  in  the  place  of  their  own  innocency 
and  righteousness,  to  cover  their  nakedness, 
and  that  they  now  stood  as  clothed  in  the 
righteousness  of  Him  whose  heel  was  to  be 
bruised  for  them.  The  distinction  also  of 
clean  and  unclean  beasts  directly  sanctioned 
by  the  Deity,  and  which  alone  might  be 
offered  in  sacrifice,*  is  another  circumstance 
confimaative  of  the  common  opinion. 

God,  both  in  his  word  and  in  his  works, 
for  the  exercise  and  improvement  of  the  in- 
tellectual powers  of  his  servants,  and  that — 
**  S^  reason  of  use  they  may  have  their 
senses  exercised  to  discern^  both  good  and 
evil;'^  has  rendered  it  indispensable  that  those 

1  Genes,  iv.  4.  viii.  20,  21.  «  Ibid,  and  vii.  2,  3. 

8  Heb.  V.  14. 


I  IfTRODU  CTI O  N .  Ixix 

who  would  understand  them,  and  gain  a  cor- 
rect idea  of  his  plan  in  them,  should  collect 
and  place  in  one  point  of  view  things  that 
in  Nature  and  Scripture  are  scattered  over 
the  whole  surface,  so  that  by  comparing  one 
part  with  another  they  may  arrive  at  a  sound 
conclusion.  Hence  it  happens  that,  in  Scrip- 
ture, when  any  truth  is  first  to  be  brought 
forward,  it  is  not  by  directly  and  fiilly  enun- 
ciating and  defining  it,  so  that  he  who  rufia 
may  read  and  comprehend  it,  but  it  is  only 
mcidentally  alluded  to,  or  some  circumstance 
narrated  which,  if  duly  weighed  and  traced 
to  its  legitimate  consequences,  puts  the  atten- 
tive student  in  possession  of  it.  Such  notices 
are  often  resumed,  and  further  expsLnded,  in 
subsequent  parts  of  the  sacred  volume,  and 
sometimes  we  are  left  to  collect  that  an  event 
has  happened,  or  an  institution  delivered  to 
Ae  patriarchal  race,  without  its  being  dis- 
tinctly recorded,  firom  circumstances  which 
necessarily  or  strongly  imply  it.  In  a  trial 
in  a  court  of  justice  it  very  conmionly  happens 
that  no  direct  proof  of  an  event  can  be  pro- 
duced, and  yet  the  body  of  circumstantial 
evidence  is  so  concatenated  and  satisfactory 
as  to  leave  no  doubt  upon  the  minds  of  the 

VOL.  I.  f 


IxX  INTRODUCTION. 

jury  as  to  the  nature  of  the  verdict  they 
ought  to  deliver.  It  would  be  a  great  and 
irreparable  loss  to  the  devout  and  sober 
student  of  Holy  Scripture,  if  in  his  endeavours 
to  become  acquainted  with  the  different  parts 
of  it,  he  is  to  be  precluded  from  forming  an 
opinion  as  to  certain  events  and  doctrines, 
because  it  has  pleased  the  Wisdom  of  God 
to  record  and  reveal  them  not  directly  and 
at  once,  but  indirectly,  in  many  parcels,  and 
under  various  forms. 

To  apply  this  reasoning  to  the  subject  I 
am  discussing.  Having  rendered  it  probable 
that  the  cherubim  placed  in  a  tabernacle  at 
the  east  of  the  Garden  of  Eden,  repre- 
sented the  same  objects,  and  were  so  far 
synonymous,  with  those  afterwards  placed  in 
the  Jewish  Tabernacle  in  the  most  holy  place 
overshadowing  the  mercy-seat,  and  that  the 
Divine  Presence  was  more  particularly  to  be 
regarded  as  taking  there  its  constant  station^ 
and  there  occasionally  manifesting  itself  by 
a  cloud  and  a  fiery  splendor,  I  shall  next 
endeavour  to  show  what  the  cherubic  images 
really  symbolized. 

The  word  Cherub,  in  the  Hebrew  Ian* 
guage,  has  no  root ;  for  the  derivation  of  it 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxi 

from  a  particle  of  similitude  and  a  word  sig- 
nifying the  mighty  or  strong  ones,  which  iu 
proposed  by  Parkhurst  and  the  followers  of 
Mr.  Hutchinson,  seems  to  me  not  satis- 
factory. Archbishop  Newcome*  and  others 
derive  it  from  a  Chaldee  root,  which  signifies 
to  plough,  and  the  radical  idea  seems  to  be 
that  of  strength  and  power y  which  will  agree 
with  the  nature  of  the  derivative,  as  indicating 
the  powers,  whether  physical  or  metaphysical, 
that  rule  under  God,  Other  divines,  as  God 
is  said  to  ride  upon  the  cherubim,  and  they 
are  called  his  chariot^  would  derive  the  word, 
by  transposition,  from  a  root  which  signifies 
to  ride  ;*  but  if  a  transposition  of  the  letters 
of  the  word  may  be  admitted,  I  should  prefer 
deriving  it  from  a  root  which  signifies  to 
hless  or  to  curse^  since,  as  we  shall  see,  the 
cherubim  are  instruments  of  good  or  evil, 
according  as  God  sees  fit  to  employ  them ; 
friiitful  seasons  and  every  earthly  blessing 
being  brought  about  by  their  ministry. 

The  word  Cheruh,  pi.  cherubim,  considered 
as  derived  from  any  of  the  roots  last  men- 
tioned, conveys  therefore  the  idea  of  strength 

1  Newc.  Ezek.  c.  i.  10,  note. 


Ixxii  INTRODUCTION, 

and  power;  of  God's  action  upon  and  by 
them,  expressed  by  his  riding  or  sitting  upon 
them,  and  inhabiting  them ;  as  likewise  by 
his  employing  them  as  instruments  both  of 
good  or  evil,  of  blessing  and  cursing. 

That  the  cherubim  are  powers  or  rulers 
in  nature  is  evident,  as  was  before  observed, 
from  their  symbols — the  man,  the  lion,  the 
ox,  a^nd  the  eagle.  It  is  singular  that  amongst 
the  descendants  of  the  three  sons  of  Noah, 
the  three  last  animals  should  be  adopted  into 
their  religion, — ^the  oar,  the  Eg5rptian  Apis, 
by  the  descendants  of  Ham;^  the  lion^  as  a 
symbol  of  light,  by  the  Persians,*  derived 
from  Shem ;  and  the  eagle  by  the  Greeks 
and  other  nations  descended  from  Japhet} 

These  powers,  be  they  what  they  may,  are 
described  in  Scripture  as  forming  a  chariot 
oh  which  the  Deity  is  represented  as  riding, 


^  Other  descendants  of  Ham,  as  the  t^hoenicians,  regarded  the 
ox  or  heifer  as  a  sacred  animal.  Baal  was  worshipped  as  an  ox 
as  well  as  a  fly.    (Tobit,  i.  5.) 

<  Mithras  is  to  be  seen  with  the  head  of  a  lion  and  the  body 
of  a  man,  having  four  wings,  two  of  which  are  extended  towards 
the  sky,  and  the  other  two  towards  the  ground.  Montfaucony 
i.  232.     Comp.  Ezek.  i.  11. 

'  Every  one  knows  that  the  eagte  was  sacred  to  the  Grecian 
Jupiter. 


INTRODUCTIOBT.  Ixxiu 

and  sometimes  in  such  terms  as  bring  to  our 
mind,  to  compare  great  things  with  small,  the 
chariots  and  charioteering  of  mortals.  Thus 
we  are  told  of  The  chariot  of  the  cherubim 
that  spread  out  their  wingsj  and  covered  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord.^  And  in 
EzekieFs  mystic  visions,  the  glory  of  Jehovah 
sometimes  went  up  from  the  cherubic  chariot 
to  the  temple,  when  The  house  was  filled  with 
the  cloudy  and  the  court  was  full  of  the 
brightness  of  the  Lord's  glory. ^  And  again, 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  departs  from  the  house, 
and  stands  over  the  cherubim,  when  mount- 
ing on  high  from  the  earth.  The  glory  of  the 
God  of  Israel  was  over  them  above.^  A 
common  epithet  of  God,  as  king  of  Israel, 
was  that  of  Insessor  of  the  cherubim,^  Whose 
Tuime  is  called  by  the  name  of  the  Lord  God 
of  Hosts  that  dwelleth  between  the  cherubim  ; 
or  he  that  sitteth  upon,  above,  or  between  the 
cherubim;  or,  as  it  may  be  rendered,  /n- 
habiteth  the  cherubim.  These  expressions 
allude,  not  only  to  the  presence  of  God  in 

1  1  Chron.  xxviii.  18. 

2  Ezek.  X.  4.  3  Ibid.  19. 

*  I  Sam.  xiv.  4.     2  Sam*  vi*  2.      2  Kings ,  xix.  15.     Ps. 
Ixxx.  1.  xcix.  ly  &c. 


\ 


Ixxiv  raTRODUCTION. 

his  tabernacle  and  temple  between  or  above 
the  sculptured  and  symbolical  cherubim,  but 
to  his  riding  upon,  sitting  upon,  or  inhabiting, 
that  is  ruKng  and  directing  those  powers  of 
whatever  description,  which  are  symbolized 
by  those  images,  or  signified  by  that  name. 

When  the  Lord  came  to  deliver  David 
from  his  enemies,  it  is  stated  that  he  rode 
upon  a  cherub  ;  *  and  the  prophet  Habakkuk,. 
alluding  probably  to  the  deHveiy  of  the 
Israelites  by  the  destruction  of  the  Egyptians 
in  the  Red  Sea,  exclaims.  Thou  didst  walk 
through  the  sea  with  thine  horses,  through 
the  heap  of  great  waters  ;*  and  again,  with  a 
prospective  view  before  him^  perhaps,  of  some 
still  mightier  deliverance  of  the  church  from 
her  enemies,  "  Wa^  the  Lord  displeaaed 
against  the  rivers  ?  was  thine  anger  against 
the  rivers  ?  Was  thy  wrath  against  the  sea^ 
that  thou  didst  ride  upon  thy  horses  and  upon 
thy  chariots  of  salvation  ?"^  He  uses  the 
same  instruments  when  his  will  is  to  inflict 
a  curse  and  execute  judgments.  The  Lord 
will  come  with  fire^  and  with  his  chariots  like 


1  2  Sam.  xxii.  11.     Ps*  xviii.  10» 

2  Hahak.  iii.  15.  ^  jtid.  8. 


INTRODUCTION*  IkXV 

a  whirlwind y  to  render  his  anger  with,  fury 
wnd  to  rebuke  with  fiames  of  fre}  In 
Cizekiel's  vision,  coals  of  fire  were  taken  from 
between  the  cherubim  to  scatter  over  Jeru- 
salem.^ 

Having  noticed  the  ideal  meaning  of  these 
mystic  symbols^  and  their  connection  with 
and  subservience  to  Jehovah  of  Hosts>  as  the 
God  of  Israel,  of  Israel  both  according  to  the 
flesh,  and  the  spirit  ;*  our  next  inquiry  must 
be  whether  there  are  no  physical  or  meta- 
physical beings  or  objects,  concerning  which 
the  same  things  are  predicated  in  Holy 
Saripture,  as  concerning  the  cherubim;  for 
if  there, are,  as  equals  of  the  same  are  equal 
to  one  another,  it  follows  that  these  things 
must  be  synonymous. 

Every  student  of  Holy  Writ,  when  he  turns 
his  attention  to  this  observation,  will  imme- 
diately recollect  passages  in  which  the  same 
things  are  predicated  of  the  heavens  ;  thus  it 

is  said  of  God,  as  the  God  of  Israel — Who 

*  < 

rideth  upon  the  heavens  in  thy  help,  and 
in  his  excellency  upon  the  skyJ^     And  again. 


1  Uai.  Ixvi.  16.  «  Ezek,  x,  2. 

3  1  Cor.  X.  18.  *  DeuU  xxxiii.  26. 


Ixxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

Extol  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens/ 
Him  that  rideth  upon  the  heaven  of  heavens 
that  mere  of  old.^  Every  one  knows  that,  ul 
Holy  Scripture,  God  is  also  perpetually  de- 
scribed as  he  who  sitteth  upon  the  heavens;^ 
that  the  heaven  is  God's  throne,  and  the 
earth  his  footstool;*  that  The  Lord  hath 
prepared  his  throne  in  the  heavens  ;^  that 
he  dwelleth  in  the  heavens,  though  they  can« 
not  contain  him  ;^  that  he  filleth  heaven  and 

4 

earth/ 

With  regard  to  Blessings  and  Curses^  that 
the  Heavens  are  the  primary  instruments  by 
which  God  bestows  the  one  and  inflicts,  the 
other,  is  evident  from  many  passages  of  Holy 
Writ.  Thus  it  is  said  in  Deuteronomy,*  The 
Lord  shall  open  unto  thee  his  good  treasure 
the  heavens,^  to  give  the  rain  unto  thy  land 
in  his  season^  and  to  bless  all  the  work  of 
thine  hand.  The  prophet  Hosea  has  a  pas- 
sage, in  which  the  hands  by  which  blessings 
and  fertility  are  transmitted  to  man  step  by 

1  Ps.  Ixyiii.  4.  2  j^d,  33. 

s  Ibid.  ii.  4.  *  Matth.  v.  34,  35. 

«  Ps.  ciii.  19L 

6  Ibid,  cxxiii.  1.     1  Kings,  viii.  27. 

7  Jerem.  xxiii.  24.  &  2)e«e^  xxviii.  12. 
9  Heb.  D»Dwn  vwk  3"»ion  nviH  r»K 


INTRODUCTION^  Ixxvii 

srtep  are  strikingly  described.  And  it  shall 
Game  to  pass  in  that  day  9  I  will  hear,  saith 
the  Lord,  /  mil  hear  the  heavens,  and  they 
shall  hear  the  earth,  and  the  earth  shall  hear 
the  com  and  the  wine  and  the  oil ;  and  they 
shall  hear  JezreeL*  Thus  the  blessing  de* 
scends  from  God  by  the  heavens  to  the  earth, 
IHToducing  abundance  for  the  support  and 
comfort  of  man*  And  with  respect  to  curses 
it  is  said.  The  heaven  that  is  over  thee  shall 
be  hrass.^  Ye  are  cursed  with  a  curse,  saith 
Malachi,  for  ye  have  robbed  me,  even  this 
whole  nation.  The  curse  alluded,  was  the 
shutting  of  the  windows  of  heat>en^ 

From  all  these  passages,  it  is  evident  that 
the  same  things  are  predicated  both  of  the 
Heavens  and  the  Cherubim,  and  that,  there- 
^e,  they  are  synonymous  terms,  and  signify 
the  same  powers.  But  this  leads  to  another 
inquiry.  What  are  the  heavens?  This  is 
a  query  which  at  first  every  one  thinks  he 
can  answer,  but  yet  when  the  term  eomes 
to  be  sifted,  it  will  be  found  that  few  have 
any  definite  idea  of  its  real  meaning.  Gene- 
rally speaking,  the  expanse  over  our  heads, 

1  Hos.  ii.  21,  22.  2  Jbid.  xxvii.  23. 

^  Malach.  iii.  9,  10. 


Ix^viii  INTRODUCTION. 

and  the,  bodies  it  contains,  are  understood  by 
the  word  ,Heaven$;  but  when  analysed,  it 
will ,  be  found  chiefly  to  indicate  powers  in 
action  contained  in  that ,  expanse,  and  which 
act  upon  these  bodies ;  powers  that  in  the  va- 
rious systems  of  the  universe  have  various 
centres  dispersed  throughout  space,  each  hav- 
ing a  local  or  partial  action  upon  its  own  sys- 
tem, and  all  derived  originally,  and  still  main- 
tained, from  and  by  one  parent  fountain,  the 
centre  of  all  irradiation,  of  all  light,  of  all  hfe 
^nd  energy. 

In  order  to  ascertain  what  the  word  hear 
ven,  or  heavens,  really  means,  the  most  satis- 
factory way  is  to  submit  it  to  analysis.  In  the 
Bible  there  are  three  terms  employed  to  sig- 
nify the  heavens  and  heavenly  powers,  one  of 
which*  is  usually  rendered  the  Heavens  ;  ano- 
ther,* the  Sky  ;  and  a  third,^  the  Firmament. 
I  shall  consider  each  of  these  terms.    . 

1.  Heaven^  or  the  heavens. — This  word,  in 
the  Hebrew  language,  is  derived  from  a  root,* 
which  signifies  to  dispose  or  place,  with  skill, 
care,  and  order,  as  say  the  lexicographers  ;  so 
that  literally  the  common  plural  term  would  be 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxix 

the  disposers  or  placers.  It  is  singular,  and 
worthy  of  particular  notice,  that  the  Pelas- 
gians,  according  to  Herodotus,  gave  no  other 
names  to  their  deities  than  that  of  godsy^  so 
calling  them  because  they  were  the  placers^  of 
all  things  in  the  world,  and  had  the  universal 
diMrihution  of  them.*  We  see  here  that  the 
Grecian  gods — ^which,  as  haa^  been  proved  in 
another  place,*  were  subsequent  to  the  origi- 
nal chaotic  state  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
when  the  one  was  without  light,  and  the  other 
without  form  and  void — were  really  synony- 
mous with  those  ruling  physical  powers  which 
God  employed  as  his  instalments  first  in  the 
formation  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  next  in 
fliat  of  their  organized  appariture,  whether  ve- 
getable or  animal ;  and  lastly,  in  maintaining 
those  motions  or  revolutions  in  the  bodies  just 
named,  which  he  had  produced,  and  other 
physical  phenomena  which  were  necessary  for 
the  welfare  of  the  whole  system  and  its  several 
parts.  These  powers,  whatever  name  we  call 
them  by,^  form  the  disposers  or  placers^  the 


.   ^  Geot.  *  •^€vrcc. 

^  9£«C  ^c  Tpocrtavofxaaay  a^tag  airo  r«  roioi/rw,  ort  Koerfxw  deyrec 
ra  Tcavra  irpyiy/iaTa  Kai  iracrag  vofxag  ei^pv.     Euterp.  c.  52. 

*  See  Appendix,  Note  1.  *  See  above,  p.  xxxix. 


IxXX  IKTRODUCTIOK. 

heavens  in  action :  these  are  the  Jupiter,  Juno, 
and  Minerva  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and 
the  various  deities  of  other  nations :  For  all 
god&  of  the  nations  are  idols,  saith  the  Psal-* 
mist/  but  Jehovah  made  the  heavens,  or  the 
powers  S3nnboUzed  by  the  idols  of  the  nations. 
These  are  those  powers  which,  under  God — 
who,  as  the  charioteer  of  the  universe,  directs 
them  in  aU  their  operations,  whether  in  heaven 
or  on  earth,  to  answer  the  purposes  of  his  pro-^ 
vidence — execute  the  laws  that  have  received 
his  sanction.  These  are  the  physical  cheru- 
bim represented  by  the  earthly  rulers — the 
man,  the  lion,  the  ox,  and  the  eagle — these 
the  chariot  and  throne  of  the  Deity;  the 
hands  also  by  which  he  taketh  hold  of  material 
things;  the  feet  by  which  he  treads  on  the 
earth  and  other  planets. 

Those  sublime  metaphors  of  the  prophet  Na- 
hum — Jehovah  hath  his  way  in  the  whirlwind^ 
and  in  the  storm  and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of 
hisfeet^ — though  at  first  sight  appearing  only 
magnificent,  figures,  when  analysed  will  be 
found  literally  true.  Knowest  thou  the  ordi- 
nances of  the  heaven  ?    canst  thou  set  the  do^ 

1  Ps.  xcvi.  5.  ^  Nakum^  i.  3. 


INTRODUCTION.  IxxXl 

minion  thereof  in  the  earth  ?  *  saith  God ; 
showing  that  he,  by  his  instruments  the  hea- 
Tens,  rules  the  earth :  this  is  said  in  stronger 
terms,  when  the  heaven  is  declared  to  be  God's 
throne,  and  the  earth  his  footstool,  which  im- 
plies that  God  acts  upon  the  earth  by  what  are 
called  symbolically  his  feet — those  powers 
therefore  that  produce  whirlwinds  and  storms 
in  our  atmosphere ;  that  by  their  impact 
upon  our  planet  cause  evaporation,  and  conse- 
quently form  the  clouds,  are  the  metaphorical 
feet  of  Jehovah,  so  that  the  clouds  with  strict 
propriety  may  be  called  the  dust  excited  by 
th^  tread  of  his  feet.  When  the  Psalmist 
says  of  God,  He  sitteth  upon  the  cherubim^ 
ht  the  earth  he  moved^  what  beauty,  pro- 
priety, and  force  is  there  in  the  expression 
when  it  is  recollected  that  the  physical  cheru- 
bim are  those  powers  that  have  complete  do- 
minion over  the  earth,  and  cause  its  motions. 
2.  The  Sky. — The  word  we  render  by  the 
term  sky,  or  skies,  for  it  is  always  used  in  the 
phiral,  is  derived  from  a  root,*  which  signifies 
to  comminute^  grind,  or  wear  by  friction,  im- 
plying powers  that  come  in  contact  from  oppo- 

1  Jcby  xxxviii.  33.  «  pnm 


Ixxxii  INTRODUCTION. 

site  directions,  so  as  to  be  antagonist  or 
conflicting  powers.  The  cherubim  placed 
at  each  end  of  the  mercy  seat  had  their 
faces  inward,  or  looking  towards  each  other,^ 
so  that  they  appeared  to  symbolize  antagonifst 
powers,  as  if  one  was  a  vis  centrifuga,  and 
the  other  a  vis  centripeta.  The  pillars  of 
the.  earth  are  the  Lord's,  and  he  hath  set  the 
world  upon  them  ;*  and  these  two  antagonist 
forces,  that  which  flies  from  and  that  which 
seeks  the  centre,  form  that,  so  called,  universal 
gravitation,  which,  under  God,  upholds  the 
universe,  keeps  all  its  wholes  and  their  parts 
in  their  places,  maintains  their  motions,  and 
mutual  actions  upon  each  other.  But  though 
these,  as  moving  in  an  opposite  direction,  may 
be  called  antagonist  or  conflicting  powers,  yet 
their  opposition  is  not  enmity,  but  universal  har^ 
mony  and  love.  This  Philo  seems  to  intimate, 
when  he  says — a  station,^  over  against  Pai^- 
disc,  was  assigned  to  the  cherubim,  and  the 
flaming  sword,  not  as  to  enemies  about  to 
struggle  and  fight,  but  as  to  those  that  were 
most  intimate  and  friendly.  It  is  stfid  of  the 
^jherubic  animals,  in  Ezekiel,  that  they  ran 

^  Exod,  xxxvii.  8.  9.  *  1  Sam,  ii.  8. 

3  De  Cherubim.  85.  F.  G.  Ed.  Col.  AHobr.  1643. 


INTRODUCTION*  Ixxxiii 

and  returned  as  the  appearance  of  a  flash  of 
lightning,^  which  seems  to  intimate  a  constant 
efflux  and  influx  of  inconceivable  rapidity. 
Accordingly  the  effluxes  of  light  and  heat 
from  the  solar  orb  in  our  own  system  are  never 
intermitted,  and  their  velocity,  for  that  of  light 
has  been  measured,  exceeds  that  of  any  other 
moving  substance.  With  respect  to  the  fuelj 
if  I  may  so  express  myself,  that  maintains  this 
constant  expenditure,  little  seems  yet  to  be 
known  of  it  philosophically ;  and  we  can  only 
form  conjectures  with  respect  to  it  derived 
from  the  general  analogy  of  nature,  as  far  as 
it  is  submitted  to  the  observation  of  our  senses^ 
On  earth  we  know  that  there  can  be  no  com^^ 
bustion  or  evolution  of  light  and  heat  without 
the  access  of  air  to  an  ignited  body ;  and  that 
a  constant  supply  of  some  comhustihle  sub* 
stance  to  replace  the  constant  expenditure  of 
fuel  is  also  necessary.  Therefore,  reasoning 
from  analogy,  something  similar  must  take 
place  at  the  great  focus  of  light  and  heat. 
There  must  be  an  influx  of  air  and  a  supply  of 
combustible  matter*  That  there  is  such  an 
influx  is  rendered  further  probable  by  other 

1  Ezek.  i.  14. 


Ixxxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

analogical  arguments.  In  man,  who  is  called 
a  microcosm^  or  world  in  miniature,  there  is 
as  incessant  a  return  of  the  blood  to  the  heart 
in  a  negative  state  by  one  set  of  vessels,  as 
there  is  an  issue  of  it  in  a  positive  state  by 
another.  The  lungs  also  inspire  the  air  in  one 
state,  and  expire  it  in  another:  and  by  this 
alternate  flux  and  reflux  life  is  maintained ; 
but  suspend  it  beyond  a  certain  period  and 
death  is  the  result.  Again,  the  rivers  are  con- 
stantly discharging  then-  waters  into  the  sea  by 
one  cLnel  ai^rLiring  them  back  again  by 
another.  Plants  likewise,  and  animals,  derive 
their  nutriment  from  the  earth  and  from  the 
heavens,  and  under  other  forms  return  it  again 
to  the  sources  from  which  it  flowed.  So  that 
it  seems  to  be  a  general  law  that  where  there 
is  an  efflux  there  must  also  be  an  iiiflux. 

3.  The  Firmament.— r£\ie  proper  transla- 
tion  of  the  word,  which  our  version,  after  the 
septuagint,  renders  firm4it$aent^  is — the  expan- 
sion. And  God  said.  Let  there  he  an  expan- 
sion, and  let  it  divide  the  waters,  &c.  The 
cause  of  expansion  is  heat,  which  naturally 
divides  and  separates  that  in  which  it  acts ;  as 
we  see  in  the  case  of  evaporation  and  the  as- 
cent of  steam :    and  not  only  this,   but  the 


INTRODUCTION,  IxXXV 

expansive  force  consolidates  that  whereon  its 
impact  is,  whence  our  translation  renders  the 
word,  after  the  Greek,  ^pcw/ua,  the  jirmament^ 
that  which  renders  all  things  Jirmj  the  action 
of  which  produces  the  cohesion  of  the  atoms 
of  bodies,  and  their  agglomeration  round  a 
partial  or  general  centre :  in  this  last  accep* 
tation  it  is  synonymous  with  the  term  attract 
tioUj  and  in  the  former  with  that  of  repulsion. 
From  these  considerations  we  may  readily 
understand  why  the  Psalmist  calls  it,  The 
Firmament  of  his  power  or  strengths 

The  terms  expansion,  then,  and  firmament, 
express  the  matter  of  the  heavens  in  a  state  of 
action,  going  from  or  returning  to  its  central 
fountain ;  for  every  system,  as  well  as  its  own 
sun  and  planets,  has  doubtless  its  own  hea- 
vens, probably  never  stagnant,  but  incessantly 
issuing  from  a  centre  of  irradiation,  as  the 
blood  from  the  heart  in  a  positive  state,  and 
returning  in  a  negative  state  to  that  centre 
where  it  is,  as  it  were,  again  oxygenated,  and 
circulates  to  the  fiammantia  modnia  mundi  ; 
and  so , 

Labitur,  et  lahetur  in  omne  volubilis  avum^ 

1  Ps.cl.  1. 
VOL.  I.  g 


IxXXvi  INTRODUCTION. 

But  though  every  system  probably  forms  a 
distinct  portion  of  creation,  yet,  reasoning 
from  analogy,  and  the  general  plan  of  the 
Deity,  as  far  as  we  are  acquainted  with  it| 
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the 
universe  consists  of  systems  so  concatenated 
as  to  form  one  great  whole,  the  centre  of 
which  may  be  the  Heaven  of  Heavens,  the 
presence-chamber  of  the  God  of  Gods  and 
Lord  of  Lords ;  in  whom  and  from  whom  is 
all  motion,  light,  and  expansion.  What  may 
be  the  links  that  connect  the  several  systems 
can  only  be  conjectured.  It  has  been  ob- 
served with  regard  to  comets^  that  they  wander 
from  one  solar  system  to  another  ;  *  if  this  be 
the  case  they  evidently  belong  to  two  systems, 
and  their  perihelion  in  one,  wiU  be  their 
aphelion  in  another,  and  thus  they  may  form 
connecting  links  between  them.  This  con- 
catenation of  systems  may  also  have  a  com- 
mon motion  round  their  glorious  centre,  form- 
ing the  grand  cycle,  or  year,  of  the  Uni- 
verse- 
Having,  I  trust,  made  it  evident,  or  at 
least  extremely  probable,  that  the  Heavens 

^  La  Place,  System.  Sec.  by  Harte,  ii.  337. 


INTRODUCTION.  IxXXvH 

and  tbe  Cherubim,  physically  considered, 
indicate  the  same  powers,  I  shall  next  advert 
to  some  passages  of  Scripture  that  seem  to 
lift  up  the  veil  which  covers  these  mysterious 
symbols,  and  show  us  expressly  what  they 
represent! 

In  that  sublime  description  of  the  descent 
of  the  Deity  for  the  help  and  deliverance 
of  David  in  the  eighteenth  Psalm,  we  have 
these  words ;  He  rode  upon  a  Cherub  and 
did  fly  ;  yea,  he  did  fly  upon  the  wings  of  the 
wind.  Here  we  have  one  of  these  symbolical 
beings  introduced  and  explained — ^as  the  latter 
hemistich  of  the  verse  is  clearly  exegetical  of 
the  former — ^by  the  phrase.  The  wings  of  the 
wind}  If  we  next  turn  to  the  hundred-and- 
fourth  Psalm,  in  a  parallel  passage,  we  find 
an  explanation  of  this  latter  metaphor.  He 
maketh  the  clouds  his  chariot,  and  walketh 
upon  the  wings  of  the  wmd.  Whence  it 
appears  that  the  wings  of  the  wind,  by  an 
elegant  metonomy,  mean  the  clouds,  conse* 
quently  the  clouds  are  a  cherub.  In  various 
parts  of  the  Old  Testament,  God's  presence 
and  glory  are  manifested  by  and  in  a  cloud. 

1  Parkhurst  renders  these  words,  The  wings  af  the  Spirit,  but 
he  stands  alone  in  this. 


Ixxxviii  INTRODUCTION". 

When  he  led  his  hosts  from  Egypt  through 
the  Red  Sea,  he  went  before  them  by  day 
in  a  pillar  of  a  cloudy  and  by  night  in  a  pillar 
of  fire  ;  *  -when  he  was  about  to  descend  upon 
Mount  Sinai,  he  said — io,  /  come  unto  thee 
in  a  thick  cloud.*  When  the  tabernacle  was 
set  up  in  the  wilderness,  and  the  work  was 
finished,  Then  a  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  the 
congregation^  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
filled  the  tabernacle.^  When  Solomons 
Temple  was  built,  and  the  ark  brought  into 
the  oracle,  and  placed  under  the  wings  of 
the  cherubim,  and  the  priests  were  come 
forth,  then  The  cloud  filled  the  house,  so  that 
the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister  because 
of  the  cloud :  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Aarf 
filled  the  house  of  the  LordJ"  As  God  thus 
came  of  old  in  a  cloud,  and  by  it  manifested 
his  presence  to  his  people  and  in  his  house ;  so 
likewise  when  he  spoke  to  them,  it  was  from  a 
cloud,  as  in  the  passage  above  quoted — Lo, 
I  come  to  thee  in  a  thick  cloud,  that  thy 
people  may  hear  when  I  speak  with  thee. 
And  again.  And  a  cloud  covered  the  mount ; 
and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  abode  upon  Mount 

1  Exod.  xiii.  21.  2  Hid.  xix.  9, 16.    1  Kings,  viii.  12. 

»  Exod.  xl!  33,  34.  *  1  Kings,  viiL  6—11. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxxix 

Sinai,  and  the  xAond  covered  it  six  days  i 

« 

aitd  the  seventh  day  he  called  unto  Moses  out 
of  the  midst  of  the  cloud/  And  in  another 
place,  And  the  Lord  descended  in  the  cloud, 
and  stood  with  him  there,  and  proclaimed 
the  name  of  the  Lord*  And  the  Lord  came 
down  in  a  cloud,  and  spahe  unto  him,  arid 
took  of  the  Spirit  that  was  upon  him,  and 
^ave  it  unto  the  seventy  elders.^  And  in  the 
New  Testament,  at  the  Transfiguration,  JBe- 
hold  a  bright  cloud  overshadowed  them,  and 
a  voice  out  of  the  cloud.*  From  these  pas- 
sages it  appears  to  follow,  that  when  the 
Deity  thought  proper  to  address  his  prophets 
or  his  people  by  the  voice  of  words,  it  was 
from  a  cloud. 

But  not  only  did  God  descend  to  com- 
municate with  his  people,  and  to  reside  as  it 
were  amongst  them  in  a  cloud;  but  when  our 
Saviour  went  up  into  Heaven,  it  was  upon 
a  cloud,  which  Athanasius  calls  mounting  the 
cherubim;'^  and  when  he  comes  again,  it 
will  be  in  the  same  manner,  attended  by  his 
holy    angels-      When    he    is    said,    in    the 

*  Exod,  xxiv.  15,  16.  '  lind.  xxxiv.  5. 

^  Numb.  xi.  25.  *  Matth,  xvii.  5. 

^  Opera,  \L  3011,  D. 


XC  IWTRODUCTIOir. 

Apocaljrpse,  to  ride  upon  a  White  Horse, 
and  the  armies  which  were  in  heaven  to 
follow  him  upon  white  horses ;  *  by  these 
white  horses  are  meant  white  clouds^  as  is 
evident  from  other  passages  of  Holy  Writ; 
as  where  it  is  said — Beholdj  he  cometh  with 
clouds.^  Again,  God's  going  to  execute 
judgments  upon  any  nation  is  sometimes 
represented  by  his  riding  upon  a  cloud.  So 
when  the  prophet  pronounces  the  burden  of 
Egypt,  his  exordium  is — Behold,  the  Lord 
rideth  upon  a  swift  cloud,  and  shall  come 
into  Egypt. 

So  immediate  is  God's  action  upon  the 
clouds  described  to  be  in  the  Bible,  that  the 
thunder  is  called  his  voice,  as  in  Job— Hear 
attentively  the  noise  of  his  voice,  and  the 
sound  that  goeth  out  of  his  mouth.  He  di- 
recteth  it  under  the  whole  heaven,  and  his 

lightning  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth God 

thundereth  marvellously  with  his  voice :  ^  and 
when  he  descended  upon  Mount  Sinai,  it  was 
with  mighty  thunderings.*  Considering  the 
benefits  and  blessing  that  God  confers  upon 

« 

1  Revel,  xix.  11,  14. 

<  Ibid.  i.  7,  comp.  Dan,  vii.  13.   Rev.  xit.  14.   Acts,  i.  11. 

'  Jobf  xxxvii.  2 — 5.  *  Exod.  ix.  28. 


IlfTRODUCTlOlf.  XCI 

mankind  by  the  ministry  of  the  Cheruh- 
clouds^  his  horses  and  chariots  of  salvation, 
we  need  not  wonder  at  the  Psalmist's  expres- 
sion— His  strength  is  in  the  cUmds^  Acting^ 
by  them,  he  causes  it  to  rain  upon  one  city 
and  not  upon  another.^  Are  there  any^  says 
Jeremiah,  among  the  vanities  of  the  Gentiles 
that  can  cause  rain  ?  or  can  the  Heavens 
give  showers?  Art  not  thou  He,  O  Lord 
our  God.^ 

The  Deity  superintends  his  whole  creation, 
not  only  supporting  the  system  that  he  has 
established,  and  seeing  that  the  powers  to 
which  he  has  given  it  in  charge  to  govern 
under  him,  execute  his  physical  laws ;  but 
Jiimself,  where  he  sees  fit,  in  particular  in- 
stances dispensing  with  these  laws:  restrain- 
ing the  clouds,  in  one  instance,  from  shedding 
their  treasures ;  and  in  another,  permitting 
them  to  descend  in  blessings.  Acting  every 
where  upon  the  atmosphere,  and  those  secon* 
dary  powers  that  produce  atmospheric  phe- 
nomena, as  circumstances  connected  with  his 
moral  government  require.  Thus  it  is  that 
his  strength  is  in  the  clouds  ;  that  his  pre- 

*  Ps.  Ixviii.  34.  *  AmoSy  ir.  7. 

»  Jerem.  xir.  22. 


XCU  INTRODUCTION, 

sence,  either  to  bless  or  to  curse,  is  mani*- 
fested  by  them ;  that  his  voice  is  heard  from 
them ;  his  glory  irradiates  from  them.  On 
this  account  also  they  are  called  his  paths} 

The  Lord  is  said  to  come  with  jirej  or 
rather  in  fire;'  to  descend  in  fire;'  to  be  a 
consuming  fire;*  to  speak  out  of  the  fire;* 
from  all ,  which  passages  it  seems  to  follow, 
that  j^r^  or  heat  form  also  one  of  the  physical 
cherubim  upon  which  the  Deity  sitteth,  or 
which  he  inhabiteth,  and  by  which  he  acteth. 

Light  appears  entitled  to  the  same  dis- 
tinction ;  for  God  is  said  to  dwell  in  the  light 
that  no  man  can  approach  unto/  and  to  cover 
himself  with  light  as  with  a  garment/ 

Lastly,  air  or  windy  which  God  bringeth 
out  of  his  treasury ;  which  is  the  t3^e,  and, 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  was  the  precursor 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  both  in  Hebrew  and 
Greek®  is  expressed  by  the  same  word  dis- 
tinguished only  by  its  adjuncts ;  and  is  one 


1  Ps.  Ixv.  14, 

«  Isai.  Ixvi.  15.  Heb.  m«3,  the  Septuagint  seem  to  hare 
read  m)io» 

3  Exod,  xix.  18.  *  Deut.  iv.  24. 

*  Ibid.  36.  ^  1  Tim.  vi.  16. 

7  Ps,  civ.  2.  '  nn  wvevfia. 


INTRODUCTION.  XClll 

of  the  main  instruments  by  which  God  acts 
upon  our  globe,  both  in  dispensing  blessings 
and  curses,  and  without  which  our  life  could 
not  be  sustained  a  moment,  is  evidently  a 
cherub,  or  ruling  physical  power,  of  the  same 
Fank  with  heat  and  light. 

The  statement  I  have  here  given  of  the 
physical  cherubim,  is  singularly  confirmed 
m  EzekieFs  vision.  /  looked,  says  he,  and 
behold  a  whirlwind  came  out  of  the  northf 
a  great  cloud,  and  a  fire  infolding  itself  and 
a  brightness  was  about  it}  Here  we  see  the 
appearance  of  the  symbolical  animals  was 
preceded  by  that  of  the  physical  agents  they 
symbolized — ^the  wind,  the  cloud,  the  fre, 
and  the  light.  The  reason  why  the  clouds 
^  particularly  signalized  as  God's  chariots, 
appears  to  be  because  they  are  instinct  with 
all  those  principles  by  which  God  acts  upon 
the  earth;  and  therefore  they  are  described 
as  carrying  him,  since  they  are  the  instru- 
ments by  which  his  will  has  full  accomplish- 
ment. 

It  is  singular,  and  worthy  of  particular 
notice,  that  God  is  also  said  to  dwell  in  dark- 


1  Ezekr  i.  4. 


XCIV  IN  TRODUCTIOir. 

ness.  The  Lord  hath  said  that  he  would 
dwell  in  the  thick  darkness ;  ^  and  again — 
Moses  drew  near  to  the  thick  darkness  where 
God  was.*  In  the  Psalms  it  is  said — He 
made  darkness  his  secret  (or  hiding)  placed 
Darkness  was  the  state  of  the  original  hea- 
vens, before  God  formed  the  light,  to  which 
this  passage  seems  to  be  an  allusion.  In 
Isaiah,  the  term  create  is  applied  to  darkness, 
and  form  to  the  production  of  light ;  *  from 
which  it  appears  that  it  was  out  of  darkness 
that  light  was  formed;  and  these  two  oppo- 
sites  seem  to  bear  the  same  relation  to  each 
other  as  positive  and  negative  electricity,  or 
heat  and  cold.  Darkness  was  that  in  which 
the  Divine  Spirit  operated,  when  by  incu- 
bation motion,  followed  by  light  and  expan- 
sion, was  educed,  and  ihe  sea  brake  forth 
from  the. crust  of  the  earth  as  from  the  womb; 
when  the  cloud  was  the  garment  thereof,  and 
thick  darkness  a  swaddling  band  for  it.^ 

In  the  different  visions  of  the  appearance 
of  the  Deity,  as  the  Insessor  of  the  chariot 
tlie  cherubim,  it  is  stated,  that  expanded 

1  2  Chron.  vi.  1.  «  Exod.  xx.  21. 

*  Ps.  xviii.  11.  ♦  Isax,  xlv.  7. 

*  Jobf  xxxviii.  8,  9. 


IKTRODUCTIOK.  XCV 

over  their  heads  was  a  firmament  like  crystal 
or  ice  ;  that  above  this  firmament  was  a  sap* 
phire  throne;  that  one  sat  on  this  throne, 
round  about  whom  was  the  appearance  of  a 
rainbow/  So  likewise  in  the  vision  of  the 
apostolic  prophet,  St.  John — A  throne  was  set 
in  heaven,  and  one  sat  upon  it,  and  there  was 
a  rainbow  round  about  the  throne,  and  before 
the  throne  was  a  sea  of  glass  like  unto  crystal ; 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  round  about 
the  throne  were  four  cherubic  animals,  which 
proclaim  the  Trisagium^  When  Moses, 
Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  the  elders  of  Israel 
went  up  into  Mount  Sinai,  and  saw  the  God 
of  Israel,  He  stood  upon  what  was  like  a 
pavement  of  sapphire  and  as  it  were  the  body 
of  heaven  in  its  clearness/  In  all  these  pas- 
sages,  the  same  idea  seems  to  prevail  with 
reqpect  to  the  firmament — it  is  Uke  ice  or  the 
terrible  crystal   in  one — a  sea  of  g^lass  like 

CTSt.!,  or Volli^g.  e>»itting  the  fplendoar 
of  crystal  in  the  other — like  the  body  of 
heaven  in  its  clearness  in  the  third. 

The  footstool  of  the  Deity,  the  pavement 
on  which  his  throne  is  placed,  is  over  or  above 

»  Ezek.'i.  22,  26,  28.  «  Revel,  iv.  2,  3^6,  7,  8. 

*  Exod,  xxiv.  10. 


XCVl  INTRODUCTIOK. 

the  heads  of  ilie  cherubim;  and  though  we 
cannot  compreliend  exactly  the  precise  mean- 
ing of  the  figures  employed,  yet  the  general 
idea  seems  to  be  that  of  irradiation  ;  and  by 
these  representations  the  claim  of  Jehovah  the 
God  of  Israel  is  indicated  to  supremacy  and 
entire  dominion  over  the  physical  cherubim^ 
or  the  heavens  in  a  state  of  action,  and  as 
the  sole  fountain  and  centre  of  that  incessant 
radiation  and  glory,  and  of  those  constant 
effluxes  by  which  the  whole  universe  of  sys- 
tems and  worlds  is  maintained. 

It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  one  of  the 
principal  reasons  why  the  cherubic  ^rmbols 
were  placed  in  the  adytum  of  the  Jewish 
tabernacle  and  temple  was  not  only  to  repre- 
sent those  pow^ers  that  govern  under  God  in 
nature,  but  likewise  to  indicate  his  Supreme 
and  only  Godhead,  and  that  his  people  were 
to  beware  of  worshipping  these  powers  or  their 
symbols,  because  they  derived  so  much  benefit 
fi^om  their  ministerial  agency,  but  to  worship 
Him  alone  who  created  them,  employed  them^ 
and  operated  in  and  by  them. 

The  ancients  seem  generally  to  have  re- 
garded the  name  and  symbols  as  indicating 
and    representing    more    than    one    object. 


INTRODUCTION.  XCVIl 

Philo  Judaeus,  who  has  written  a  treatise 
upon  those  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden 
of  Eden,  sometimes  interprets  them  physi^ 
colly,  and  sometimes  metaphysically.  Physi- 
cally, in  one  place,  he  considers  one  cherub 
as  representing  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stare, 
and  the  other  that  of  the  planets,^  and  in 
another  he  asks,  whether  they  may  not 
signify  the  two  hemispheres,*  both  of  which 
amount  to  the  whole  universe.^  The  flaming 
sword,  he  conjectures,  either  represents  the 
general  motion  of  the  heavens  and  planets,  or 
else  is  a  symbol  of  the  sun.*  Metaphysically, 
he  considers  the  two  cherubim  as  symbolizing 
the  Power  and  Goodness  of  the  Deity,  and 
the  flaming  sword  the  Logos  or  his  essential 
Word ;  «tnd  this  interpretation  he  seems  to 
think  was  divinely  suggested  to  him/  Cle- 
ment of  Alexandria,  in  some  degree,  seems  to 
incline  to  the  opinions,  on  this  subject,  of  his 
compatriot  Philo,  but  he  expresses  himself 
obscurely,'  and,  afler  alluding  to  other  inter* 
pretations,  concludes  with  mentioning  "  The 

1  De  Cherubim.  1613.  86.  A.  B. 
«  Ibid.  D.  '  Ihid.  85.  G. 

♦  Ibid.  D.  E.  «  Ibid.  86.  F.  G. 

6  Clem.  Alex.  Stromata.  1.  v.  241.  ed.  Sylburg.  1592. 


XCVlll  INTRODUCTIOIf. 

doxologising  spirits  whom  the  cherubim  sym- 
bolize"^  Irenaeus,  the  learned  Bishop  ef 
Lyons,  who  had  conversed  with  Polycarp, 
St.  John's  disciple,  regards  these  mystic  db^ 
jects  as  physical  and  ecde^istical  sjopbols^ 
taking  chiefly  iaio  consideration  their  number. 
The  yimr  quarters  of  the  globe,  the  ybwr  winds, 
the  four  gospels,  the  four  universal  covenants 
given  to  man — each  of  these  he  appears  to. 
regard  as  figured  by  the  cherubic  animals;' 
and  he  might  have  added  the  /oter  physical 
cherubim,  spirit  or  wind,  Ught,  expansion, 
and  the  clouds.  Justin  Martyr  has  a  sin* 
gular  opinion  on  this  subject.  He  thinks 
Ezekiel's  cherubim  symbolized  Nebuchad* 
nezsar  when  he  was  driven  out  jfirom  the 
society  of  man  as  a  beast :  ^  when,  according 
to  the  Septuagint  which  Justin  used,  he  eat 
grass  like  an  ox,  his  hair  was  like  a  lions,  and 
his  nails  like  a  bird's  or  eagles.  Athanasius 
has  a  remarkable  passage,  before  alluded  to, 
in  which  he  says  of  Christ,  that  when  he  ap- 
peared upon  earth,  He  bowed  the  heavens  and 
came  down,  and  that  he  again  mounted  the 

1  In  allusion  probably  to  Isaiah  vi.  3,  and  Revel,  iv.  8. 

*  Adv,  Hares.  1.  iii.  c.  11. 

^.  Qucest.  et  Resp»  ad  Orthodox*  Qucest.  xliv^. 


n^TBODUCTION.  XCIX 

ehenibim,  and  ascended  into  heaven,*  from 
whence  it  should  seem  that  he  had  adopted 
the  opinion,  that  the  heavens,  and  the  clouds 
were  antitypes  of  the  symbolical  cherubim : 
yet  in  another  passage  of  his  works,  he  ex- 
pressly places  the  seraphim  and  cherubim 
amongst  the  highest  of  the  heavenly  essences. 
"  As  we  know,"  says  he,  "  that  there  is  a 
distinction  of  rank  in  the  powers  above,  so 
there  are  also  differences  of  station  and  know* 
ledge-  The  thrones,  both  the  Seraphim  and 
the  Cherubim,  learn  from  God  immediately, 
as  higher  than  all  and  nearest  to  God,  and 
diey  instruct  the  inferior  orders — ^but  the  low- 
est rank  are  the  angels,  which  are  also  the 
instructors  of  men."  * 

It  seems  evident  from  this  statement  of  the 
opinions  of  both  ancient  Jews  and  Christians, 
that  the  sculptured  Cherubim,  in  their  opinion, 
represented  physical  as  well  as  metaphysical 
objects;  in  fact,  the  most  general  interpreta- 
tion seems  to  be — that  those  powers  that  rule 
under  God,  either  in  his  physical  universe,  or 
which,  with  regard  to  our  planet,  have  power 
in  his  church,  or  over  his  people;  and  also 

1  Quasi,  ad  Antioch*  cxxxvi. 

<  De  eommun.  essent.  ed.  Paris,  1627,  i.  238. 


C  INTRODUCTIOK- 

those  spiritual  essences  that  approach  nearest 
to  him,  in  the  purity  of  their  natures,  are  the 
antitype  of  the  cherubic  forms.  St.  Paul, 
describing  the  creation  of  all  things  by  the 
Son  of  God,  whether  visible  or  invisible,  men- 
tions particularly  four  ruling  powers  in  nature 
and  grace — Thrones^  dominions,  principali- 
ties, and  powers.^  This  may  be  interpreted 
of  all  rule  and  government  both  in  heaven 
and  upon  earth;  which  is  all  derived  from 
Christ,  as  King  of  Eangs  and  Lord  of  Lords, 
to  whom  All  power  is  given  in  heaven  and 
earth :  *  who  therefore  is  the  Insessor  of  the 
cherubim,  acting  by  all  the  powers  that  he 
hath  created,  whether  physical  or  metaphy- 
sical, whether  civil,  ecclesiastical,  or  spiritual ; 
for  He  upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of 
his  powers 

In  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  and  in  the 
Apocalypse,*  the  six-winged  beings  called  by 
the  former  The  seraphim,^  and  by  St»  John 

1  Cohss.  1.  16.  2  Matth.  xxviii.  18. 

*  Heb.  i.  3.  ♦  IsaL  vi.  3.     Rev,  iv.  8. 

^  Heb.  D^Bntt^  This  name,  which  literally  may  be  rendered 
bumersy  physically  would  signify  the  heavens  in  the  most  in- 
tense state  of  action;  they  are  stated  to  have  six  wings,  the 
upper  pair  veiling  their  faces,  the  lower  pair  covering  their  feet, 
the  intermediate  pair  being  used  for  flight.     See  Isai,  vi.  2. 


INTRODUCTION,  CI 

Imng-creatures^ — ^^ which  by  most  ancient 
writers  are  thought  to  be  syiion3niious  with 
the  cherubim — ^are  represented  as  repeating 
the  TrUagium  ;  the  latter  says — They  rest 
not  day  and  night,  saying.  Holy,  Holy,  Holy, 
Lprd  Gad  Almighty.  This  triple  ascription 
of  QolinesB  is  thought  by  many  to  intimate 
a  Trinity  of  Persons  in  the  Godhead,  and 
that  the  {diysical  cherubim  or  seraphim 
symhoHcally  represent  that  mystery.  Arch* 
deacon  Sharp,  and  after  him  Archbishop 
Newcome,*  have  observed,  that  this  opinion 
k  inconsistent  with  these  symbolical  animals 
ffiUing  down  and  worshipping  the  Lamb,  and 
aseribing  their  redemption  to  him;  an  ob« 
jection  which  appears  to  me  not  to  have  been 
satisfactorily  answered.  It  should,  however, 
be  taken  into  consideration  that  the  cherubim 
are  symbols  not  solely  of  physical,  but  of 
idl  governing  powers ;  and  that,  therefore,  in 
order  to  interpret  rightly  any  act  of  theirs,  the 

When  o«r  Saviour  says  of  the  loimd — Tho^  hearest  the  sound 
thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it 
^oeths  «Miy  net  th«  same  thiBg  be  meant  as  by  Isaiah's  Descrip* 
lion  of  the  Serajibin  ? 

*  Gr.  Zwa. 

'  Sharp  On  the  Cfierubim,  305.  Newcome's  Ezekielf  i.  10, 
note. 

VOL.  I,  h 


Cll  INTRODUCTION. 

circumstances  attending  upon  it  should  be 
carefully  examined.  If  we  consider  the  pas- 
sages in  the  Apocalypse  here  alluded  to,  we 
shall  find  that  whien  praise  is  to  be  rendered 
to  God  as  Creator  and  Upholder  of  the  uni- 
verse, they  then  are  stated  to  proclaim  his 
Triune  Deity,  by  saying — Holy,  Holy,  Holy, 
Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and 
is  to  come.  Thi8  they  do  as  the  physical 
powers,  under  God,  upholding  the  universe, 
especially  as  fire,  light,  and  air;  all  of  which, 
in  passages  of  Scripture  above  noticed,*  ap- 
pear to  represent  the  Three  Persons  of  the 
Holy  Trinity.  But  when  they  are  introduced 
as  representing  the  governing  Powers  of  the 
universal  Church,  as  they  are  when  they  fefl 
down  and  worship  the  Lamb,  the  case  is 
altered ;  for  those  they  then  represent  are 
amongst  the  redeemed. 

One  of  my  objects  in  treating  so  much  at 
large  upon  this  mysterious  subject,  was  to 
counteract  that  tendency,  often  observable  in 
the  writings  of  philosophers,  to  ascribe  too 
much  to  the  action  of  second  causes,  and  the 
mechanism  of  the  heavenly  powers;   a«  if 

^  Revel,  ubi  supr,  *  See  above,  p.  xcii. 


INTRODUCTION.  ClU 

they  were  sufficient  of  themselves,  and  with* 
out  the  intervention  of  the  First  Cause,  to  do 
all  in  all,  and  keep  the  whole  machine  and 
dU  its  parts  together  and  at  work.  Instead 
of  regarding  Him  as  receding  further  and 
fiirther  from  our  observation,*  my  desire  is  to 
bring  Him  nearer  and  nearer  to  us,  that  we 
may  see  and  acknowledge  Him  every  where, 
^  the  main-spring  of  the  universe,  which 
animates,  as  it  were,  and  upholds  it  in  all  its 
parts  and  motions — 

Lives  through  all  life,  extends  through  all  extent, 
Spreads  undivided,  operates  unspent. 

Maintaining  his  own  laws  by  his  own  universal 
action  upon  and  by  his  cherubim  of  glory. 
Without  Him  they  can  do  nothing. 


I  cannot  conclude  this  Introduction  without 
returning  my  grateful  acknowledgments  to 
the  Board  of  Curators  of  the  Hunterian 
Museum,  for  their  kind  permission  to  have 
drawings  taken  of  such  subjects  in  tliat 
superb  collection  as  might  answer  my  pur- 

*  See  above,  p.  xxii. 


CIV  INTRODUCTION- 

pose ;  and  to  Messrs.  Clift  and  Owen,  the 
conservator  and  assistant-conservator  of  ti» 
museum,  for  their  readiness,  on  all  occaaionsv 
to  show  and  explain  to  me  such  artides  und^r 
thedr  care  as  I  had  occasion  to  impect;  to 
the  friendly  attentions  of  the  latter  gentleman 
I  am  particularly  indebted,  not  only  for  his 
exertions  to  serve  me  in  the  museufii,  but  for 
his  valuable  information  on  num^ous  ^ienr 
tific  subjects,  on  which  I  had  occasion  to  con* 
suit  him,  which  his  deep  knowledge  of  com^ 
parative  anatomy,  and  familiar  acquaintance 
with  the  classification  of  the  animal  kingdom, 
enabled  him  to  give  me.  To  the  gentlemen 
connected  with  the  British  Museum  and  tliat 
of  the  Zoological  Society,  I  have  to  m^e 
similar  acknowledgments  for  the  kindness  and 
information  with  which  my  inquiries  on  several 
subjects  have  uniformly  been  answered. 

As  the  first  volume  of  this  woric  was 
printed  before  the  publication  of  Dr.  Rc^et-s 
admirable  Treatise,  it  will  not  be  deemed 
wonderful  that,  in  some  instances,  we  have 
treated  of  the  same  subject.  The  history, 
habits,  and  instincts  of  animals,  are  so  inti- 
mately connected  with  their  physiological 
structure,  especially  their  external  anatomy. 


INTRODUCTION.  CV 

that  it  is  scarcely  possible^  in  order  to  prove 
the  adaptation  of  means  to  an  end,  to  treat 
satisfactorily  of  the  former  without  occasional 
illustrations  from  the  latter.  After  the  doctor's 
work  appeared,  I  removed  many  things  of 
this  kind  from  my  MS-,  upon  which  he  had 
enlarged.  The  moult  of  Crustaceans,  how- 
ever, seemed  to  me,  and  to  every  friend  whoin 
I  consulted,  so  necessary  to  make  the  history 
of  that  Class  complete,  that,  though  mostly 
derived  from  the  same  source  as  that  of  my 
learned  Co-nominee,  I  did  not  expunge  it* 


THE 


HISTORY,  HABITS,  AND  INSTINCTS 

OF  ANIMALS. 


Chapter  I. 
Creation  of  Animals. 

In  no  part  of  creation  are  the  power,  wisdom,' 
and  goodness,  of  its  beneficent  and  almighty 
Author  more  signally  conspicuous  than  in  the 
various  animals  that  inhabit  and  enliven  our 
globe.  The  infinite  diversity  of  their  forms  and 
organs ;  the  nice  adaptation  of  these  to  their 
several  functions ;  the  beauty  and  elegance  of  a 
large  number  of  them ;  the  singularity  of  others ; 
the  variety  of  their  motions ;  their  geographical 
distribution ;  but,  above  all,  their  preeminent 
utility  to  mankind,  in  every  state  and  stage  of 
life,  render  them  objects  of  the  deepest  interest 
both  to  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low,  wise  and 
unlearned,  so  that  arguments  in  proof  of  these 
primary  attributes  of  the  Godhead,  drawn  from 
the  habits,  instincts,  and  other  adjuncts  of  the 

VOL.  I.  B 


2  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

animal  creation,  are  likely  to  meet  with  more 
uniyerBal  attention,  to  be  more  generally  compre- 
hended, to  make  a  deeper  and  more  lasting  im- 
pression upon  the  mind,  to  direct  the  heart  more 
fervently  and  devotedly  to  the  maker  and  giveir 
of  the  seiQteresting  beings,  than  those  which  are 
drawn  from  more  abstruse  sources,  though  really 
more  elevated  and  sublime. 

The  history  of  the  animal  kingdom  naturally 
commences  with  the  creation  of  animals,  and  the 
great  events  preparatory  to  it,  for  when  the 
Almighty  Creator,  in  his  wisdom,  and  by  the 
word  of  his  power,  had  first  brought  into  being, 
and  afterwards  set  in  order,  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  {  had  caused,  the  latter  to  bring  forth  grass, 
and  herb,  and  tree,  and  then  had  placed  his  sun 
in  the  former,  that  by  constant  irradiations  of 
light  and  heat  from  that  central  fountain,  the 
life,^  and  motion,  which  the  first  mover  had 
b^un  by  ihe  incubation  of  his  Spirit,  and  which 
now  manifested  itself  in  the  vegetable  kingdom, 
might  be  mamtained  till  it  had  run  its  destined 
course.  When  all  things  were  thus  prepared, 
his  next  care  was  to  people  and  enliven  the  earth 
with  a  different  and  higher  class  of  beings,  in 
whom— to  organization,  wd  life,  and  growth, 
and  rq[>roductive  powers, — might  be  added  sensa- 
tion and  voluntary  motion.    Unpeopled  by  ani- 

<^  Bee  Appendix,  note  I* 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  3 

mab,  the  verdant  earth  in  all  its  primitive  and 
untarnished  beauty,  though  inlaid  with  floi^ers 
exhibiting,  in  endless  variety,  every  mixture 
and  shade  of  colour  that  can  glad  the  sight ; 
though  fhnned  by  gales  breathing  Sabean  odours, 
to  gratify  the  scent ;  though  tempting  the  appe- 
tite by  delicious  fruits  of  every  flavour,  still 
would  be  a  scene  without  the  breath  of  life.  No 
motions  would  be  seen  but  of  the  pas^ng  clouds, 
of  the  fluctuating  waters,  and  the  waving  boughs ; 
no  voice  heard  but  of  the  elemetits. 

Was  a  single  pair  placed  in  this  paradise, 
though  at  first  it  would  seem  that  there  was 
gratification  fi»r  every  sense,  and  joy  would  pos- 
sess the  heart,  and  admiration  fill  the  soul  with 
pleasure ;  yet  after  the  novelty  of  the  spectacle 
had  ceased,  and  the  efiect  of  its  first  impriession 
was  obliterated,  a  void  would  soon  be  felt,  some- 
thing more  would  seem  wanting  to  animate  thd 
otherwise  lovely  scene ;  a  longing  would  arise  in 
the  mind  for  some  beings,  varying  in  form  and 
magnitude,  fumishfed  with  organs  that  would 
enable  thetoi  to  traverse  and  enliven  the  lower 
regions  of  the  atmosphere,  others  that  might 
course  over  the  earth's  surface,  and  others  that 
eould  witiL  l&etr  easy  way  through  its  waters,  so 
that  all,  by  their  numbers,  and  the  variety  of 
their  motions,  might  e^ibit  a  striking  and  inter- 
esting contrast  to  the  fixed  and  unconscious 
vitality  of  the  vegetable  kingdom. 


4  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

But  it  was  not  the  will  of  the  beneficent  Crea- 
tor to  leave  such  a  blank  and  blot  in  his  creation ; 
before  he  created  man  in  his  own  image,  and  en- 
throned him  king  of  the  new-made  world,  he 
decreed  that  his  dominion  also  should  be  an 
image  of  his  o^n,  over  innumerable  creatures  of 
every  form  and  grade,  each  in  its  place  entrusted 
with  a  peculiar  office  and  function,  and  furnished 
with  organs  adapted  to  its  work,  contributing  to 
its  own  and  the  general  welfare;  so  that  all 
should  operate,  **  though  each  in  difierent  sort 
and  manner,"  to  accomplish  the  great  plan  of  an 
All-wise  Providence. 

What  was  the  precise  order  of  creation  in  the 
animal  kingdom  is  no  where  clearly  revealed  in 
Holy  Scripture;  and  we  can  only  conjecture, 
since  the  most  perfect  animal,  and  he  who  alone 
belonged  to  the  spiritual  and  invisible  world  by 
his  soul,  as  well  as  by  his  body  to  the  visible,  was 
created  the  last,  that  the  progress  was  from  those 
that  were  at  the  foot  of  the  scale  to  those  that 
were  at  the  summit.  We  are  told,  indeed,  in 
general  terms,  that  on  the  fifth  day,  at  the  divine 
bidding,  the  waters,  hitherto  barren  and  unten- 
anted, produced  abundantly  "Mc  moving  crea- 
ture that  hath  life,''  and  fowl  to  traverse  the  firma- 
ment. In  an  instant,  in  obedience  to  that  quick- 
ening word,  by  the  operation  of  Almighty  Power, 
and  under  the  guidance  of  infinite  Wisdom  and 
Goodness,  the  boundless  ocean  with  all  its  tri- 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS  5 

butary  streams  became  prolific,  and  brought 
forth  by  myriads,  in  endless  and  strange  diver- 
sity, its  destined  offspring,  beginning,  perhaps, 
with  the  viewless  animalcule  or  the  senseless 
polype,  half  animal  and  half  plant,  and  ending 
with  thie  half  fish  and  half  quadruped,  cetaceans, 
and  their  kindred  monsters.^  Nor  was  the  Ocean 
prolific  of  aquatic  animals  alone,  and  those  whose 
habitation  was  the  restless  world  of  waters,  with 
all  its  streams,  its  caves,  and  its  abysses,  it  also 
gave  birth  to  all  the  winged  and  feathered  tribes 
—from  the  brilliant  humming  bird  to  the  mighty 
eagle  and  the  giant  vulture — that  people  and 
enliven  the  atmospheric  sea,  and  make  it  the 
field  of  their  excursions,  'ftie  animals  created 
on  this  day  were  destined  to  dwell  or  move, 
independent  of  the  earth,  in  a  fluid  medium  of 
greater  or  less  tenuity,  and  for  that  purpose 
were  fitted  with  appropriate  and  peculiar  organs, 
in  one  case  both  for  respiration  and  locomotion, 
in  the  other  for  locomotion  only. 

Agaiir  the  word  of  power  was  spoken, — "  Let 
the  earth  bring  forthj'  and  instantly  the  various 
tribes  of  quadrupeds  issued  from  her  teeming 
womb,  varying  infinitely  in  size,  fipom  the  minute 
harvest-mouse*  to  the  giant  bulk  of  the  elephant 
and  hippopotaioii^then  also  the  earth-bom  rep- 
tiles, whether  mur-footed,  six-footed,  eight-footed, 

^  See  Appendix,  note  2.  ^  Mus  messarius. 


6  CRBATION  OF  ANIMALS, 

o^  many-footed,  started  kvto  Ufe,  a»d  connected 
tbe  terrestrial  tribes  with  those  parodueed  from  the 
wafers.  !(n  the  majority  of  these,  the  6ns  of  the 
fishes  Bod  cetaceans,  and  the  wings  of  the  birds, 
were  replaced  by  legs  best  fitted  for  motion  on 
the  theatre  <»  which  they  were  to  act  their  part, 
and  to  fulfil  the  will  of  their  Creator. 

The  earth  was  now  completely  furnished  aad 
decorated  to  receive  her  destined  king  apd  master* 
The  suQ,  the  moon,  and  the  stars  were  sheddiag 
their  kindly  infiueaiees  upon  her;  she  tod  her 
fellow  planets  had  commenced  their  annual  and 
diurnal  reyolutions ;  the  plants  and  flowers^  her 
first  born  progeny,  had  ^rung  out  of  her  bosom, 
and  covered  her  with  yerdtire  and  beaiity ;  and 
the  firuit  and  forest  trees  flourishing  in  ajl  their 
glc»y  of  leaf,  blossoms,  and  fruit,  we^e  ready  to 
minister  to  the  support,  coaaaiort,  and  enjoymeat 
of  their  future  lord :  the  sea»  the  air,  the  earth, 
were  each  filled  with  their  apprppriate  inhabi- 
tants, and  throughout  the  whole  creation  was 
beauty,  and  grace,  and  life,  and  motion,  -and  joy, 
and  jubilee.  But  still,  in  the  nudst  of  all  this  ap* 
parent  glory  and  activity  of  vegetable  and  anifioal 
life  in  the  new  created  world,  there  was  not  a 
single  being  epidued  with  reason  and  understand* 
ing ;  one  that  could  elevate  its  thought  above  the 
glorious  and  wonderful  spectacle  to  the  great 
Author  of  it,  or  acknowledge  and  adore  its  Creator. 


CREATION  OF  ANIMAI«».  7 

Amidat  tfaia  iafinke  variety  of  beings  there  was 
aot  a  aiiigle  one  which  to  a  material  body  added 
m  ioiiiiaterial  immortal  soul';  so  that  there  was 
still  a  great  bkmk  in  creati<»u  A  wonderful  and 
magnificent  temple  was  reared,  and  shone  in 
gloiy  and  beauty,  but  there  was  as  yet  no  priest 
therein  to  offer  up  incense  to  the  Deity  to  whom 
it  was  dedicated.. 

We  are  nowj  therefore,  to  consider  the  creation 
of  him  for  whom  this  high  office  was  reserved, 
who,  as  king  and  priest,  was  to  render  to  the 
common  Creator  the  praises  due  from  all  created 
things,  and  be  the  spokesman  for  all  the  inhabi* 
tonts  of  this  terrestrial  globe. 

The  vast  distance,  on  this  account,  intervening 
between  man  and  the  highest  animals  in  the  scale 
of  beings  appears  evident  from  the  different  cirr 
cumstances  attending  their  (creation.  When  they 
were  farou^t  into  existence,  the  word  was — **JLet 
the  waters  bring  Jar  th — Let  the  earth  bring  farth^^ 
frmn  which  it  should  seem  that  God  did  not  act 
imme4iatdy  in  their  creation,  except  by  his  agency 
on  those  powers  that  he  had  established  as  rulers 
in  nature,  and  by  which  he  ordinarily  taketh 
hold,  as  it  were,  of  the  material  universe.  But 
when  &  being,  c<mibining  the  spiritual  with  the 
material  world,  is  to  be  created,  all  the  persons 
of  the  Godhead  unite  immediately  in  the  work, 
and  without  the  intervention  of  any  other  agent, 


8  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

''  Let  US  make  man ''  He  was  therefore  neither 
sea-born  nor  earth-bom,  as  some  ancient  nations 
claimed  to  be,  but  born  of  God ;  though,  as  Christ 
moistened  clay  when  he  was  about  to  exercise 
his  creative  power,  in. the  re-forming  of  an  eye  ;* 
so  was  the  humid  earth  used  in  the  creation  of 
the  body  of  man  by  his  Maker,  and  when  that 
wonderful  machine,  with  its  copiplex  apparatus  of 
organs,  both  external  and  internal,  was  finished ; 
when  a  throne  and  presence  chaml)er  were  pre- 
pared for  the  intellectual  and  spiritual,  and  govern- 
ing part  of  his  nature,  and  that  wonder-working 
pulp  the  brain,  with  its  silver  spinal  cord,  and 
infinitely  divaricated  threads,  already  fitted  for 
the  mastery  of  every  motive,  organ,  was  in  a  state 
to  transmit  without  obstruction,  each  flux  and 
Tefiux  of  that  subtile  fluid,  intermediate,  as  it 
were,  between  matter  and  spirit,^  which  so  in- 
stantaneously conveys  and  causes  the  execution 
of  the  commands  of  the  will  by  every  external 
bodily  organ ;  when  the  heart  was  ready  to  beat ; 
the  lungs  to  play;  the  blood  to  circulate;  and 
every  other  system  to  start  for  the  fulfilment  of 
its  prescribed  errand.  ^^  Then  the  Lard  God 
ht'eathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  Jives^  -  and 
man  became  a  living  souV  He  was  now  installed 
into  his  kingdom  over  the  globe  which  he  inha- 
bited,  and  dominion  was  given  him  over  the 

1  JohD^ix.  6.  2  See  Appendix,  aote  3. 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  9 

inhabitants  of  the  water,  of  the  air,  and  of  the 
earth ;  and  the  divine  image,  in  which  he  was  to 
be  created,  was  rendered  complete. 

Now,  the  generations  of  the  world  were  perfect 
and  healthAil,  and  God  saw  every  thing  that  he 
had  made,  and  behold  it  was  very  good.  That 
is, — every  individual  essence,  whether  inanimate 
or  animate,  was  fitted  in  every  respect  to  answer 
the  end  of  its  creation,  and  perform  its  allotted 
part  in  contributing  to  the  general  welfare.  The 
entire  machine  was  now  in  action,  every  separate 
wheel  was  revolving,  and  the  will  of  Him  who 
contrived  and  fabricated  it  had  full  and  unin- 
terrupted accomplishment.  The  instincts  of  the 
whole  circle  of  animals  urged  them,  by  an  irre- 
sistible impulse,  to  fulfil  their  several  functipus ; 
I  mean  those  that  were  necessary  to  the  then 
state  of  things :  for  if  the  instinct  of  the  pre- 
daceous  ones  was  not  restrained,  they  would  soon 
have  annihilated  the  herbivorous  ones,  even  if, 
as  Lightfoot  supposes,  they  were  at  first  created 
by  sevens.^  They  must,  therefore,  originally  have 
eaten  grass  or  straw  like  the  ox,  and  neither 
injured  nor  destroyed  their  fellow-beasts  of  a 
more  harmless  character ;  this,  indeed,  appears 
clearly  from  the  terms  of  the  original  grant, 
^*  To  every  beast  of  the  earthy  and  to  every  fowl 
of  the  air  J  and  to  every  thing  that  a'eepeth  upon 

1  See  Appendix  y  note  4. 


10  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

• 

tke  earthy  wherein  there  is  life,  I  have  givek 
every  green  herb  far  meat.'^  And  to  this  vege«- 
table  diet,  beft^e  the  dodo  of  the  pieseat  aeeae, 
we  are  aanired  they  shall  again  return  90  a&  to 
render  the  last  age  of  the  woild  as  happy  as  the 
original  state  of  man  in  Paradise.^  This  harmony 
of  thie  animal  creation,  continued  probably  loQg 
enough,  after  the  fall,  to  allow  sufficient  time  for 
such  a  multiplication  of  the  flocks  and  herds, 
and  flights  and  shoals  of  the  gregarious  animals, 
as  would  secure  them  from  extinction^-^bnt  then, 
as  the  poet  sings : 


III    ■>■! 


-»  Diacor4  fy^i 


Daughter  of  sia,  among  th'  irrational 
Death  introduc'd  through  fierce  antipathy : 
.    Beast  now  with  beast  'gan  war,  and  fowl  with  fowl, 
And  fifth  willi  fiab ;  to  gn^Be  IhQ  herb  siU  leA^ing/ 
Devour*d  eaqh  oth^r ;  nor  ft^ood  much  in. awe 
Of  man  but  fled  him,  or  with  countenance  grim 
Glar'd  on  him  passing.     Tliese  were  from  without 
The  growing  miseries  whiok  Adam  saw. 

Had  Adam  not  fallen^  this  sad  change  would, 
probably,  never  have  taken  place,  for  as  the 
author  of  the  book  of  wisdom  argues  i — ''  God 
made  not  deaths  neither  hmtk  he  pieaswre  in  the 
destruction  qf  the  living.  Far  he  ereated  all  things 
that  thejf  might  have  their  being ;  and  the  genera- 
tiom  qf  the  world  vme  healthful:  and  th/sre  is  no 

1  Isaiah,  Ixv.  25. 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  1 1 

poison  of  destructiam  in  ihem^  nor  the  kingdom  of 
death  upon  the  earth.''-  When  we  coDsider  the 
relatiye  position  of  man  aod  the  wumaal  kingdom, 
by  the  diviDO  decr^e^  objected  to  his  dominioii, 
the  harmony «and  goodwill  that  wh^isted  between 
thm,  it  ai^>eara  impfobable  that  immortal  man 
wou)d  have  been  afflicted  by  the  appearance  of 
death  and  destraetioist  amongat  his  sul^ects  from 
any  cause,  especially  by  th^  strong,  and  those 
armed  with  deadly  weapons,  attacking  and  de- 
yamring  the  weak  and  he}{]JesSr  Even  now, 
fsSieik  as  we  are  from  oyr  original  dignity^  there 
is  no  creature  so  fell  and  savage  that  we  have  not 
lowe  or  less  the  power  to  subdue  and  tame ;  no 
natures  so  averse^  that  we  are  not  skilled  to  re* 
concile ;  we  can  counteract  even  instinct  itself, 
and  nmke  a  treaty  of  peace  and  mutual  good 
will  between  animals,  w^om  nature,  by  a  law, 
has  placed  in  the  fiercest  .enmity  and  opposition 
to  each  other.* 

The  Creator,  indeed,  foreseeing  the  fatal  apos* 
tacy  that  plunged  our  race  in  ruin,  and  providing 
for  the  circumstances  in  which  our  globe  would 
eventually  be  placed  from  the  too  rapid  increase 
of  various  animals  nu)st  given  to  multiply,  fur- 

« 

nished  the  predatory  tribes  with  organs  and 
ofii^sive  arms,  which,  when  he  gave  the  word 
and  let  loose  the  reins,  would  urge  them  to  the 

^  See  Appendix;  note  5. 


12  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

work  of  destruction,  and  impel  them  to  attack 
and  devour  without  pity,  those  amongst  the 
weaker  animals,  that  were  likely  to  increase  in 
a  degree  hurtful  to  the  general  welfare,  thus  ful- 
filling his  great  purpose  of  generally  maintaining 
those  relative  proportions,  as  to  number,  of  indi- 
vidual species,  that  would  be  most  conducive  to 
the  health  and  mutual  advantage  of  all  parts  of 
the  system  of  our  globe. 

This  too  is  the  place  to  consider  another  cir- 
cumstance connected  with  the  appointment  by 
Providence  of  certain  animals  to  certain  ends. 
There  are,  as  must  be  evident  to  every  one  who 
thinks  or  observes  at  all,  large  numbers  of  the 
animal  kingdom,  which,  considered  in  their  in- 
dividual capacities,  may  be  regarded  as  positively 
injurious  to  man ;  and  seem  to  have  been  created 
with  a  view  to  his  punishment y  either  in  his  per- 
son or  property.  Of  this  description  are  those 
predatory  tribes  of  which  I  have  jiist  spoken: 
but  I  here  mean,  more  particularly,  to  advert 
to  those  pei'sonal  pests,  that  not  only  attempt  to 
derive  their  nutriment  from  him  by  occasionally 
sucking  his  blood  when  he  comes  in  their  way, 
as  the  flea,  the  horse-fly,  and  others,  but  those 
that  make  a  settlement  upon  him  or  within  him, 
selecting  his  body  for  their  dwelling  as  well  as 
their  food,  and  thus  infesting  him  with  a  double 
torment. 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  13 

Besides  those  insects  of  a  disreputable  name  ^ 
which,  under  more  than  one  form,  inhabit  his 
person  externally ;  and  those  that,  burying  them- 
selves in  his  flesh,  annoy  him  and  produce  cuta- 
neous diseases,^  a  whole  host  of  others  attack 
him  internally,  and  sometimes  fatally.  Can  we 
believe  that  man,  in  his  pristine  state  of  glory, 
and  beauty,  and  dignity,  could  be  the  receptacle 
and  the  prey  of  these  unclean  and  disgusting 
creatures  ?  This  is  surely  altogether  incredible, 
I  had  almost  said  impossible.  And  we  must 
either  believe,  vnth  Le  Clerc  and  Bonnet,  that 
all  those  worms  now  infesting  our  intestines 
existed  in  Adam  before  his  fall,  only  under  the 
form  of,  eggs,  which  did  not  hatch  till  after  that 
sad  event :  or  that  these  eggs  were  dispersed  in 
the  air,  in  the  water,  and  in  various  aliments,  and 
so  were  ready  to  hatch  when  they  met  with  their 
destined  habitation :  or,  as  some  parasites  are 
found  in  the  earth, ^  or  the  water, ^  as  well  as  in  the 
human  species,  that  they  are  in  general  formed 
for  living  in  different  stations :  ^  or,  lastly,  that 
they  were  created  subsequently  to  the  fall  of 
Adam,  not  immediately  or  all  at  once,  but  when 
occasions  called  for  such  expressions  of  the  divine 
displeasure. 
*  With  respect  to  the  first  of  these  hypotheses^ 

*  Pediculi,  *  Sarcoptes  Scabiei,  Pulex  penetrans,  Sfc, 
'  Lumhricus,  *  Oordius  aquaticus. 

*  See  Introd,  to  Ent.  iv.  229. 


14  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

it  seems  to  me  very  improbable  for  this  reason, 
that  it  supposes  the  first  pair  to  have  in  them 
the  germes  of  all  these  animal  pests,  .which 
although,  before  the  fall,  they  were  restrained 
from  germination,  after  that  event,  were  left 
to  the  ordinary  acftion  of  physical  laws,  so  that 
then  every  one  of  these  scourges  must  have 
inhabited  th^H  and  preyed  upon  them.  Fallen 
indeed  they  were  from  glory  and  grace,  but  who 
can  think  that  all  the  accumulated  evils  that  thefir 
sin  introduced  into  the  world  fell  with  coiicen- 
trated  violence  upon  their  own  beads,  that  all  the 
various  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to  were  experienced 
by  them  in  their  own  persons  before  they  were 
divided,  some  to  one  and  some  to  another, 
amongst  their  posterity?  It  is  scarcely  tb  be 
supposed  that  any  single  individual,  from  that 
time  to  this,  was  subject  to  the  annoyance  of 
every  one  of  these  animals,  and  it  seems  incre- 
dible that  'Adam  and  Eve  had  experience  of 
them  all. 

That  they  had  thehr  eDsistence  cnrigiiiaUy 
either  as  germes  or  as  perfect  animals  in  tlie 
air,  the  earth,  or  the  waters,  and  were  takeh 
in  by  mian  with  his  food,  with  respect  to  some 
species  may,  perhaps,  be  true.  The  earlii'-worm 
is  o£ten  voided  by  childr^i,  and  some  other 
that  infest  animals  are  found  in  the  water,  but 
of  those  that  are  appropriated  to  man  internally, 
none  have  as  yet  been  found,  except  that  just 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  15 

mentioQed,  in  any  odi^  habitation.  lAnn^  indeed 
assigns  an  aquatic  origin  to  the  fluke»  the  asca« 
ridei^,.  and  the  tape- Worm,  but  he  seems  to  hare 
adopted  ^is  bpiniim  upon  very  slight  gn>unds. 
Bonnet  very  jiiMly  asks,  with  rei^pect  to  the  last 
(xf  these  animals,  .Which  Linn6  g^tates  he  found 
onoe  in  a  kind  t)f  ochre*  ^*  M.  Linne  is  the  only 
one  that  has  made  this  ^scorery,  now  it  Ia 
certain  that  If  tape-worms  existed  out  o(  the 
body  of  man  and  other  animals,  Would  it  be 
possible^  after  the  numerous  rteearcbes  that 
naturalists  of  every  country  have  made  in  a 
variety  oi  places,  both  in  the  earth  akid  the 
wat^,  tiobe  should  evet  meet  with  that  insect?  "^ 
All  Helminthologists  seem  now  to  be  of  c^ibion 
tJiat  the  sole  natural  habitation  of  th&se  adimals 
IB  that  in  which  they  are  usually  found,  the. 
human  viscera. 

We  now  come  to  the  last  hypothesis,  that  these 
animals  were  created  subsequently  to  the  fall :  a 
single  instance  from  Scripture  qf  such  a  crea- 
tion will  be  suffici^it  to  render  it  probable  that 
others  may  have  tak^i  place  when  occasions 
called  for  such  expressions  of  Divine  displibasdre. 
Every  one  is  aware  that  God  by  the  wonder- 
working rod  of  Moses  converted  all  the  dust  of 
jBgypt  nibo  some  punitive  aiiimal  or  geilus  o£ 
animala,  for  they  atttaeked  mad  and  bea^l,  ecm^ 

1  OEuvr.  iii.  138. 


16  CREATION  OF  ANIMAUS. 

caning  the  kind  of  which  interpreten  differ  ;^ 
bat  this  does  not  affect  the  question,  it  is  evident 
that  here  is  an  instance  of  the  creation  of  air 
animal  in  great  nnmbos,  and  what  is  worthy 
of  particular  observation,  that  this,  animal  was 
not  afterwards  again  annihilated  as  the  fiogs,* 
and  others  were.  What  has  evidently  been  done 
once  under  circumstances  that  required  itythoq^ 
not  recorded,  may  haye  been  repeated,  and  thus 
all  the  punitive  species  in  question  may  have 
been  produced. 

This  is  given  merely  as  an  hjrpothesis,  to  ac- 
count far  the  exist^ice  of  these  annuals,  wjtiioiiit 
doing  violence  to  probability ;  and  rather  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  word  of  God,  than  cimtroy^rting 
any  thing  delivered  therein — and  if  it  excites  a 
discussion  that  may  throw  new  light  upon  the 
sutgect,  which  ever  way  the  questimi  is  deter- 
mined, I  shall  be  well  pleased — my  object  being 
rather  to  elicit  truth,  than  to  uphold  cpini&n. 


Another  inquiry  also  suggests  itself  with  respect 
to  the  original  wimal  creation.  Are  any  of  those 
animals  with  which  Grod  peopled  the  earth,  air^ 
and  waters,  preparatory  to  the  creaticm  of  man, 
now  extinct  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  will 
principally  depend  upon  that  to  another.  Did 
any  alteration  take  place  in  the  climate  wd  pro- 

^  See  Appendix,  note  6. 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  17 

ductioQS  of  our  globe  in  consequence  of  the  fell 
of  man  from  his  original  state  ?    We  learn  from 
the  ins{Hred  penman,  that  God;  induced  by  that 
sad  event,  prcmounced  a  curse  upon  the  ground; 
and  predicted  that  it  should  produce  in  abundance 
noxious  plants  fw  the  annoyance  of  the  offending 
race  of  knan,  and  that  whereas  the  primeval  earth 
brought    forth    spontaneously    her    fruits    and 
flowers,  and  afforded  man  a  pleasant  and  delight- 
ful recreation  and  employment;  without  subject- 
ing him  to  toil  and  weariness ;   this  state  of 
things  should  cease,  and  man,  for  the  future; 
should  earn  his  bread  with  difficulty  by  the  la^ 
hour  of  his  hands  and  the  sweat  of  his  brows; 
From  hence  it  seems  to  follow  that  at  this  time 
some  great  change  took  place,  both  with  respect 
to  climate;  and  to  that  blessing  from  atmospheric 
influences  which  produces  plenty  and  fertility 
with  the  lowest  amount  of  labour:     Gediogistj 
have  observed,  from  the  remains  of  plants  and 
animals  embedded  in  the  strata  of  this  and  other 
northern  countries,  that  the  climate  must  formerly 
have  been  warmer  than  it  now  is/  Some  change 
or  changes  of  this  kind  therefore  would  sooner  or 
later  produce  the  extinction  of  such  animals  and 
plants,  inhabitants  of  northern  countries,  as  could 
not  bear  such  a  change  of  temperature,  and  at 
the  same  time  could  not  escape  from  it;  and 

1  See  Appendix,  note  7. 
VOL.  I.  C 


18  CmSATION  OF  AMIUALS. 

admitting  this — ^it  would  enable  m  to  ainweir  in 
the  aflBnnatiYe  to  the  query  above  stated — 
namdy,  that  there  wete  species  of  animals  ori- 
ginally created  which  hare  since  ceased  to  exist* 
Being  no  longw  necessary  to  bear  a  part  in  car* 
rying  on  the  genial  plan  of  Dinae  PioTidence 
with  regard  to  onr  globe,  they  were  perautted  or 
caused  to  perish. 

One  circumstance,  which  I  hare  not  se^i 
adTerted  to,  seems  to  confirm  this  hypothesis: 
that  so  few  fossil  remains,  if  any,  of  tropical 
Irirds  have  hitherto  been  discovered  in  cold 
countries,  while  such  numbers  of  the  quadra^ 
peds  of  warm  climates,  both  Thriparous  and  on^ 
parous,  are  met  with  every  day  in  a  fossil  state* 
Now  the  birds  could  readUy  shift  their  quartero 
soutlkwmrd,  when  the  temperature  grew  too  co\A 
for  them,  while  the  quadrupeds  might  be  stopped 
by  seas,  rivers,  and  other  obstecles. 

Another  question  may  be  asked  with  respect 
to  tbe  sabject  I  am  discussing;  might  not  the 
aniflsals  now  become  superfluous  have  beiNi  exr 
eluded  from  the  ark  at  the  time  of  the  general 
deluge^  and  so  left  to  peri^  ?  This  would  furnish 
a  veiy  easy  solutbn  of  the  d;fficulty ,  but  the  text 
of  Scripture  seems  too  precise  and  express  to 
allow  of  such  a  suppositkHi.  For  the  commaiid 
to  Noah  isr^"^  Of  every  living  thing  cf  all  JhA^ 
two  of  eve^y  sort  shall  thou  bring  into  the  ark.'' 
But  yet  the  terms  here  employed  must  be  limited 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  19 

to'  tlHMie  abMnals  that  required  such  shelter  to 
prei^anre  tib^n  from  destructiou  by  the  diluvial 
waters;  §0  that  the  eKpnasion-^^^qfaUJlesh'' — 
necens^rily  admits  of  some  exoeptions. 

Bat  tb^re  are  doubtless  very  many  animak 
jstiU  0i^^iins  upon  the  earth  and  in  its  waters, 
Aat  h»v^  not  yet  been  discovwed.  When  we 
consider  the  vast  tracks  of  terra  incognita  still 
abut  otit  from  us  in  the  heart  of  Africa,  that  iatai 
ccwQtry  jy therto  a&  it  wefe  hermetically  sealed  to 
(m  researches*  and  from  whose  bourn  00  few 
tmveUeis  return ;  how  little  we  know  oi  Cen^aral 
Ami^  of  China,  and  of  some  parts  of  North  Ame^- 
riea;  we  may  well  believe  that  our  eatalogueB 
of  dnimate  are  still  very  short  of  their  real  num- 
heiSf  even  with  rei^MSct  to  those  of  the  lai^est 
dimeusionB.  Burohell  and  Campbell  appear  to 
have  met  with  more  than  oa^  new  species  ct 
flanoe&tos^  m  tbdr  joiimey  ftom  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope  into  the  int^ior  ;^  the  same  coiimtry 
may  conceal  others  of  the  3ame  gigantic  or  other 
tr&es,  whiehy  when  it  is  more  fiiUy  explored,  may- 
hereafter  be  brought  to  light. 

Agaim,  with  regard  to  the  produetiens  of  the 
vmoas  seas  and  oceans  tba;t  ooeupy  so  lai^e  a 
portion  of  our  globe,  we  know  comparatively 
few,  08fi«cially  of  ks  mollti^cous  inhabitants. 
What  are  cast  up  on  the  shores  of  ttie  various 

^  See  Appendix,  note  8* 


20  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

countries  washed  by  their  waves,  and  what  th^e 
net  or  other  means  may  collect  in  their  vicinityj 
find  their  way  indeed  into  onr  cabinets;  but 
what  are  these  compared  with  such  as  inhabit 
the  depths  and  caves  and  bed  of  the  infinite 
ocean,  which  net  never  dragged,  nor  plumb-lin* 
fathomed.  Who  shall  say  what  species  lurk  in 
those  unapproachable  recesses  never  to  be  re- 
vealed to  the  eye  of  man,  but  in  a  fossil  state. 
The  giant  Inoceramiy  the  singular  tribe  d  Atnm^ 
nites,  and  all  their  cognate  genera,  as  even  La- 
marck seems  disposed  to  concede:^  the  Saculites^ 
Hamites,  Scaphites^  and  numerous  others  there 
have  space  enough  to  live  unknown  to  £ame,  whil6 
they  are  reckoned  by  the  geologist  as  expunged 
from  the  list  of  living  animals.  I  do  not  mean  to 
assert  that  these  creatures  are  not  extinct,  but  I 
would  only  caution  the  student  of  nature  from 
assuming  this  as  irrefragably  demonstrated; 
since  we  certainly  do  not  yet  know  enough  of  the 
vast  field  of  creation,  to  say  dogmatically  with 
respect  to  any  species  of  these  animals  that  this 
is  no  longer  in  being; 

But  besides  the  unexplored  paiiiB  of  the  sur- 
face of  the  earth,  and  of  the  bed  of  the  ocean, 
are  we  sure  that  there  is  no  receptacle  for 
animal  life  in  its  womb  ?  I  am  not  going  here 
to  revive  the  visionary  speculations  of  Athana- 

i  In  N.  D.  D.  H.  N.  vii.  553. 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  21 

sills  Kircher  in  his  Mundus  subterraneus^  but 
la^r^Iy  to  inquire  whether  there  are  any  pro* 
bable  grounds  for  thinking  that  some  creatures 
may  be  placed  by  their  Creator  at  such  a  depth 
iHbin  the  earth's  crust,  as  to  be  beyond  all 
human  ken. 

When  Laplace  says,  "  It  is  certain  that  the 
densities  of  its  (the  earth's)  strata  increase  from 
Ae  surface  to  the  centre,"  it  seems  to  follow  that, 
IQ  ,hi8  opinion,  there  is  no  central  cavity  in  our 
l^obe ;  but  as  his  object  was  chiefly  to  assert  the 
im^aasing  density  of  the  strata  as  they  approach 
the  centre,  perhaps  ^his  words  are  not  to  be 
taken  strictly,  especially  as  in  another  place  he 
^)eaks  of  it  merely  as  probable  that  the  strata 
are  JEO^ore  dense  as  they  are  ^nearer  to  the  centre. 
Sir  I.  F.  W.  Herschel  makes  a  similar,  but  less 
^^lusive  observation,  using  the  terms,  "  towards 
the  centre,"  which  is  not  inconsistent  with  a 
cavUy. 

,  But  after  all  this  is  matter  of  conjecture  built 
upon  the  attraction  of  the  earth,  and  cannot  be 
ascertained  by  actual  examination ;  as  far  as  that 
hps  been  carried,  it  does  not  appear  that  in  the 
present  state  of  our  globe  the  strata  always  lie 
exactly  in  the  order  of  their  densities ;  in  the 
original  earth  probably  they  did.  But  now  we 
tr^ad  upon  the  ruins  of  a  world  that  has  been 
almost  destroyed  and  reformed.  "  The  struc- 
ture of  the  globe,"  observes  an  eminent  geogra- 


22  CRBATION  OF  AIIIIIAL8. 

pher,  "  preamits  in  all  its  parts  die  featoree  ^  a 
graad  ruin ;  the  eonfbaion  and  ovnthrow  of  m(d«t 
of  its  strata,  the  irrc^golar  suecemion  of  those 
which  se^m  to  remain  iti  th^  ordinal  ritaatio&s, 
the  wond^rfol  variety  which  the  direction  of  the 
veins  and  the  forms  of  the  caverns  display,  the 
immente  heaps  oi  confused  and  broken  sub- 
stances, the  tramportation  of  enormous  blocks 
to  a  great  distance  Irom  the  mountains  of  tdiich 
they  a{^>ear  to  have  formed  a  part/'^ — do  not 
lelkl  us  as  he  would  intmiate  ^'to  periods  &r 
anterior  to  the  existence  of  the  human  race,'* 
but  to  a  mi^ity  catastrophe  by  which  the  whole 
structute  ^  our  globe  has  been  dislocated,  and 
its  and^it  strata  brc^en  up,  and  separated  by 
the  int^vention  of  new  ones  fonned  of  animal 
and  v^etable  remains. 

When  the  Alodghty  formed  our  globe  from 
the  original  chaosy  and  projecting  it  into  space 
bade  it  perform  its  diurnal  and  annual  revolu* 
tions,  he  fiftrt  wei^ied  it  in  his  balance,  and 
moulded  it  so  as  it  might  answer  to  the  action 
of  those  mighty  powers  by  whose  constant  im- 
pulse or  impact  those  revolutions  were  to  be 
maintained ;  and  if  a  central  void  wss  necessary 
he  wanted  not  tJie  means  to  produce  and  main- 
tain it«  When  the  power  called  attractkm 
tended  to  drive  all  to  the  centre,  the  repdUant 

1  Malte-BniD  Sy6t,  of  Geogr.  L.  i.  192. 


CREATION  Of  ANIMALS.  33 

pckidpAe  might  be  so  ftatioaed  as  to  counteiact 
kf  And  keep  the  earth's  cruet  at  its  aseigned  dis- 
tance. To  compare  great  things  with  small,  he 
who  made  the  ram^bop  made  also  the  air- 
bubble, — the  one  to  fall,  the  other  to  rise. 

The  word  of  God,  in  many  places,  speaks  of 
an  abyss  of  waters  midar  the  earth,  as  distinct 
fixHB  the  ocean  though  in  communication  with 
it,^  and  also  as  contribnting  to  form  springs  and 
iiTeis.'  Scientific  men,  in  the  present  day, 
appesyr  disposed  to  question  this ;  the  Geologist, 
though  he  may  regard  the  granitic  strata  as 
fiiiming  the  base,  as  it  were,  of  the  crust  of  the 
earth,  seenis  rather  to  ^iew  it  as  containing  a 
focus  of  heat,  than  a  magazine  of  infinite  waters ; 
bbm  whence  are  partly  derived  the  springs  and 
men  that  water  the  earth's  surface,  and  ulti- 
mately make  good  to  the  ocean  its  whole  loss  by 
eraporation.'  '^  Springs,''  says  the  author  above 
quoted,  '^  are  so  many  little  reservoirs,  which 
mseive  their  waters  from  the  neighbouring 
ground,  through  small  lateral  channels."  He 
allows,  however,  that  the  origin  of  springs 
cannot  be  referred  to  one  exclusive  cause,  and 
asBociates  with  .that  just  mentioned,  the  precipi- 
tation of  atmospheric  vapours  attracted  by  high 
lands,  the  dissolving  of  ice,  the  filtering  of  sea- 

^  Comp.  Job,  xxviii.  14,  xxxviii.  16,  17. — Genes,  xlix.  25. — 
Deut.  xxxiii.  13. — ^Jonah,  ii.  6,  &c. 
*  Ps.  Ixxviii*  15, 16. — Prov.  viii.  24.      ^  See  Appendix,  note  9. 


24  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS^ 

waters,  and  the  explosion  of  subterraneous  YtH 
pours.  He  makes  no  direct  mention  of  a.stwe^ 
house  of  waters  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth  as  in 
any  case  the  source  of  springs  and  riYers,  but 
allows  that  ''the  phenomena  of  capillary  tubes 
may  obtain  in  its  interior.  The  sea^waters^ 
depriyed  of  their  salt  and  bitter  elements^ 
may  ascend  through  the  imperceptible  potfes 
of  several  rocks,  from  which,  being  disengaged 
by  the  heat,  they  will  form  those  subterra^ 
neous  vapours;  to  which  many  springs  owe 
their  origin."  A  very  slight  alteration  of  this 
passage  would  make  it.  harmonize  with  th^ 
Scripture  account  of  the  matter.  If,  for  ".  some 
rocks,"  we  substitute  through  the  rocky  strkta, 
and  to  the  ''  sea- waters "  add  received  ivnto  the 
ahyssj  it  would  amount  to  nearly  the  same  tbingi 
It  was  an  ancient  opinion,  mentioned  in  Plato's 
Phsedon,  that  there  is  a  flux  and  reflux  of  the 
waters  of  our  globe,  a  kind  of  systole  and  dias- 
tole, into  and  from  Tartarus  or  the  great  abyssii 
which  produce  seas>  lakes,  rivers,  and  fountains*^ 
That  all  the  causes  mentioned  above  contribute 
to  the  formation  of  the  rivers  that  water  tibe 
earth,  especially  the  clouds  and  vapours  that 
gather  round  the  tops  of  the. mountains  and  high 
hills  I  e^m  ready  to  admit,  at  the  same  time  I 
must  contend  that  the  principal  reservoir  from 

\  PUtonis  Dialogi.  Ed.  For$t.  Phc&i&n,  %K* 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  2S 

wiiicfa  ii^  are  supplied  has  its  station  under  the 


/:  Writers  on  this  subject  seem  to  speak  as  if 
the  source  of  all  rivers  was  in  mountainous  or 
killy  countries,  but  though  the  mightiest  rivers 
af  the'  globe  originate  in  such  situations,  there 
is  errery  large  number  of  considerable  streams 
iv^hose  source  is  not  particularly  elevated,  espe- 
dally  in  the  flat  parts  of  England ;  and  there 
are  few  rivers  that  do  not  receive  some  supply 
from  lesser  ones,  having  their  rise  in  low 
grounds,  in  their  course.  The  practice,  in  all 
countries,  of  dicing  wells  indicates  a  downward 
source  of  water. 

In  the  Mosaic  account  of  the  deluge  it  is 
stated,  that  the  waters  prevailed  above  the  tops 
<rf  ali  tlie  mountains  fifteen  cubits — now  the 
highest  mountain  in  the  globe,  Dhawalagiri,  a 
peak  of  the  Himmaleh  range  in  northern  India, 
is  five  miles  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  this  will 
>make  a  sphere  of  waters,  inclosing  the  whole 
globe  as  its  nucleus,  of  five  miles  in  depth  above 
the  level  of  the  sea,  but  in  calculating  the  immense 
additional  body  of  water  thus  burying  the  whole 
globe,  deductions  must  be  made  for  the  moun- 
tains and  the  lands  elevated  above  that  level, 
which  would  considerably  decrease  the  total 
amount.  But,  even  then,  how  vast  would  be  the 
increase.  If  two  fifths  of  this  body  were  de- 
ducted, a  deluge  of  rain  for^  forty  days  and  forty 


26  CR£ATIOK  OF  AMUAMS. 

nighte  orer  ike  wIm^  ^obe,  would  taHl  infinitely 
riiort  of  the  amount  of  water  required  to  cover  it 
to  this  height*    The  mean  quantity  of  rain  that 
no w  £dl8  upon  the  earth  in  the  cooiae  of  a  whole 
year  is  short  of  three  feet;  there  mast  therefore 
hare  been  an  oathreak  of  waten  fimn  a  source 
which  coold  supply  all  that  was  necessary  to  ac^ 
eomplish  the  will  erf  the  Almighty,  and  mabe  the 
earth  itself  a  ruin,  as  well  as  sweep  off  its  infaahi* 
tants;  and  where  diall  we  look  for  this  but  to  the 
abyss  that  caucketh  bemeatk  the  earth,  whose  foun- 
tains, as  the  sacred  historian  tells  us,  were  brdKU 
up.    If  we  omsider  the  diameter  of  our  globe, 
and  that  the  ocean  in  depth  is  not  supposed  to 
exceed  the  highest  mountains,  we  may  conceive 
that  in  a  spheroid,  whose  diameter  is  8000  nuks^ 
allowing  for  the  depth  of  the  crost  of  the  earthy 
there  is  space  finr  a  treasure-house  of  water,  <rf 
sufficient  amplitude  to  supply  what  the  hearens 
could  not  furnish,  to  raise  the  dihnrial  waters  to 
*he  height  decreed  in  the  Divine  eonnsels.    It 
seems  now  agreed  anumgst  geologists  and  mine- 
ralogists that  traces  of  the  action  of  fire,  as  wdi 
as  water,  are  very  visible  am<mgst  the  present 
strata  of  this  globe :   wh^i  the  waters  of  the 
abyss  were  sent  out  finm  their  hidden  receptacle, 
it  must  be  by  the  agency  of  some  potent  caaie 
employed  by  the  Deity,  equal  to  the  produdion 
of  the  ^ect  he  intended. 

In  the  present  state  of  the  globe,  volcanss,  or 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  27 

tiieir  tmces  aie  Tiftible  in  vaiiotis  regions  in  all 
climates^  and  in  tbe  islands  of  various  seas,  and 
in  leeiand,  near  Hecla,  the  subterranean  furnace 
sends  vast  columns  of  water  into  the  air,  somer 
times  to  the  height  of  a  hundred  feet,  and  at  the 
base  of  half  that  diameter.^  These  circumstances 
render  it  probable  that  fire  was  the  agent,  or  one 
of  the  mgentB^  employed  to  send  out  the  waters 
from  the  abyss ;  and  this  is  no  new  hypothesis. 
"^  It  is  the  opinion  of  geologists/'  says  Laplace, 
^'  that,  originally,  there  existed  in  the  interior  of 
the  crust  of  the  earth,  a  great  magazine  of  fire, 
^cfa  according  to  them  was  the  cause  of  the 
lieluge^"  Some  writers  suppose  that  the  air  was 
(biven  downwards  into  the  earth,  being  forced 
through  those  chasms  which  opened  towards  the 
Ajy  and  that  then  by  its  expansion  it  drove  out 
the  water  .^ 

He  who  willed  the  deluge,  wid  the  destruction 
of  the  primeval  earth  and  heavens  by  it,^  kept  in 
his  t>wn  hands  the  reins,  and  guided  the  whole 
body  of  means  that  he  employed  to  fulfil  the 
gieat  purposes  of  his  Providence,  saying  to  every 
agents  ^^  Tkvsfar  shalt  thou  go^  and  no  further."^ 
It  must  always  be  kept  in  mind  t)iat  this  was  not 
an  event  in  the  wdinary  course  of  nature,  and  a 
remit  cdf  liie  enforcement  of  her  established  code 

1  See  Hooker's  Recollections  of  Iceland,  120. 

.2  Rev.  W.  Jones'  Works,  x.  264. 

^  Pet,  iii.  6,  7,  and  see  Appendix,  note  10. 


28  CREATION  OF  ANIM Al£. 

0f  laws»  but  a  miraculoiis  deyiatiim  bcm  it,  in 
which  their  acticm  was  snqpended^  and  in  conse-^ 
quence  of  which,  perhaps,  s<mie  were  afoiogated 
and  new  ones  enacted  in  their  room.  I  may  here 
farther  observe,,  that  probably,  the  whole  body 
of  waters  which  before  the  creation  of  the  firma^ 
ment  or  expanse,  with  the  earthy  atoms  sasn 
pended  in  it,  formed  the  primeyal  chaos,  were 
now  again  its  masters ;  descending  and  ascend- 
ing from  every  receptacle  or  storehoase  to  which 
that  powerful  expansion  bad  been  the  means 
employed  to  guide  them.  Whaterer  waters  were 
suspended  in  the  atmosphere,  or  could  be  formed 
in  it,  whatever  were  contained  in  the  ocean,  m 
the  womb  of  our  globe,  now  united  their  forces 
and  subdued  and  destroyed  the  primitive  earth, 
till  they  reduced  it  to  the  state,  for  the  most 
part,  in  which  we  now  behold  it. 

I  am  next  to  inquire  what  has  been*  said  iu 
scripture  on  the  subject  of  subterranean  animals. 
In  the  second  commandm^nit  we  are  forbidden  to 
*^  make  any  likeness  of  any  thing  thai  is  in  the 
waters  under  the  earth.''  These  words,  however, 
may  be  merely  used  to  indicate  the  animals  that 
inhabit  the  ocean,  considering  the  waters  imd^ 
the  earth  as  forming  a  part  of  it.  But  there  is 
a  passage  in  the  Apocalypse,  where  the  creatures 
under  the  earth  are  distinguished  from  those  in 
the  sea.  "  And  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven 
and  an  the  earthy  and  under  tlie  earthy  and  such  as 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  20 

dore  in  the  sea^  and  all  that  are  in  them^  heard  I 
saving j^ Blessings  and  honour  ^  and  glory  and  power y 
he  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne^  and  unto 
the  Lamb /or  ever  and  evef\''^  Some  interpreters 
understand  this  passage  as  relating  to  those 
men  that  were  buried  under  the  earth,  or  in  the 
sea,  but  admitting  they  were  meant  in  the  spirit ^ 
the  creatures  in  general  are  expressed  in  the 
letier,  and  therefore  the  outward  symbol  must 
^ave  a  real  existence,  as  well  as  what  it  symbo- 
lized; 

There  is  another  place  in  scripture,  which 
though  highly  metaphorical,  seems  to  me,  to 
point,  if  rightly  interpreted,  at  subterranean  ani- 
mals; and  even  a  particular  description  of  them. 
The  passage  I  allude  to  is  in  the  xlivth  Psalm, 
'^  ThotigJk  thou  hast  sore  broken  us  in  the  plaee  of 
dragons  and  covered  us  with  the  shadow  of  death. "^ 
In  these  words  theplace  of  dragons  and  the  shadow 
of  death  evidently  mean  the  same  thing ;  and  the 
object  of  these  metaphors  is  to  express  the  lowest 
degree  of  affliction,  depression,  and  degradation ; 
equivalent  to  being  brought  down  to  hell  or  hades 
in  other  passages.  The  shadow  of  deaths  properly 
speaking,  is  in  the  hidden  or  subterranean  world. 
This  appears  ifrom  the  passage  of  Job  before 
quoted,  in  which  the  abysSy  the  gates  of  deaths 
and  the  gates  of  the  shadow  of  death,  are  used  as 

1  Revel.  V.  13.  «  Ps.  xliv.  19. 


30  CRKATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

synonymous  expressions.^  The  pktce  of  dragons, 
then,  aecording  to  this  expoaation,  will  be  sub^ 
terranean.  In  another  Psalm,  David  c^mpltis 
dragons  and  abysses  J^  . 

We  must  next  inquire  what  is  meant  by  t^ 
word  dragons.  The  Hebrew  word  usually  tl»is 
translated,  but  in  some  places  rendered  whales  and 
sea-monsters^  and  in  others  serpents,'  is  derii^ 
from  a  root,  which  signifies  to  wail  or  lament ; 
probaUy,  alluding  to  the  noise  at  certain  timel 
emitted  by  those  animals,  that  are  more  propady 
riegarded  as  dragom^  by  which  I  would  under* 
stand  the  Saurian  race,  without  excluding  die 
others,  which  are  sometimes  certainly  intended 
by  that  word.  Thus,  when  Jeremiah  alludes, 
under  the  name  dragons^  to  animals  tinat  gire 
suck  to  their  young,  It  is  clear  that  he  meant 
some  of  the  whale  or  seal  kind,  wiiieii  are 
mammiferous.  Our  trandators,  therefore,  vestf 
properly  rendered  the  word  sM-momtm^Sy  i^  s^ 
in  the  margin,  sm^eahse^.  I  may  hasee  obserre, 
though  ai:  first  sight,  the  crocodile  and  tfae^  *wbide 
seem  widely  separated  inmx  each  othev,  Itet 
there  are  certain  species,  at  present  fixind  only 
in  a  fossil  state,  and  fitted  with  paddles  iiostoad 
of  legs,  whid)  are  stated  to  combine  charaeiters 
obserrahle  in  the  Oet^^eami  with  those  of  tlus 


1  Job,  xxxviii.  16,  17.  «  Ps.  cxlviii.  7. 

^  Genes,  i.  21.    Lament,  iv.  3.    Eisod.  yi.  9,  10. 


CREATION  OF  ANIHAL6.  31 

Sauriaiis,  particularly  the  Plesiomums ;  ^  the 
Testudo  also  of  the  Greeks^  seems  to  approach 
some  of  the  seals.  The  word  we  are  considering, 
in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis,  is  rendered  hy 
oar  translators,  wholes.  In  the  version  of  the 
seventy,  a  word  is  used/  which  the  Greek 
writers  ea^>loy  to  signify  any  aquatic  monster ; 
thus,  Tfaeocritas,  when  be  describes  the  Nile  aa 
abounding  in  monsters,  means  the  crocodile. 
Our  Saviour,  when  he  speaks  of  Jonah  in  the 
belly  of  the  fish,  uses  the  same  word,  probably, 
for  a  shark,  the  dog  Carcharias  of  the  Greeks, 
wldch  was  fabled  to  have  swallowed  Hercules,  a 
fable,  uo  doubt,  derived  from  the  history  of  Jonah. 

It  af^ears  clearly  that  the  word  is  also  used 
for  a  serpent,  for  it  is  employed  to  express  the 
animal  into  which  the  rod  of  Moses  and  those 
oi  the  Egyptian  magicians  were  transformed  as 
related  in  the  bode:  of  Exodus. 

Tlie  typical  animal,  however,  if  I  may  so  em* 
ploy  tbat  term,  or  the  dragon  proper  of  scripture, 
is  undoubtedly  a  Saurian,  especially  the  amphi* 
bious  ones,  such  as  the  crocodile  and  its  affinities. 
In  tbe  Septuagint  version  the  Hebrew  word  is 
semetiakes  rendered  by  the  term  Siren,  which 
iQ  other  places  is  used  for  the  ostrich,^  derived 

*  Mantell's  Age  of  Reptiles, — Sussex  Gazette. 
^  Sphargis  coriacea, 

,  '  Ta  Ktyni  ra  fuyaXa, 

*  isai.  xiii.  21. — Job,  xix.  ^9,  Sec. 


32  CREATION  OP  AWIMAM. 

from  a  root  which  rdates  to  its  noise,  \mi  the 
Siien  of  the  Greeks  is  yery  difiioent  fitom  that 
of  these  Jews — the  former  being  a  fitbuloos,  the 
latter  a  real  animal.  Travdlers  describe  the 
noises  of  crocodiles  and  alligators  as  horrible; 
Crocodiles,  doring  the  whole  sommw,  says  Base; 
bat  especially  immediately  after  they  eni»ge  from 
the  earth,  that  is  in  the  ^ring  and  the  epoch 
of  their  amours,  freqaendy  send  forth  lowings 
almost  as  loud  as  those  of  an  ox.  They  respond 
to  each  other  often  by  hundreds,  especially  in 
the  evening,  which  makes  in  the  swampy  forest 
a  frightftd  and  thundering  din.  Captain  Jobson 
says,  that  those  of  the  riyer  Grambia  utter  cries 
that  may  be  heard  from  a  great  distance,  which 
seem  as  if  they  issued  from  the  ground. 

The  whale  also,  when  it  expels  the  water,  is 
related  to  make  a  frightftd  noise,  like  distaat 
thunder.  Captain  Cook  represents  the  walras^ 
when  in  herds,  as  roaring  or  braying  very  loud, 
and  some  species  of  seals  are  stated  to  bellow 
like  bulls. 

The  hissing  of  serpents  agrees  less  with  the 
radical  idea  of  the  word  dragouy  than  the  nmses 
of  either  of  the  preceding  tribes  of  animals; 
The  aquatic  and  amphibious  Saurians  occupy^ 
ing,  as  it  were,  a  middle  station  between  the 
Cetaceans  and  Ophidians,  may  be  regarded, 
therefore,  as  the  dragons  par  excellence. 

These,  then,  are  the  animals  that  I  conjecture 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  33 

mtiy  not  improbably  be  istill  in  existence  in  the 
subterranean  ocean ;  I  shall  now,  therefore,  bring 
forward  some  arguments,  independent  of  what  I 
hare  alleged  from  Holy  Scripture,  which  seem 
taafiwd  grounds  for  such  an  hypothesis. 

It  has  been  calculated  that  the  depth  of  the  sea 
in  any  part  does  not  exceed  30,000  feet,  or  a  little 
more  than  five  miles;  this,  compared  with  the 
diameter  of  our  globe,  about  8000  miles,  may  be 
r^rded  as  nothing.  What  a  vast  space  then, 
sopposiilg  it  really  hollow,  may  be  contained  in 
its  womb,  not  only  for  an  abundant  reservoir  of 
iraters,  but  for  sources  of  the  volcanic  action, 
which  occadonally  manifests  itself  in  various 
parts,  both  of  the  ocean  and  terra  firma.  Rea^ 
soniug  from  analogy,  and  from  that  part  of  the 
globe  which  falls  under  our  inspection,  it  will  ap- 
pear not  improbable  that  this  vast  space  should 
mt  be  altogether  destitute  of  its  peculiar  inhabit 
taats.  We  know  that  there  are  numerous  animals, 
on  the  surface  of  the  globe,  that  conceal  them- 
selves in  various  places  in  the  day  time,  and  only 
make  their  appearance  in  the  night.  It  would, 
therefore,  be  perfectly  consistent  with  the  getieral 
course  of  God's  proceedings,  and  in  exact  har- 
mony with  the  general  features  of  creation,  that 
he  should  have  peopled  the  abyss  with  creatures 
^ted«  by  their  organization  and  structure,  to  live 
there :  and  it  would  not  be  wonderful  that  some 
of  the  Saurian  race,  especially  the  marine  ones, 

VOL.  I.  D 


34  CBEATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

should  have  their  station  in  the  subterranean 
wat^s,  which  would  safficiently  account  for  their 
never  having  been  seen  exc^t  in  a  fossil  state. 

The  organization  of  many  reptiles  &voars  the 
idea  of  their  being  fitted  for  a  subterranean 
habitation.    It  has  been  observed  of  them,  that 
they  not  only  perceive  otgects  at  a  great  distance, 
but  are  furnished  with  a  nictitant  membraffle 
like  birds;  and  that  the  greater  part  can  coa- 
tract  the  pupil  like  cats,  which  enaUes  them  to 
see  in  the  dark.  Their  other  organs  furnish  them 
with  biit  few  sensations :  they  commtmicate  less 
frequently   and    less    perfectly   with    external 
otigects ;  their  blood  is  ccdd,  and  wiH  circulate  a 
long  time  without  communicaticm  with  the  air. 
They  will  bear  very  long  fasts  without  injury ; 
and  those  of  some  tribes,  the  Chekmians  at  leaist, 
will  survive  for  a  time  die  loss  of  their  brain, 
their  heart,  and  even  their  head.    These  circum- 
stances are  found  in  those  that  only  occasionally 
seek  subterranean  retreats,  or  seclusion  fi*om  the 
light  and  the  air ;  but  those  whose  existence  is 
whoUy  subterranean,  doubtless,  like  the  Preteus^ 
would  be  fitted  by  their  organization  for  thdi* 
destined  abode.     We  see,  in  several  of  those  we 
are  acquainted  with,  except  at  certain  times,  a 
constant  effort  to .  escape  not  only  fircmi  obser- 
vation, but  frcmi  immediate  contact  with  the 
light  and  the  air. 

This  leaife  me  further  to  observe,  that  there  is 
one  instance  of  a  Saurian,  at  this  time  known  to  be 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  35 

in  existence,  that  is  perfectly  subterranean,  which 
never  makes  its  appearance  on  the  earth's  surface, 
biit  is  always  concealed  at  a  considerable  depth 
below  it ;  and,  what  is  worthy  of  particular  no- 
tice, by  its  structure,  is  connectied  with  one  of  the 
lai^er  Saurians,  now  found  only  in  a  fossil  state. 
It  will  immediately  be  perceived  that  I  allude  to 
that  most  extraordinary  animal,  the  Proteus  an- 
guinusy^  which  is  found  in  subterranean  lakes  and 
caves  two  or  three  hundred  feet  below  the  surface 
of  the  ground  in  Illyricl,  breathing  both  by  lungs 
and  gills,  and  presenting  characters  which  connect 
it  with  the  Saurian  mongers  before  alluded  to, 
whdse  remains  have  occasioned  so  much  astonish- 
ment, appear  to  have  puzzled  in  some  meai^re  the 
most  acute  geologists,  and  have  given  birth  to  an 
hypothesis  I  shall  hereafter  notice.    Sir  H.  Davy, 
in  his  last  singular  work,  thus  expresses  himself 
concerning  the  Proieus : — "  My  reveries  became 
discursive,  I  was  carried,  in  imagination,  back  to 
the  primitive  state  of  the  globe,  Mrhen  the  great 
animsds  of  the  Batiri  kind  were  created  under  the 
pressure  of  a  heavy  atmosphere ;  and  my  notion 
on  this  subject  was  hot  destroyed,  when  I  heard 
from  a  celebrated  anatomist,  to  whom  I  sent  the 
specimens  I  had  collected,  that  the  organization  of 
the  spine  of  the  Proteus  was  an^dogous  to  that  of 
oAe  of  the  Sauri,  the  remains  of  wliich  are  found 
in  the  older  secondary  strata.''    Sir  Humphry 

*  Plate  xiv.  Fig.  1. 


;)6  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS. 

probably  here  alludes  to  a  celebrated  fossil  fotini) 
in  the  slate  quarries  of  (Eningen,  which  Scheuch- 
zer  called  an  antediluvian  man,  but  which  Cuvier 
regards  as  a  giant  species  of  Proteus. 

All  the  cu*cumstances  above  stated  being  duly 
weighed,  and  especially  the  discovery  of  a  species 
in  the  depths  of  the  earth,  related  to  one  of  the 
fossil  ones,  I  trust  that  my  hypothesis  of  a  sub- 
terranean metropolis  for  the  Saurian,  and  perhaps 
other  reptiles,  will  not  be  deemed  so  improbable 
and  startling  as  it  may  at  the  first  blush  appear; 
at  the  same  time,  I  would  by  no  means  be  thought 
to  contend  that  none  of  these  animals  axe  extinct, 
but  solely  that  all  may  not  be  so,  and  that  their 
never  having  been  found  in  a  recent  state  may 
have  arisen  from  the  peculiar  circumstances  of 
their  situation. 

i  have  been  led  into  this  discussion  by  Mr. 
Mantell's  Hypothesis  of  an  Age  of  reptilesj  which 
I  have  seen  only  in  an  extract  from  one  of  tile 
Sussex  advertisers  for  last  year,  which  he  was  so 
kind  as  to  send  to  me;  in  which  he  supposes 
that  the  Saurians  were  the,  mighty  masters,  as 
well  as  monsters,  of  the  primeval  animal  kiug- 
dom»  and  the  lords  of  the  creation  before  the 
existence  of  the  human  race.  Since  this  hypo- 
thesis, as  stated  in  the  above  extract,  cannot  be 
reconciled  with  the  account  of  the  creation  of 
animals  as  given  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis, 
I   shall  not  be   wandering   from  the    purpose 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  37 

of  the  present  essay  if  I  devote  a  few  pages  to 
the  consideration  of  it. 

The  hypothesis  in  question  is  based  by  its 
learned  promulgator  chiefly  upon  the  supposed 
age  of  the  beds  and  strata  in  which  the  remains 
of  these  fossil  Saurians  generally  have  been 
found,  which  he  states  as  more  ancient  than 
those  which  contain  the  remains  of  viviparous 
animals ;  and  upon  the  myriads  which  appear, 
when  they  were  the  lords  of  our  globe,  to  have 
listed.  But  it  is  clear  from  his  own  statement 
that  with  the  fossil  remains  of  the  Megalosaurusy 
a  giant  lizard,  calculated  to  have  been  forty  feet 
in  length  and  eight  in  height,  those  of  some 
viviparous  quadruped  related  to  the  Opossum 
have  been  found,  which  he  acknowledges  cannot 
be  satisfactorily  explained.  A  fact  that  militates 
strongly  against  an  insulated  Saurian  reign.  Nor 
is  it  altogether  true  that  the  remains  of  these 
mighty  lizards  are  found  solely  in  what  are  deno- 
minated ancient  deposites ;  vertebral  joints  are 
not  unfrequently  found  in  other  situations.  I 
have  one  between  three  and  four  incbes  in 
diameter,  which,  from  its  being  cupped,  or 
deeply  concave  at  each  extremity,  evidently 
belongs  to  one  of  these  animals,  which  was 
found  in  a  gravel-pit,  at  no  great  depth,  in  my 
own  neighbourhood ;  and  I  have  seen  similar 
ones  found  in  other  parts  of  the  county  of  Suf- 
folk.    These  dispersed  bones  seem  to  indicate 


38  CREATION  OF  ANIMALS » 

that  the  individuals  to  lehich  they  belonged 
were  deposited  in  situations  more  exposed  to  the 
action  of  the  atmosphere,  so  as  to  decompose  the 
ligaments  that  kept  the  sli^eleton  entire.  The 
interment  of  these  animals  was  therefore  various, 
and  evidently  regulated  by  circumstances,  so 
that  no  satisfactory  hypothesis  can  be  built  upon 
it;  When  the  whole  globe  was  subm^ged,  and 
the  waters  overtopped  the  highest  Qiountains, 
the  terrestrial  animals  would,  in  numberless 
cases,  float  upon  the  surface,  and  be  deposited 
in  eountries  far  distant  from  those  which  they 
inhabited,  while  those  that  were  aquatic,  being 
in  their  native  element,  must  have  owed  their 
death  tb  other  circumstances ;  they  must  either 
have  been  overwhelmed  by  some  sudden  force 
that  they  could  not  reg^st  or  escape  from;  or 
some  cause  that  we  cannot  now  appreciate  may 
have  overtaken  and  destroyed  the^. 

With  regard  to  the  numbers  of  these  animals, 
which  Mr.  Mantell  thinks  prove  their  preva- 
lence, we  can  only  judge  of  it  by  those  that  are 
found  in  a  fossil  state,  and  these,  certainly,  are 
sufficiently  numerous ;  but  surdy  it  cannot  be 
safely  affirmed  that  for  one  individual  found  in 
a  fossil  state  thousands  must  have  been  devoured 
or  decomposed.  These  mighty  monsters  were 
more  likely  to  devour  than  to  be  devoured ;  and 
even  the  herbivorous  ones,  such  as  the  vast 
Ig-uanodauy  supposed  to  be  sometimes  one  hull- 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  39 

dre|d  feet  loog  and  ten  feet  high !  would  bav^ 
puzzled  the  crocodiles  and  alligators  and  other 
carnivorous  ones  to  overpower  and  dispatch  then^. 

But,  in  fact,  the  question  is  concerning  those 
that  were  alive  upon  this  globe  at  the  time  when 
the  great  convulsion  took  place  that  buried  them. 
The  skeletons  of  all  that  were  placed  under 
similar  circumstances  would  be  found  in  a 
similar  state  of  preservation ;  their  flesh  would 
be  decomposed  but  not  their  skeleton ;  the 
deluge  would  also  interrupt  all  attacks  of  one 
animal  upon  anoth^,  every  individual  would  be 
seeing  to  secure  its  own  escape.  But,  setting 
aside  these  arguments  upon  the  uncertain  facts 
on  which  this  hypothesis  is  built,  if  we  turn  our 
attention  to  the  reason  of  the  thing,  who  can 
think  that  a  Being  of  unbounded  power,  wisdom, 
and  goodness  should  create  a  world  merely  for 
the  habitation  of  a  race  of  monsters,  without  a 
single  rational  being  in  it  to  glorify  and  serve 
him.  The  supposition  that  these  animals  were 
a  separate  creation,  independent  of  man,  and  oc- 
cupying hi3  eminenJ;  staticm  and  throne  upon  our 
globe  long  before  he  was  brought  into  existence, 
interrupts  the  harmony  between  the  different 
members  of  the  animal  kingdom*  and  dislocates 
the  beautiful  and  entire  System^  iseciml^d  with  so 
mu^b  subHnuty  and  majestk  brevity  in  the  Jjrst 
chapt^  of  Genesis. 

How  grand  and  at  the  mmi^  time  how  simple 


40  CREAllON  OF  ANIMALS. 

IS  this  record,  proceeding  step  by  step  from  one 
Almighty  operation  to  another !  each  the  natural 
consequence,  as  it  w«e,  of  that  which  preceded 
it  When  the  earth  was  formed,  and  planfed, 
and  was  receiving  the  influences  of  the  flon 
and  other  luminaries,  and  thus  was  prepared  t# 
welcome  and  maintain  her  locomotive  inhabitants, 
the  perfect  sphere  of  animals,  if  I  may  so  speak; 
adapted  to  the  wants  of  the  primeval  state  of  the 
globe  of  dry  land  and  sea,  both  external  and  in- 
ternal, and  to  the  instruction  and  uses  of  man, 
each  individual  form  gifted  and  fitted  to  play  the 
part  assigned  to  it  in  the  general  plan  of  Provi^ 
dence,  was  brought  into  existence.  The  supposed 
extinct  animals  all  exhibit  a  relationship  to  thos^ 
that  we  now  find  existing,  and  many  of  them 
evidently  fill  up  vacant  places  in  the  general 
system,  and  therefore  there  is  no  cause  to  sup* 
pose  that  they  were  originally  separated  from 
and  anterior  to  their  fellows.  It  is  observed  that 
those  herbivorous  Saurians  now  inhabiting  the 
surface  of  our  globe,  as  the  Monitor  and  Iguana^ 
though  these  can  scarcely  be  called  herbivorous 
since  they  live  principally  on  insects,  are  pigmies 
compared  with  their  affinities,  the  Megalosaurus 
and  Iguanodon  ;  and  a  similar  dii^roportion  ob^ 
tains  between  the  existing  Proteus  and  the  fossil 
one.  If  any  of  these  races  are  subterranean, 
perhaps  these  smaller  ones  may  be  regarded,  as 
inhabiting  the  outskirts  of  the  proper  station,  or 
metropolis  of  their  tribe. 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  41 

It  appears^,  I  hope,  from  what  has  been  ob- 
berved,  in  the  (Mresent  chapter,  on  the  subject  of 
&niii»k  brought  mto  being  subsequent  to  the 
&Uy  afid  upon  those  that  have  since  that  sad 
6T«nt  become  extinct  from  whatever  cause,  that 
Divine  Pioyidence,  after  the  first  creation  of  man 
£uid  the  animal  kingdom,  did  not  leave  all  things 
to  the  action  of  the  original  laws  which  had 
received  his  awful  sanction  before  the  fall,  but 
aitered  those  by  which  this  system,  especially 
(mr  own  globe,  was  guided  and  governed  before 
tkit  fatal  event,  to  suit  them  to  what  had  taken 
{dace,  and  to  the  altered  and  deteriorated  moral 
Mate  of  man.  We  learn  from  the  Apostle  Saint 
Peter,  that  the  primeval  globe  and  its  heavens 
or  atmosphere,  perished  at  the  deluge,^  by  which 
expressicHi  less  cannot  be  intended,  than  that  the 
atmosj^^re  and  the  earth  were  then,  as  it  were, 
new  minted,  so  as  to  render  the  former  less 
friendly  to  life  and  health,  whence  would  gradu- 
ally follow  the  shortening  of  human,  and  pro* 
bably  animal  life ;  and  subject  to  raging  storms 
and  hurricanes ;  to  the  fury  and  fearful  efiects  of 
Sunder  and  lightning ;  to  the  overflowing  vio^ 
lence  of  torrents  of  rain :  while  the  latter,  from 
the  breaking  up,  inversion,  mixing,  depression, 
or  elevation  of  its  original  strata,  and  the  addition 
of  new  ones  from,  animal  and  vegetable  deposites/ 
was  rendered  in  many  places  utterly  barren,  and 

^  Gr.  airwXero,  2  Pet.  iii.  6.         2  ggg  Appendix,  note  11. 


42  CB9A7I0K  OF  ANIMALS. 

in  ptber8  much  diminished  in  £^lity,  so  that  the 
general  prodnctiyeness  of  the  globe  must  faa^e 
been  considerfibly  diminished,  and  the  permission 
to  eat  flesh  must  have  been  extremely  useful  in 
increasing  the  amount  of  food,  and  diminishing 
that  of  labour.  Such  a  change  having  taken 
place,  both  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and 
vast  countries  being  essentially  altered  both  in 
the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  fiom  what* 
ever  cause,  and  the  productions  of  the  soil,  the 
extinction  of  many  of  the  original  animal  formft, 
that  were  extra*tiopical,  or  at  least  were  inhabi- 
tants of  high  latitudes,  and  were  incapable  of 
bearing  the  changes,  whether  it  was  ante-diluvial 
or  post-diluvial,  would  necessarily  follow;  and 
again  as  man  was  become  by  his  nature  {M*one  to 
sin^  he  as  necessarily  was  made  subject  to  eviL 
Hence  he  became  exposed^  from  the  new  consti- 
tution of  the  earth  and  atmosphere,  to  various 
diseases  and  sundry  kinds  of  death,  the  term  of 
his  existence  was  shortened,  and  it  was  chequoed 
with  days  of  darkness  as  well  as  of  light :  and 
he  was  infested  by  various  animals,  either  newly 
created,  or  th^i  first  let  loose  against  him  and 
his  property. 

All  these  things  indicate  a  change  in  the  me- 
chanical as  well  as  other  original  powers  set  and 
kept  in  action  by  the  Creator,  and  a  certain 
dependence  of  two  distinct  classes  of  events  upcm 
each  other.     If  a  great  alteration  generally  takes 


CREATION  OF  ANIMALS.  48 

place  in  the  moral  condition  of  man,  a  corres- 
ponding change  affects  his  physical  one ;  and 
this  alternation  and  conflict  between  good  and 
evil,  in  this  double  series,  after  a  long  and 
arduous  struggle,  will  finally  be  determined  by 
the  deslxuction  of  this  diluvial  earth  and  heavens^ 
which  we  are  assured  will,  in  the  end,  be  re- 
placed by  ^^  Nw>  Heavens  and  a  new  Earth 
wherein  dweUeth  righteousness*'' 


Chapter  II. 

Geographiaxl  and  Local  IHsttibution  i^  Aninuds. 

Having  considered  the  first  creation  of  the  ani* 
mal  kingdom,  and  the  larger  features  of  its  his- 
tory to  the  time  of  the  Deluge,  bringing  us  to 
that  era  when  our  globe  had  assumed  its  present 
general  characters,  and  its  pi^ulation  was  in 
those  circumstaaces  that  led  to  their  present  ha- 
bits and  stations:  the  next  subject  to  be  discussed 
is  their  geographical  and  local  distribution. 

What  had  taken  place  in  this  respect  before  the 
Deluge  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining.  That 
the  original  temperature  of  the  earth  was  once 
more  equal  than  it  is  now,  seems  to  be  the  ge- 
neral opinion  of  men  of  science,  however  they 


44  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

may  differ  as  to  its  cause.^  If  this  was  the 
case,  as  it  probably  was,  any  indiyidual  specie^ 
might  have  been  located  in  any  country,  north 
or  south,  and  suffer  no  inconyenience  froin  nw 
accustomed  heat  or  cold,  so  as  to  interfere 
with  its  complete  naturalization :  the  only  other 
requisite  would  be  a  kind  of  food  suited  to  ito 
nature;  and  it  is  singular  and  worthy  of  par- 
ticular attention,  that  a  large  proportion  of  the 
plants,  as  well  as  animals,  that  are  found  in  a 
fossil  state  in  our  northern  latitudes  are  of  a 
tropical  type  or  character. 

After  their  creation,  and  perhaps  the  expulsion 
of  the  first  pair  from  Paradise,  we  may  suppose 
that  the  various  animals  of  the  antediluvian  world 
were  guided  to  those  regions  in  which  it  was  the 
will  of  Providence  to  place  them,  by  a  divine  im- 
pulse upon  them,  which  caused  them  to  move  m 
the  right  direction.  Probably  before  the  Deluge 
took  place,  the  world  was  every  where  peopled 
with  animals :  and  perhaps,  as  Professor  Buck- 
land  has  suggested,  the  sudden  change  of  tern* 
perature  that  destroyed  the  northern  animals 
might  be  one  of  the  predisposing  causes  of  that 
event. 

Under  the  present  head,  the  geographic^  dis- 
tribution of  our  postdiluvian  races  of  animals,  the 
first  thing  to  be  considered  is  the  means  by  which, 

• 

^  See  above,  p.  17,  &c. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  45 

after  quitting  the  ark,  they  were  conveyed  to  thie 
bther  parts  of  the  globe.  The  disembclrkation  of 
the  venerable  patriarch  and  his  family,  followed 
by  an  the  animals  preserved  with  him  in  the  ark. 
a  scaie  of  universal  jubilee  to  man  and  beast, 
such  as  the  world  till  that  day  had  never  wit- 
nessed, took  place  on  Mount  Ararat :  the  stream 
of  interpreters,  ancient  and  modem,  place  this 
moutitain  in  Armenia ;  but  Shuckford,  after  Sir 
Walter  Raleigh,  seems  to  think  that  Ararat  was 
further  to  the  east,  and  belonged  to  the  great 
range  anciently  called  Caucasus  and  Imaus, 
which  terminates  in  the  Himmaleh- mountains  to 
the  north  of  India.  This  opinion  seems  to  receive 
some  confirmation  from  Scripture,  for  it  is  said, 
**  As  they  journeyed  from  the  east,  they  found  a 
plain  in  the  landofShinar.^'  Now  the  Armenian 
Ararat  is  to  the  nor/A  of  Babylonia,  whereas  the 
Indian  is  to  the  east.  Again,  as  the  ark  rested 
upon  Ararat  more  than  ten  weeks  before  the  tops 
of  the  mountains  were  seen,  it  seems  to  follow  that 
it  must  have  been  a  much  higher  mountain  than 
the  generality  of  those  of  the  old  world.  The  mo- 
dem Ararat  (Agri-Dagh)  is  not  three  miles  above 
the  level  of  the  sea,  whereas  the  highest  peak  of 
the  Himmaleh  range,  Dhawalagiri,  i^five^  and 
the  highest  mountain  in  the  known  world :  so  that 
the  tops  of  a  great  number  of  mountains  would 
have  appeared  previously  had  the  ark  rested  upon 
the  former  Ararat,  but  not  so  if  upon  the  latter. 


46  GEbORAPHICAL  AKD  LOCAL 

The  traditions  also  of  various  nations,  given  by 
Shuckford,  add  strength  to  this  opinion.  In  ad- 
dition to  these,  the  following  lines,  qaoted  in  d 
late  article  on  Sanscrit  poetry,  in  the  Quarterly 
Review,  shew  what  was  the  creed  in  India  on 
this  subject : — 


In  the  whole  world  of  creation- 


None  were  seen  but  these  seven  sages,  Menu  and  the  fish ; 
Years  on  years,  and  still  unwearied,  drew  that  fish  the  bark  along, 
Till  at  length  it  came  where  reared  Himavan — its  loftiest  peak ; 
There  at  length  they  came,  and,  smiling,  thus  the  fish  addressed 

the  sage  :-*- 
Bind  thou  now  thy  stately  vessel  to  the  peak  of  Himavan — 
At  the  fishes*  mandate,  quickly  to  the  peak  of  Himavan : 
Bound  the  sage  his  bark,  and  even  to  this  day  that  loftiest  peak 
Bears  the  name  of  Nanbahdhana. 


Both  these  opinions  have  their  difficulties,  which 
I  shall  not  further  discuss,  but  leave  the  decision 
of  the  question  to  persons  better  qualified  thail 
myself  to  direct  the  public  judgment :  I  shall  only 
observe,  that  perhaps  the  Indian  station  was  more 
central  and  convenient  for  the  ready  dispersion  of 
men  and  animals  than  the  Armenian  one.  Every 
naturalist  is  aware  that  there  are  many  animals 
that,  in  a  wild  state,  are  to  be  found  only  in 
particular  countries  and  climates.  Thus  the 
Monkey  and  Parrot  tribes  usually  inhabit  a  warm 
climate,  the  Bears  and  Gulls  with  many  other 
Sea-birds,  for  the  most  part  a  cold  one.  The  Kan- 
garoo and  Emu  are  only  found  in  New  Holland ; 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANI3f  ALS.  47 

the  Lama  in  Peru ;  the  Hippopotamus  and  Ostrich 
in  Africa.    Now  we  may  ask,  how  were  all  these 
local  animals  conveyed  from  the  place  of  disem- 
barkatioD  to  the  countries  and  climates  that  they 
severally  inhabit  ?    In  considering  this  question, 
we  must  never  lose  sight  of  Him,  according  to 
whose  will,  and  by  whose  Almighty  guidance, 
they  were  ail  led  to  the  stations  he  had  appointed 
for  them,  and  with  reference  to  which  he  had 
organized  and  formed  them.     Whatever  second 
causes  he  might  commission  to  effect  this  purpose, 
they  were  fully  instructed  and  empowered  by  him 
to  accomplish  the  work  intrusted  to  them.     I  do 
not  mean  here  to  infringe  the  rule,  N^  Deiis 
ifUersit  nisi  dignus  vindice  nodus.     Where  the 
faculties,  senses,  and  wants  of  an  animal  were 
sufficient  for  its  guidance,  therie  was  no  need  for 
Divine  interposition,  but  where  these  are  insuf- 
ficient guides,  the  animal  must  attain  its  destined 
station  under  some  other  influence. 

What  brought  the  various  animals  to  the  ark 
previously  to  the  dekige?  Doubtless  a  diving 
impulse  upon  them,  similar  to  that  which  caused 
the  milch-kine  to  carry  the  ark  of  the  covenant  to 
Bethshemesh,  with  the  offerings  of  the  lords  of 
the  Philistines.  Noah,  though  he  probably  se- 
lected the  clean  animals,  at  Iteast  those  that  were 
domesticated,  could  have  little  or  no  influence 
over  the  wild  ones  to  compel  them  to  congregate 
by  pairs,  at  the  time  fiixed  upon  for  their  entry 


48  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

into  the  ark.  So  in  the  dispersion  of  animals^ 
wherever  man  went  he  took  his  flocks  and 
herdsy  and  domestic  poultry,  and  those  in  his 
employment  for  other  purposes,  with  him  :  but 
the  wild  ones  were  left  to  follow  as  they  would, 
or  rather  as  God  direc^ted. 

Every  one  who  looks  at  a  map  of  the  world,  on 
Mercator's  projection,  can  easily  conceive  how 
the  animal  population  of  the  greatest  part  of  the 
old  world  made  their  way  into  the  difierent  coun- 
tries of  which  it  consists,  but  when  he  looks 
at  America  and  New  Holland,  he  feels  himself 
unable  satisfactorily  to  explain  the  migration  of 
animals  thither,  especially  those  that  can  live 
only  in  a  warm  climate,  at  least  as  far  as  regards 
the  former.  How,  he  might  ask,  did  the  Sloths, 
the  Anteaters,  and  the  Armadillos  get  to  South 
America?  If  the  climate  of  Behrings  Straits, 
after  the  deluge,  was  as  cold  as  it  is  at  this  day, 
they  could  never  have  made  their  way  thither, 
and'  in  those  latitudes  the  temperature  of  which 
was  adapted  to  their  organization  the  vast  Pacific 
presents  an  insuperable  barrier. 

The  same  question  may  be  asked  with  respect 
to  the  indigenous  animals  of  New  Holland ;  the 
Kangaroo,  the  Cola,  the  Omithorhynchus,  the 
Emu,  and  several  others  that  are  found  in  no 
other  country ;  how  did  they,  leaving  the  conti- 
nent altogether,  convey  themselves  to  this  their 
appointed  abode  ?    It  is  true  the  difficidty  is  not 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  49 

80  great  in  this  last  case,  on  account  of  the 
numerous  islands  interposed  between  Malacca, 
Cochin-china,  &c.  and  the  North  Coast  of  New 
Holland,  but  then  it  is  unaccountable,  if  the 
transit  of  these  animals  was  gradually  effected  by 
natural  causes,  and  following  that  of  mankind 
from  island  to  island,  till  they  reached  the  country 
to  which  their  range  is  now  limited,  that  they 
should  have  left  no  remains  of  their  race  in  the 
countries  and  islands  which  they  must  have  tra- 
versed in  their  route ;  and  those  that  would  have 
accompanied  man  would  be  a  different  tribe  of 
animals,  more  fitted  to  minister  to  his  wants,  so 
that  with  respect  to  these  the  difficulty  still  re- 
mains— they  could  not  have  reached  the  country 
tinless  under  the  guidance  of  Providence,  and 
the  same  power  that  accomplished  their  removal 
to  that  appointed  for  their  residence,  prevented 
their  leaving  any  of  their  race  in  the  regions 
through  which  they  passed. 

There  is  only  one  supposition  that  will  enable 
us  to  account  for  the  transport  of  these  animals 
in  a  natural  way,  which  is  this,  that  immediately 
subsequent  to  the  deluge,  America  and  New  Hol- 
land, and  the  various  other  islands  that  are  inha- 
bited by  peculiar  animals,  were  once  connected 
with  Asia  and  Africa,  by  the  intervention  of  lands 
that  have  since  been  submerged.  Plato,  in  his 
Timseus,  relates  a  tradition  concerning  an  island 
called  Atlantis,  which  he  describes  as  bigger  than 

VOL.  I.  E 


50  GEOGRAPHICAL  A^fD  f^OC^^ 

A^ia  and  Africa,  situated  before  the  piUard  of 
Hercules,  which  after  an  earthquake  was  BW»h 
lowed  up  by  the  $fea.    According  to  hi3  state^ 
mant,  thi^  account  ww  gi^en  by  tibie  Egyptian 
pidests  at  Sais,  to  Solon,  the  Athenian  legislatpr^ 
Catcott,  in  bis  history  of  tb«  dolnge,  seei9^  to  giy« 
some  credit  to  this  tmdition,  and  supposes  th^l 
Pbaleg  took  his  name,  not  from  the  confusion  of 
tongues  at  Babel,  and  the  subsequont  diyigion  of 
the  earth  amongst  the  faroiUos  of  the  tbrep  ^ons 
of  If oah,  but  from  its  division  occ£^8ioned  by  ihf 
f^ubsidence  of  this  great  islands  by  which  the  occi- 
dental were  separated  from  the  oriental  countms 
of  the  globe*  Philo  Judmus  speaks  of  this.cat&s^ 
trophe  in  terms  that  imply  he  gave  credit  to  it> 
as  does  also  TertuUian ;  but  it  appears  to  me  to 
rest  on  too  uncertain  a  base,  and  to  be  too  muc^ 
mixed  with  evident  fable  and  allegory,  to  cl^m 
full  credit  a^  a  real  fact  in  the  history  of  our 
globe.    Still  that  many  violent  convuletions  hawf 
taken  place  since  the  deluge  is  generally  sup- 
posed*   Qnr  own  island  is  thought  once  to  }^ff 
formed  part  of  the  continent,  Sicily  to  have  beflHt 
united  to  Italy »  with  many  other  instances  mail- 
thn^  by  Pliny,   It  is  equally  probable  that  tk^ 
islands  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  were  at  one  t^mf 
joined  to  that  part  of  Asia.    Whether  such  dlir 
ruptions  from  the  continents  were  simulta9€i(W» 
or  took  place  at  different  periods,  is  uncertain; 
but  if  such  an  event  as  the  submersion  of  tji^ 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  51 

tast  island  of  Plato  did  really  happen,  it  surely 
would  affect  the  whole  terraqueous  globe,  pro- 
duce convulsions  far  and  wide,  and  cause  Tarious 
disruptions  in  its  crust,  and  elevations  in  other 
parts  from  the  bed  of  the  ocean*  It  throws 
Mme  weight  into  this  scale,  that  thus  a  way 
mnld  be  open,  though  certainly  a  circuitous  one, 
for  the  miration  of  those  animals  to  America, 
^  are  found  in  no  other  part  of  the  world,  and* 
mpposing  Asia  to  have  been  disrupted  from  it  at 
Behrings  Straits,  could  scarcely  have  ascended 
to  so  high  a  latitude,  in  search  of  their  destined 
home. 

Malte-brun,  in  his  ge<^raphy,  after  proving 
that  the  animals  in  question  could  have  passed 
neidier  from  Africa  nor  Asia,  observes — *  *  Nothing, 
dierefore,  remains,  but  the  accommodating  re- 
floorce  of  a  tremendous  convulsion  of  nature,  with 
a  vast  tract  of  country  swallowed  up  by  the 
waves,  which  formerly  united  America  with  the 
temperate  regions  of  the  old  world.  Such  con-* 
jectures  as  these,  however,  being  devoid  of  all 
iiist(Hical  support,  do  not  merit  a  moment's  con- 
sideration ;  consequently  we  cannot  refrain  &om 
aduutting,  that  the  animals  of  America  originated 
on  the  very  soil,  which,  to  this  present  day,  th^ 
etttt  inhabit." 

That  it  might  have  been  the  will  of  the  Greater 
to  people  the  country  in  question  by  the  imme- 
diate productidn  of  a  new  raice  of  animals,  suited 


L 


52  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

to  its  climate  and  circumstances,  I  will  not  deny, 
but  I  would  only  ask,  is  it  consistent  with 
what  occurred  at  the  Deluge  ?  Surely  the  task 
of  Noah  would  have  been  much  less  difficult  arid 
laborious^  had  it  been  merely  necessary  for  him 
to  construct  a  vessel  fitted  for  the  reception  of 
himself  and  family,  and  of  food  for  their  suste- 
nance during  their  confinement ;  and  a  new  race 
of  animals  had  been  created,  adapted  to  the  then 
state  of  the  earth  and  mankind.  Btit  siich  was 
not  the  will  of  God,  and,  doubtless,  for  wise  rea- 
sons. He  would  neither  create  a  new  race  of  men, 
nor  a  new  race  of  animals,  when  the  world  might 
be  repeopled  by  those  already  in  being.  This 
would  not  have  harmonized  with  the  ordinary 
proceedings  of  his  providence.  Whoever  exa- 
mines the  animals  of  North  America,  will  find  a 
vast  number  that  correspond  with  European  spe- 
cies, distinguished  only  by  characters  that  mark 
varieties.  On  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  in  the 
country  westward  of  that  range,  Asiatic  types  are 
discoverable,  both  in  the  vegetable  and  animal 
kingdoms.^  Several  animals,  likewise,  of  t&e 
southern  part  of  that  Continent  belong  to  dd 
world  genera',  and  also  species.  I  have  received 
from  Val  Paraiso  a  beetle,  common  in  Britain,' 
and  Molina  mentions  several  other  European  ge- 
nera, as  natives  of  Chili ;  so  that  part  of  the  animal 

1  See  Appendix,  note  14.  ^  Sphodrus  Terricola. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  53 

population  of  the  New  World  appears  to  have 
been  derived  from  Europe  and  Asia ;  and  if  so, 
there  is  a  door  open,  through  which  Providence 
might  also  have  conducted  those  North  American 
aoimals  that  are  found  in  no  other  country. 
.  But  besides  the  probable,  or  possible,  modes 
by  which  the  transit  of  animals  to  their  respect- 
ive settlements  might  have  been  accomplished, 
Mr.  Lyell,  in  the  second  volume  of  his  Principles 
of  Geology,  has  su^ested  one  which  might, 
amongst  others,  have  been  employed  for  this 
purpose- 

"  Captain  W.  H,  Smyth  informs  me,"  says  he, 
"  that,  when  cruising  in  the  Cornwallis,  amidst  the 
Philippine  islands,  he  has  more  than  once  seen, 
after  those  dreadful  hurricanes  called  typhoons, 
floating  islands  of  (matted)  wood,  with  trees 
growing  upon  them ;  and  that  ships  have  some- 
times been  in  eminent  peril,  in  consequence  of 
mistaking  them  for  terra  firma."  Mr.  Lyell 
conjectures,  not  improbably,  that  by  means  of 
such  an  insular  raft,  or  wandering  Delos, — "  if 
the  surface  of  the  deep  be  calm,  and  the  rafts 
carried  along  by  a  current,  or  wafted  by  a  slight 
breath  of  air  fanning  the  fcdiage  of  the  green 
trees,  it  may  arrive,  after  a  passage  of  several 
weeks,  at  the  bay  of  an  island,  into  which  its 
plants  and  animals  may  be  poured  out  as  from 
an  ark ;  and  thus  a  colony  of  several  hundred 
new  species  may  at  once  be  naturalized."    Thus 


54  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

he  accounts  for  the  peopHng  of  the  voIcaBic  audi 
coral  islands  in  the  Pacific 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  nothmg  really 
happens  by  chance,  or  is  the  result  of  an  acdh 
dental  concourse  of  fortuitous  erents:  second 
causes  are  always  under  the  direction  of  ihe^rst^ 
who  order^  all  things  according  to  the  good 
pleasure  of  his  will ;  and  therefore  the  elevation  of 
a  new  island  from  the  bosom  of  the  deep^  whether 
immediately  produced  by  volcanic  agency,  or  bjr 
im  earthquake,  or  built  by  Zoophytes,  still  may 
be  denominated  his  work ;  so  likewise  the  same 
Almighty  Guardian  of  the  universe,  whose  name 
is  Jehovah  of  Hoste,  directs  all  the  actions  and 
motions  of  the  hosts  that  he  hath  created,  to  the 
foil  accomplishment  of  cfvery  purpose  that,  in  his 
wisdom,  he  hath  formed.  When  we  are  assured 
that  the  hairs  of  our  head  are  all  numbered,  and 
that  not  a  sparrow  falleth  without  our  Heavenly 
Father,  we  are  instructed  to.  look  beyond  second 
causes  fcHT  the  direction  and  management  of  events 
that  appear  at  first  sight  the  most  trivial,  huA 
which,  in  their  immediate  or  remote  conse- 
quences, inay  be  productive  of  effects  that  are 
important  to  be  attended  to  and  provided  for/ 

We  know  that  when  animals  of  any  kind 
exceed  certain  limits,  though  beneficial  ia  the 
ordinary  exercise  of  their  instincts,  they  become 

1  Appeodixy  note  15. 


DI8TA1HUTION  OF  ANIMAL8.  && 

ikxxioFus.  God  alone  knows  when  they  approach 
tbetse  limitd ;  it  id  he,  tbc^efitire^  that  employs  man 
Of  othef  animab  to  destroy  a  certain  nusaber  of 
them,  that  they  may  bear  a  due  proportion  td 
Mher  beings  on  which  they  act ;  or  if  he  wills  to 
panish  mawikifid,  he  suffers  their  numbers  to  in*» 
trease  so  as  to  answ^  this  intention.  But  to  all 
his  hosts,  he  says,  ''  Thus  far  shalt  th&u  go  (md 
ii» farther.''  Therefore,  when  the  ocean,  or  fires 
below  its  bed,  or  other  causes  elerate  islands 
above  its  surface,  it  is  he  that  conducts  to  them 
tiie  popidatbn  he  intends  should  occupy  them. 

The  iskmds  of  Bourbon  and  Mauritius  both 
appear  to  be  of  volcanic  origin :  amongst  their 
aboriginal  animal  inhabitants  was  a  most  extru'^ 
ordiimry  gallinaceous  bird,  called  the  Dod6;^ 
this  bird,  like  the  ostrich  and  cassowary,  had 
^ty  rudiments  of  wings,  and  of  course  was 
unable  to  fly ;  being  unfit  for  food,  though  of 
the  gaUmaceous  order,  and  a  very  ugly  smd  dis^^ 
gusting  ol^ect,  it  soon  became  extinct  in  those 
ttbndsi,  and  the  only  remains  of  it  are  a  leg  and 
foot  at  th^  British  Museum,  and  a  skeleton  of 
die  bead  in  the  Ashmoldan  Museum  at  Oxford. 
It  has  been  contended  that  this  Urd,  having 
never  been  discovered  elsewhere^  was  peculiar 
to  these  iriands,  brat  tb^?e  ate  reasons  for  be^ 
leiviftg^  diat  it  was  not  the  only  species  of  its 

^  Didus  ineptus* 


56  GEOGRAPHICAL  AMD  LOCAL 

genus,  for  Latham  has  included  in  it  two  others/ 
hoth  stated  to  liave  been  found  in  African 
islands.  This  affords  a  strong  presumption  that 
the  head  quarters  of  the  genus  are  on  the  contir 
nent  of  Africa,  and  that  these  three  species  Ixave 
been  conveyed  to  the  islands  they  are  stated  to 
have  inhabited  by  some  accidental  cause.  By 
^he  direction  of  Providence,  a  floating  island* 
like  that  seen  by  Captain  Smyth,  might  be  the 
means  of  conveying  this  and  their  other  inha* 
bitants  to  them. 

I  think,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  necessity 
jto  have  recourse  to  a  new  and  more  recent  crea- 
tion, to  account  for  the  introduction  of  its  pecu- 
liar animals  into  any  given  country. 

The  fact  itself,  that  almost  every  country  has 
its  peculiar  animals,  affords  a  proof  of  design, 
and  of  the  adaptation  of  means  to  an  end, 
demonstrating  the  intervention  and  guidance  of 
an  invisible  Being,  of  irresistible  power,  to  who^e 
will  all  things  yield  obedience,  and  whose  wisr 
dom  and  goodness  are  conspicuous  in  all  th^ 
arrangements  he  has  made.  Wherever  we  ^ee.a 
peculiar  class  of  animals  we  usually  see  peculiar 
circumstances  which  require  their  presence 
Thus  the  Elephant  and  Rhinocero^t  the  Iao^ 
and  the  Tiger,  are  found  only  in  warm  climatQS^ 
where  a  rapid  vegetation,  and  infinite  hosts  of 

'  Didus  fiolitariui  and  nazarenus. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  57 

animals,  s^em  to  require  the  efforts  of  such 
gigantic  and  ferocious  devouilers  to  keep  them  in 
dieck :  but  on  this  subject  I  shall  have  occasion 
to  ^enlarge  hereafter. 

There  is  another  point  of  view,  illustrative  of 
tl&e  Divine  attributes  in  this  partial  location  of 
Tarious  animals.  If  every  region,  or  nation, 
contained  within  its  limits  the  entire  circle  that 
constitutes  the  animal  kingdom,  and  the  remark 
may  be  extended  to  every  natural  object,  how 
weak  and  trifling  would  be  the  incitement  for 
man  to  visit  his  fellow-men.  Were  the  pro- 
ductions of  every  country  the  same,  there  would 
be  little  or  no  temptation  for  commercial  spe- 
culation, therefore  the  merchant  would  stay  at 
home;  the  animal,  and  plants,  and  minerals 
.would  be  the  same,  therefore  the  naturalist  would 
stay  at  home;  the  astronomer  indeed,  and 
geographer,  and  the  student  of  his  own  species^ 
might  be  tempted  sometimes  to  roam,  but  the 
pcean  would  be  truly  dissociable^  ond  those  ties 
that  now  connect  the  different  nations  of  the 
globe  wouldj  for  the  most  part,  be  broken.  They 
are  now  linked  to  each  other,  in  a  bond  of  amity, 
by  ,the  intercourse  which  their  mutual  wants 
j^oduce,  and  the  body  geographical,  if  I  may 
use  such  a  metaphor,  as  well  as  the  body  na- 
.tural,  is  so  .t^npered,  and  so  furnished  in  every 
part,  that  constant  supplies  of  things,  necessary 
or  desirable,  are  uninterruptedly  circulating,  by 


58  OEOORAPUICAL  AJPTD  LiOCAI* 

certain  chaDoeis,  throng  the  wbole  system^ 
and  thtn  keep  up  a  kind  of  aystide  and  diaslc^ 
which  diffiiseB  e^ory  where  a  healthy  fempcva^ 
ment,  and  is  nnirersally  beneficial.  It  id,  uore^ 
met,  calculated  ta  gencarate  thoae  kindly  feel- 
ings which  ooght  to  reciprocate  between  being8 
inhabiting  the  same  globe,  and  spnmg  b&m  dM 
same  cMiginal  father.  And  the  cnltiyation  «f 
these  fieelings  of  mntnal  good  will  was,  no  dimbt/ 
the  principal  object  of  ihe  Deity  in  the  distribiH 
bntion  <tf  various  gifts  to  variowi  countries^  en* 
dowing  some  with  one  peculiar  production  and 
some  with  another :  so  that  one  might  not  say  to 
another, ''  /  kave  no  need  ofyen.^^ 

Herein  is  the  Divine  wisdcmi  and  gtednen 
most  conspicuous.  Had  chance,  or  nature,  as 
some  love  to  speak,  directed^  the  distaributkna  of 
animals,  and  they  were  abandoned  tO'  ibems^tM 
and  to  the  circumstances  in  which  they  fimnd 
tiiemselves  in  their  original  station,  witiM)at  any 
superintending  power  to  guide  them,  they  would 
not  so  invariably  have  fixed  themselves  in  the 
climates  and  regions  for  which  they  were  evi* 
dently  intended.  Their  migrations,  under  their 
own  sole  guidance^  would  have  depended,  ftr 
their  direction,  upon  the  season  of  the  year,'  at 
which  the  desire  seized  them  to  change  their 
quart»» :  in  the  height  of  summer,  the  tropicd 
animals  might  hare  taken  a  direction  fiiither 
removed  from  the  tropics.;  and,  in  winter,  those 


DISTBIBVTION  OP  ANIMALS.  SO 

of  coider  <^iiiated  mi^t  have  journeyed  towards 
inMead  of  from  tkern.  Besides,  taking  into  con* 
gideraticm  other  motives,  from  casual  circum* 
stenoes,  that  might  have  induced  different 
iadividuals  belonging  to  the  same  climates  to 
pamne  different  routes,  they  might  be  misted 
by  cupidity,  or  dislike,  or  fear.  On  no  other 
}Hrmciple^  can  we  explain  the  adapti^ion  of  their 
OfgaBlzalion  to  the  state  and  productions  of  the 
cmntxj  in  which  we  find  them — I  speak  of  local 
^ecies*-^but  that  of  a  Supreme  Power,  who 
foimed  and  furnished  the  country,  organized 
tkem  for  it,  and  guided  them  into  it^ 

There  is  another  question  relating  to  local 
animals  v^hich  here  requires  some  notice.  Are 
Ihey  reidly  distinct  species  ?  Have  not  the  cha* 
meters  which  separate  thetn  fix>m  their  affinities 
been  produced,  in  the  course  of  years,  by  pecu^ 
Har  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed,  such 
as  climate,  t^anperature,  nature  of  the  country, 
Idod,  and  the  like  ?  Every  person  who  knows 
any  thiag  of  the  history  of  animals  must  admits 
that  gieart  changes  do  take  place  in  them  from  the 
feng  acticm  of  these  causes.  For  instance,  some 
varieties  of  the  common  ox  are  polled,  having 
only  rudiments  of  h(»ns;  others  have  very  short 
and  others  very  Icmg  ones;  in  some  they  are  not 
&Ded-  to  the  skull,  but  attached  to  the  skin,  and 
moveaUe  with  it.  The  same  thing,  likewise, 
takes  plaice  with  sheep;   some  have  no  horns, 


60  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

others  have  two,  and  one  breed,  the  Icelandic, 
is  distinguished  by  having  four.  How  these 
variations  have  been  produced,  and  by  what 
circumstances  they  are  ruled,  has  not  been  as* 
certained,  nor  what  differences,  in  other  re? 
spects,  obtain  between  the  armed  and  unarmed 
varieties.  Linn6  indeed  observed,  with  respect 
to  the  polled  sheep,  which  he  denominates 
English  sheep, — ^but  whether  they  are  strictly 
entitled  to  that  name  is  not  clear,  for  in  the 
pillai*s  of  Tnyan  and  Antoninus,  though  there 
are  no  polled  oxen,  there  are  polled  she^ — 
that  their  tails  and  scrotum  reach  to  the  knees .; 
but  this  does  not  appear  a  certain  and  invariable 
fact.  A  young  zoologist,  when  his  attrition .  is 
first  arrested  by  these  facts,  will  probably  be 
inclined  to  think  that  animals,  exhibiting  such 
striking  differences,  cannot  belong  to  the  same 
species ;  but  in  the  progress  of  his  experience, 
especially  in  what  takes  place  in  almost  all  ani- 
mals, that  man  has  taken  into  alliance  with  him, 
he  will  see  reason  to  chaqge  his  sentiments. 

Again,  the  ears  of  some  animals  also  exhibit 
differences  that  might  seem  to  indicate  specific 
distinction.  We  see  this  both  in  the  horse  and 
the  swine.  In  the  wild  horse  the  ears  lie  back, 
in  the  domesticated  or  cultivated  one  they  are 
erect.  The  horse  was  not  originally  a  native 
of  America ;  but  when  the  Spaniards  and  other 
nations  obtained  a  footing  in  that  country,  they 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  61 

carried  this  animal  with  them,  which  is  now 
become  wild,  and  numerous  herds  of  them  are 
found  in  the  Llanos,  these  generally,  we  are 
toldj  are  of  a  chestnut  bay,  and  have  recumbent 
ears.  Those  that  are  found  wild  in  the  Steppes 
of  Tartary,  hare  the  hair  of  tfie  mane  and  tail 
very  long  and  thick,  and  their  ears  also  are 
l-ecumbent.  A  writer,  quoted  below,  has  con- 
cluded from  some  observations  of  Xenophon  and 
Varro,  that  the  military  horses  of  the  Greek  and 
Roman  republics  were  much  nearer  those  in  the 
wild  state,  as  just  described,  than  in  a  siibse- 
tjuent  period.^  In  all  the  war  horses,  however, 
sculptured  in  Trajan's  and  Antoninus'  pillars^ 
the  ears  kre  erectj  as  I  think  also  are  those  of 
the  Elgin  marbles  in  the  British  Museum — al 
least,  none  of  them  appear  to  be  recumbent ;  and 
in  some  figured  in  Hamilton's  JEgyptidca,^  from 
sculptures  ^t  Medinet  Abou,  in  Egypt,  which 
are  still  more  ancient,  the  ears  of  all  are  erect. 

In  England  we  have  two  breeds  of  swine,  one 
with  large  flapping  or  pendent  ears;  of  this 
description  g[re  those  fattened  in  the  distilleries 
in  and  near  London  ;  the  other  with  small,  erect, 
acute  ears,  common  in  the  county  of  Suffolk. 

When  it  is  considered,  that  the  varieties  of 
the  above  animals  with  erect  ears  appear  to 
exhibit  altogether  a  better  character,  if  I  may 

*  Roulin.  Anim,  Domest.  Ann,  Des,  Sc.  Nat.  xvi.  26. 
«  PI.  vUi.  ix. 


62  OEOOBAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

SO  speak,  than  their  less  spirited  brethren,  whose 
ears  are  pendent  or  laid  back,  and  that  thU 
circumstance  seems  to  indicate  some  apph)ach 
to  civilization  in  them;  it  may,  probably,  be 
deemed  to  result  from  some  developement  of  the 
brain  produced  by  education,  and  present  some 
analogy  to  the  effects  of  the  latter  in  the  human 
species. 

There  is  a  certain  protuberance  growing  on 
the  back,  between  the  shoulders,  and  consisting 
chiefly  of  fat,  which  distinguishes  the  Indian 
ox^i,  both  the  larger  and  smaller  varieties,  from 
our  own,  which  is  known  sometimes  to  attain  to 
the  enormous  weight  of  fifty  pounds ;  the  o%  ot 
Surat  is  stated  to  have  two  of  these  bosses,  or 
humps.  Now,  Burckhardt  has  observed,  with 
respect  to  the  camel,  that — "  While  the  hump 
continues  full,  the  animal  will  endure  consider- 
able fatigue  on  a  very  short  allowance,  feeding, 
as  the  Arabs  say,  on  the  fat  of  its  own  hump. 
After  a  long  journey  the  hump  almost  entirely 
subsides,  and  it  is  not  till  after  three  or  four 
months'  repose,  and  a  considerable  time  after 
the  rest  of  the  carcass  has  acquired  flesh,  that  it 
resumes  its  natural  size  of  one  fourth  of  the. 
whde  body."  This  conjecture  of  the  Arabs 
may,  very  probably,  be  well  founded,  for  it  is 
known  that  animals  which  become  torpid  in  the 
winter,  are  very  fat  and  have  several  cauls 
abounding  in  that  substance ;  but  when  they 


DIJSTRIUJTION  OF  ANIBfALe.  63 

awaku  from  their  long  repoae  in  the  spring,  they 
have  abscHrbed  a  large  proportion  of  it,  and  are 
comparatiyidy  lean,  and  more  fit  for  action. 
During  their  torpidity  the  &t  is  absorbed  into 
the  system  by  means  pf  the  lymphatic  Tessels 
and  the  mmifiisations  of  the  veins.  It  is  stated, 
however,  that  the  Bear  comes  out  of  its  winters- 
quarters  as  fat  as  it  went  into  them,  but  that  in 
a  few  days,  it  becomes  very  lean.^  In  this 
case  it  would  seem  as  if  there  was  little  or  no 
absorption  during  hybernation,  and  that  it  be- 
comes very  rapid  upon  the  animal's  emersion 
fiom  its  hiding  place. 

Reasoning  from  analogy,  the  hump  on  the 
Zebu  may  have  some  such  use,  and  during  the 
dry  season,  when  the  food  ia  scorched  up,  may 
minister  to  the  nutriment  of  the  animal.  If  this 
be  the  case,  this  variation  from  the  common 
type  is  evidently  designed,  and  furnishes  a  proof 
of  the  care  of  the  Creator  for  all  his  creatures, 
and  likewise  of  such  an  adaptation  of  means  to 
an  end,  as  evince  both  the  wisdom,  power,  and 
pfescience  of  Him  who  has  so  arranged  circum- 
stance?  and  agents  in  every  climate  as  to  fulfil 
Im  benevolent  purposes. 

The  allwise  Goyemor  of  the  universe,  when 
he  gave  to  the  sheep  its  covering*  appears  to 
haye  had  in  view  not  solely  the  protection  of  the 

1  Dr.  Richardson,  Faun.  Bareali-Americ.  i.  16,  20. 


64  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

animal  from  the  effects  of  cold,  but  more  par^* 
ticularly  the  benefit  of  him  whom  he  had  en^ 
throned  at  the  head  of  his  creation,  by  thus 
placing  at  his  disposal  a  material  so  inestimable, 
for  his  use  and  comfort,  as  wool.     It  has  been 
observed  that  all  the  wild  sheep  are  clothed  with 
long  hair ;   but  the   Guinea  sheep,^  which  is 
found  in  the  tropical  countries;  both  of  Africa 
and  India,  is  the  most  truly  hairy  of  any,  evi- 
dently a  provision  of  the  Author  of  niature,  suited 
to  the  climate  in  which  they  are  found.     The 
fine  fleeces  of  the  cultivated  breeds  appear  to 
have  been  engrafted,  as  it  were,  on  the  long  hair 
of  the  wild  ones,  which,  doubtless,  have  been 
very  much  improved  by  the  attention  paid  by 
man  to  his  flocks.     The  influence  of  climate^ 
the  quality  of  pasturage,  a  due  supply  of  whole- 
some food  in  winter  ;  iand  washing  and  shearing 
when  summer  approaches,  have  all,  certainly^ 
contributed  to  the  improvement  of  this  staple  of 
our.  commerce.     But  it  was  God  who  endowed 
these  animals  with  those  facilities,  if  I  may  so 
speak,  of  which  man  availing  himself,  might 
produce  by  culture  the  valuable  article,  in  its 
highest  perfection,  of  which  I  am  here  speakinj^ 
What  a  difference  between    the   hair  of  the 
Guinea  sheep,  and  the  beautiful  fleece  of  tiie 
Merino,  which  even  seems  to  be  exceeded,  ii 

*  Ovis  aries  africana, — L. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  65 

fioeness  and  softness,  by  the  straight  wool  of  the 
Parnassian  breed. 

No  animal,  if  indeed  all  belong  to  one  original 
species,  varies  more  than  one  that  is  most  domes-* 
ticated  of  any,  the  dog :  some,  as  the  water-d(^,^ 
being  covered  with  curled  hair  almost  as  thick 
as  the  fleece  of  a  sheep,  while  others,  the  Turk- 
ish-dog,*  are  absolutely  naked ;  others  again,  the 
grey-hound/  being  very  slender^  with  long 
slender  muzzle  and  legs,  remarkable  for  their 
velocity  and  the  quickness  of  their  sight ;  others 
lastly,  the  hound,^  more  robust  in  form,  less 
swift  in  motion,  with  a  short  obtuse  muzzle, 
depending  chiefly  upon  their  scent  in  pur* 
suit  of  their  prey.  Whoever  studies  all  these 
supposed  varieties,  and  the  diversified  functions 
which  they  exercise  in  our  service,  as  our  faith- 
fill  and  attached  companions,  the  watchful 
guardians  and  defenders  of  our  property,  the 
purveyors  of  our  table,  and  the  ministers  of  our 
pleasures,  must  acknowledge  the  wisdom,  good- 
ness, and  power  of  the  Creator  in  the  production 
of  so  versatile  a  race,  applicable,  in  so  many 
ways,  to  such  a  variety  of  purposes,  many  of 
them  of  the  first  importance.  Without  them 
some  nations  would  have  no  means  of  con- 
veyance fi'om  place  to  place  ;^  and  ethers  would 

*   Cards  familiaris  aquaticus,        *  Canis  familiaris  (pgyptius. 
3  Canis  familiaris  gj^aius,  ^  Canis  familiaris  molossus. 

^  The  Kaintchadales. 

VOL.  I.  F 


66  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

scarcely  be  able  to  supply  themselves  with  a 
sufficiency  of  food.^ 

Amongst  the  birds  there  is  one  tribe  peculiarly 
domesticated,  which  likewise  is  subject  to  nu- 
merous variations  (it  will  be  readily  seen  that  I 
allude  to  our  common  poultry),  but  the  diffe* 
rences  that  obtain  in  them  are  chiefly  confined 
to  their  plumage ;  some  are  crowned  with  a  tuft  of 
feathers  ;  others,  as  the  Friesland-hen^  have  the 
feathers  on  their  body  recurved ;  another  breed, 
as  the  rumplets,  have  no  tail ;  the  generality 
have  their  legs  naked,  but  the  bantams  have 
them  covered  with  feathers;  and,  to  name  no 
more,  the  silk-hens,  instead  of  feathers,  are 
clothed  with  a  kind  of  silken  hair. 

We  cannot  state  the  object  of  all  these  diffe- 
rences,  but  probably  it  is  connected  with  the 
climate  and  other  circumstances  of  the  country 
in .  which  they  were  produced.    India  and  its 
islands  appears  to  be  the  metropolis  of  this 
valuable  species  of  fowl,  and  the  jungle  fowl  is 
supposed  to  be  the  original  breed  ;  but  this  is  one 
of  those  animals  which  will  live  and  thrive  in 
every,  climate  except  the  Polar ;  and  when  we 
consider  the  benefits  we  derive  from  them,  we 
shall  be  disposed  with  grateful  hearts  to  adore 
and  glorify  our  Almighty  benefactor,  who  fitted 
them,  as  well  as  so  many  other  useful  animaK 

'  Many  of  the  North  American  Indians,  Esquimaux,  &c. 


DISTI^BUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  67 

to  become,  lik^  ourselves^  denizens  of  the  whole 
earth.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance,  and 
worthy  of  particular  attention,  that  the  animals 
most  subject  to  variatiim^  are  chiefly  those 'which 
man  has  taken  into  alliance  wit h^  him  from  their 
adaptation  to  his  purposes.  Now  this  tendfericy  to 
vary  multiplies  their  uses,  or,  at  least,  contributes 
to  fit  them  for  following  him  into  difierent  cli<^ 
matbs,  enabling  them  to  accommodate  themselves 
gradually  to  any  change  of  circumstances  to 
which  they  may  therein  be  exposed,  without 
diminishing  their  utility. 

Amongst  the  other  races,  especially  the  feline, 
this  appears  not  to  take  place,  at  least  only  with 
respect  to  colour.  The  cat,  though  every  where 
domesticated,  exhibits  no  other  difierences  than 
what  obtain  in  the  colour  of  her  fur.  If  we 
recollect  that  this  favourite  quadruped  is  prin- 
cipally employed  to  destroy  those  minor  animals 
tiiat  are  noxious  in  and  about*  our  houses,  to 
which  indeed  her  instinct  impels  her,  and  that 
she  is  solely  led  by  that  instinct,  and  adds  nothing 
to  it  from  instruction,  her  sole  savage  object 
beings  like  that  of  her  congeners,  to  seize  and 
devour  her  prey ;  that  she  never  assists  man, 
like  the  dogj  as  the  companion  of  his  sports 
in  various  ways,  but  exercises  her  single  func- 
tion always  in  the  same  way,  and  under  the  same 
influence :  if  we  further  recollect  that  these  are 
the  general  habits  of  the  genus  to  which  she 


68  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

belongs,  which  appear  subject  to  very  trivial  mo- 
difications from  altered  circumstances,  and  that 
almost  all  animals  that  do  not  follow  in  the  train 
of  man  affe  equally  constant,  we  may  hence  infer 
that  the  Creator  has  not  gifted  them  with  the 
capability  of  improvement,  and  the  develope- 
ment  of  latent  qualities  not  apparent  in  their 
wild  state. 

There  is  one  circumstance,  however,  in  which 
predaceous  or  carnivorous  animals,  when  domes- 
ticated, shew  some  aberration  from  their  instinct, 
they  do  not  refuse  farinaceous  food.  The  cat 
and  the  dog  will  both  eat  bread  with  great 
eagerness  and  thrive  upon  it. 

It  has  been  questioned  by  some  whether  the 
present  races  of  animals  have  not  all,  in  the 
lapse  of  ages,  undergone  some  alterations  from 
the  primitive  types.  The  only  way  by  which 
this  can  be  at  all  ascertained  is  by  consulting 
the  oldest  descriptions  of  them,  and  the  oldest 
sculptures;  and  these,  I  think,  will  prove  that 
no  such  alteration  has  taken  place. 

In  considering  the  general  distribution  of 
animals  we  may  further  remark  that  some  are 
Stationary,  while  others,  at  certain  periods,  mi- 
grate or  shift  their  quarters  from  one  climate  or 
region  to  another. 

In  considering  the  former,  I  shall  not  here 
enlarge  on  the  stations  of  the  different  tribes 
further  than  as  they  are  connected  with  the  great 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  69 

object,  which  it  is  my  duty  to  illustrate.  With 
respect  to  many  it  may  be  observed,  that  though 
perhaps  widely  dispersed,  yet  they  have  their 
metropolis.^  Thus  the  gigantic  whales,  though 
they  are  sometimes  found  in  low  latitudes,  not, 
however,  within  the  tropics,  yet  their  grand 
rendezvous  is  in  the  arctic  and  antarctic  seas ; 
furnishing  a  strong  proof  that  in  these  they  find 
the  greatest  supply  of  their  appropriate  food; 
The  giant  terrestrial  Mammalia,  on  the  contrary, 
confine  themselves  to  intratropical  r^ions,  where 
the  luxuriance  of  vegetation  best  corresponds  with 
their  enormous  consumption  of  food.  Amongst 
the  birds  the  Vulture,  though  one  species,  the 
Lammer-Geyer,^  comes  as  far  north  as  the  Swiss 
Alps,  generally  most  abounds  in  hot  climates, 
and  is  often  of  essential  service  in  preventing  the 
infection,  likely  to  be  produced  by  putrid  ani- 
mals ;  to  these  birds  our  Saviour's  words,  doubt-> 
less,  allude, "  Wheresoever  the  carcass  is^  there  will 
the  eagles  he. gathered  together;'^  the  species  he 
had  in  his  eye,  was  probably  the  Egyptian  Vul- 
ture,* the  services  of  which  in  Egypt  are  strik- 
ingly described  by  Hasselquist.  After  noticing 
its  disgusting  appearance,  he  says :  "  Notwith- 
standing this,  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  cannot 
be  enough  thankful  to  Providence  for  this  bird. 

I  See  Introd,  to  Ent,  iv.  Lett,  xlix.         ^  Vultur  Barbatus, 

3  Vultur  percnapternSt  L. 


70  e£06R4PHICAl.  AND  LOCAL 

All  the  places  round  Cairo  are  filled  with  ille 
dead  bodies  of  asses  and  camels ;  and  thoosaadfi 
of  these  birds  fly  about  and  devour  the  carcasses 
before  they  putrify,  and  fill  the  air  with  noxious 
exhalations."  Belon  observes,  which  pioves  their 
prevalence  there,  that  in  Palestine  they  jdevoor 
an  infinite  number  of  mice,  which  would  others 
wise  be  a  great  pest.  The  cc^nate  tribe,  liie 
eagles,  though  they  are  widdiy  dispensed,  have 
their  metropolis  in  more  northern  climates,  and 
are  distinguished  also  from  the  vultures,  hy 
making  living  animals  chiefly  their  prey :  for 
this  they  are  gifted  with  a  wonderfol  BcvAenei^ 
of  sight,  and  indomitable  strengdi  of  wing^  and 
e{  legs  and  talons,  fitting  them  for  astcmishtDg 
velocity  of  flight,  and  for  resistless  fwoe,  when 
they  attack  and  bear  ofi^  their  prey.  *  As  they 
have  no  scei^,  their  ey«s  are  e£  infeiite.  ^use,  and 
enable  them  to  discern  a  mmiU  biid  at  ^n.  alaiofit 
incredible  distance :  and  often  to  get  a  ctewer 
view  and  more  ext^isive  horizon,  when  they 
leave  their  mountain  aeries,  they  ascend  to  a 
great  height.  M.  Ramond,  when  he  had  as- 
cended the  highest  peak  of  the  Pyrenees,  saw 
an  eagle  soaring  above  him,  flying  directly  in 
the  teeth  of  a  violent  south-wester,  with  incon- 
ceivable velocity. 

Another  genus  of  a  tropical  type,  but  not  con- 
fined to  the  tropics,  forming  a  striking  contrast 
with  the  gigantic  forms  last  adverted  to,  consists 


MCKTRIHUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  7  ( 

of  the  Dumerous  species  of  the  -  brilliant  and  di* 

miDutive  Humming  birds,  which  like  the  butter* 

flies,  whose  analogues  they  are,  suck  the  nectar 

of  the  flowers.    This,  strictly,  American  genus  is 

in  great  force^  also  without  the  tropics,  for  they 

abound  in  Mexico,  and  go  northward  as  far  as 

Canada,  and  southward   as  far  as  Patagonia. 

Hiere  is  no  ncnrthem  metropolis  for  any  analo- 

goc»  form^  to  these  living  gems,  which  constitute 

the  omamaal  and  life  of  the  new  world.     But 

the  old  shaires  with  the  new,  in  another  beautiful 

type  in  the  winged  creation,  I  mean  the  Psitta** 

oeous  or  Parrot  tribes,  which   chiefly  support 

themselves  upon  fruits,  and  abound  in  all  tro-* 

ptcal  countries,  these  the  Creator  has  not  only 

invested  with  the  gayest  colours  and  plumage, 

bat  gifted  also  with  the  power  of  speech,  at  least 

of  imitating  the  speech  of  man,  when  brought 

into  contact  with  him^  Their  principal  residence 

is  within  tl^  tropics,  but  not  confined  to  them, 

as  many,  are  found  in  New  Holland.    The  Aras^ 

are  confined  to  the  new  worlds  and  one  of  its 

greatest  ornaments ;  their  plumage  being  the 

most  brilliant  of  any  of  the  Psittaceans. 

An  analogous  tribe  of  mammiferous  animala 
inhal»ts  the  same  station,  and  feeds  on  the  same 
food  with  the  parrots,  these  are  what  Zoologists 
call  the  Quadrumanesj  or  Fou^-handed  beasts,' 

1  Macrocercus. 


72  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  UOCAh 


from  their  often  using  their  hind  as  w^  as  their 
lore  feet  as  hands,  and  many  of  them  even  thitr 
tail.  This  tribe  includes  the  Monkeys,  Apes; 
and  Baboons,  and  though  these  do  not  imkato 
man,  by  catching  his  phrages^  like  the  birds  kusC 
named,  yet  they  mimic  all  his  aetioM.  1  haie 
often  thought,  when  I  hare  examined  figures  of 
this  tribe,  that  thdr  features  are  typical  of  tbe 
different  kinds  of  lace  observable  in  the  human 
species :  as  far  as  relates  to  badg  they  approach 
us,  but  in  the  spiritual  part  of  our  nature,  ele- 
vated by  high  expectaticms,  and  by  knowledge 
not  confined  to  this  ^obe  on  which  we  tread,* 
but  traversing  the  heavens,  and  penetrating  i& 
thought  to  the  throne  of  Him  who  sitteth  upon 
them,  we  infinitely  exceed  them. 

Those  animals  that  are  of  a  predaceous  or  car- 
nivorous character,  are  more  widely  dispersed, 
than  many  of  the  herbivorous  ones,  in  lact  the^ 
are  co-extensive  with  their  food,  I  do  not  meanr 
specifically,  but  generically.  Though  the  lion 
and  the  Tiger,  and  the  larger  feline  animals  are 
g^ierally  tropical,  yet  the  Gat  is  naturalized 
every  where.  Though  the  Hysena  and  the  Jackal 
shrink  from  the  temperature  of  the  greater  part 
of  Europe,  yet  Wolves  and  Foxes,  as  well  as  the 
great  majority  of  the  canine  race,  are  found  in* 
digenous,  or  have  been  formerly  indigenous,  ia* 
almost  every  part  of  it. 


DISTRIBUTIOJN  OF  ANIMALS.  73 

Many  more  instances  might  be  adduced  proT-- 
kig  tbfit  animals  have  been  placed  originally  in 
certain  stlttiona,  adapted  to  the  habits  resulting 
fima  their  organization  and  general  structure, 
fii^m  which  some  of  them  have  sent  forth  their 
c^pnies  far  and  wide,  while  others,  owing  to 
pec»liiirittes  in  these  respects,  requiring  a  given 
temperature  and  kind  of  food,  or  to  local  obsta- 
clef(  stopping  their  further  progress,  have  not 
wawiered  beyond  certain  limits. 

Havinjg,  in  the  preceding  pages,  endeavoured 
to  account  for  the  dispersion  and  present  stations 
of  the  vari<His  members  of  the  animal  kingdom 
s^t  large,  not  to  leave  the  subject  incomplete,  I 
must  next  make  a  few  oteervations  relative  to 
that  of  the  human  race. 

It  has  been  a  favourite  theory  of  some  modern 
{Aysiologists  that  God  '^  hath  not  made  of  one 
blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the 
face  of  the  earth^'  but  that  there  are  different 
species :  of  men  as  well  as  of  animals :  others, 
who  do  not  go  quite  so  far,  suspect—  that  at  the 
last  great  deluge,  besides  Noah  and  his  family 
who  were  saved  in  the  ark,  some  others  escaped 
from  that  sad  catastrophe  by  taking  refuge  on 
some  of  the  highest  mountain  ridges  of  Asia  and 
Africa,  and  seem  to  insinuate  that  from  these 
arose  the  three  principal  races,  the  Caucasian, 


74  OEOGBAPUICAL  AND  LOCAL 

the  Mongol,  and  the  Negro,  that  now  hold  pos- 
session of  our  globe.^  I  shall  say  something  in 
controversion  of  each  of  these  theories,  b^inning 
with  the  last 

This  indeed  Aimishes  a  cine  for  its  own  refu- 
tation, since  it  admits  three  principal  stems,  which 
is  in  accordance  with  the  Mosaic  account,  that 
firom  the  families  of  the  three  sons  of  Noah,  the 
nations  were  divided  in  the  earth  after  the  flood. 
The  author  of  the  above  theory  seems  disposed 
to  admit  the  truth  of  the  Mosaic  account,  but 
insinuates  that  it  may  have  been  only  intended 
to  instruct  the  Isradites  in  the  history  of  the  race 
to  which  they  belonged,  while  that  of  other  races 
may  have  been  passed  over  in  silence.  It  is  too* 
much  the  fashion,  in  this  sceptical  age,  to  evade 
the  facts  that  are  most  clearly  revealed  in  scrip- 
ture, by  saying  the  language  must  not  be  taken 
strictly  nor  interpreted  literally,  even  when  it  is 
concerning  events  in  which  there  is  no  room  for 
metaphor.  One  would  think  that  the  terms  in 
which  God  foretold  the  deluge  were  of  this  de- 
scription. ^^  And  behold  /,  even  /,  do  bring  a 
flood  of  waters  upon  the  earthy  to  destroy  all  flesh 
wherein  is  the  breath  of  life  from  under  heaven ; 
and  every  thing  that  is  in  the  earth  shall  die." 
And  again — **  And  the  waters  prevailed  exceed- 
ingly upon  the  earthy  and  all  the  high  hills  th^d 
were  under  the  whole  heaven  were  covered :  fifteen 

*  Outlines  of  Hist.  Cab.  CycL  ix.  4. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  75 

eMts  .^iQHfrards  ^d  tke  waters  pre^ail^  and  the 
maautmos.  were  I  covered.''  It  is  also  stated  that 
m&y  iimng ,  substance^  both  man  and  cattle,  &c.» 
was  destroyed  from  the  earth,  and  that  Noah  only 
remaiiud  ahne,  and  they  that  were  with  him  in  the 
9rk.  Can  language  be  more  definite  and  ex- 
press? 

Wiiat  can.  be  more  absurd  than  that  an  ark 
should  be  necessary  for  the  saving  of  Noah  and 
hkhleimily:^  and  a  world  of  animals,  to  be  stored 
With  a  ¥881:  Ripply  of  provision,  when. they  might 
have  escaped  according  to  thk  hypothesis  by 
talung  refuge  on  the  summit  of  some  lofty  moun- 
tainto  jf hicEDivine  Wisdom  might  have  directed 
thcon.?. 

There  ^  no  occasion  whateE\rer  for  such  an 
Hypodiesis  to  account  for  the  dispersion  of  man- 
kind and  then*  breaking  into  nations.  Two  chap- 
ters in  the  book  of  Genesis^  set  the  whole  matter 
in  a  clear  light,  bodi  as  to  the  finst  cause  of  their 
separation,  and  the  various  tribes  into  which  they 
separated,  in  which  we  can  trace  the  names  of 
many  nations  still  in  existence.  From  Babdl 
each  in  due  time  took  the  course,  in  that  direc- 
tion, however  led  by  circumstances,  that  Provi- 
d^ice  had  decreed.  Europe  became  at  last  the 
head  quarters  of  the  descendants  of  Japhet, 
Asia  of  those  of  Shem,  and  Africa  of  those  of 

'  Chap.  X.  xi. 


76  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  IjOCAL 


Ham ;  the  Shemites  in  the  lapse  of  i^es,  peas- 
ing  oyer  to  America,  were  the  progenitors  of  the 
red  or  copper  race  of  that  coatinenL    Nor  were 
there  any  iDsormountable  obstacles  in  the  way 
to  prevent  the  peopling  of  the  ^obe  firom  one 
common  stock.    Supposing  Babel  or  Babyloo 
to  have  been,  so  to  speak,  the  centre  of  irradia- 
tion— hovr  easy  was  the  transit  for  Ham's  de- 
scendants into  Afirica  by  the  Isthmus  of  Suez ; 
into  Europe,  the  path  was  still  more  open  for  those 
of  Japhet ;   and  as  the  stream  of  popuiatioQ 
spread  to  the  East,  the  passage  to  America  was 
not  difficult  to  those  who  had  arrived  at  Behrihgs 
Straits.  But  in  all  these  countries  mixtures  with 
the  aborigines  have  probably  taken  place,  either 
from  the  irruption  and  .colonizations  of  great 
conquerors,  the  spread  of  commerce  and. similar 
causes,  which  naturally  tend  to  produce  varia- 
tions in  races  from  the  primitive  type.     Hence 
writers  on  this  subject  now  reckon  six  races  dis- 
tinguished by  their  c(dour,  viz.  a  white  race ;  a 
tawny  race  ;  a  red  race ;  a  deep  brown  race ;  a 
brown-black  race ;  and  a  black  race. 

This  leads  me  to  the  other  theory  alluded  to 
above,  that  there  are  different  species  of  men  as 
well  as  of  other  animals.  The  principal  foun- 
dation upon  which  those  naturalists  have  built 
their  theory,  that  have  adopted  the  opinion, 
that  there  are  several  distinct  species  of  men 
originally  created,  is  not  only  their  colour,  but 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  77 

likewise  certain  parts  of  their  structure,  which 
aire  found  to  vary  in  different  races,  such  as 
the  shape  of  the  head ;  the  prominence,  more 
er  less,  of  the  jaws,  producing  different  facial 
angles ;  the  comparative  length  of  some  of 
the  bones,  and  shape  of  the  feet;  the  degra-^ 
dation  of  intellect ;  the  peculiar  acuteness  of  the 
senses ;  the  tenacity  of  the  memory ;  and,  to 
name  no  niore,  the  appropriation  of  a  peculiar 
species  of  parasitic  animal  to  a  peculiar  race.^ 

Various  are  the  circumstances,  which,  in  the 
progress  of  generations,  tend  to  produce  differ- 
ences between  the  different  races  which  are  now 
found  inhabiting  our  globe,  without  having 
recourse  to  a  theory  that  boldly  contradicts  or 
nullifies  the  word  of  God ;  since  the  Scripture 
expressly  declares,  that  God  "  hath  made  of  one 
blood  all  nations  of  men^Jbr  to  dwell  on  all  the 
face  of  the  earthy  and  hath  determined  the  times 
befoi^e  appointed^  and  the  hounds  of  their  habi- 
tation.'' Climate,  the  elevation  of  country,  its 
soil,  waters,  woods,  and  other  peculiarities ;  the. 
fi)od,  clothmg,  customs,  habits,  way  of  life,  and 
state  of  civilization,  often,  of  its  inhabitants,  pro- 
duce effects  upon  the  latter  that  are  important 
and  durable,  and  contribute  to  impress  a  pecu- 
liar character  upon  the  different  races  of  men 


*  See  N.  Diet.  D'Hist.  Nat.  xv.  150,  Article  Homme.    White's 
Begular  Gradation  in  Man^  &c.  S.  2^ 


78  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL, 

as  well  as  animals,  that  inhabit  our  globe,  and 
will  account  for  many  distinctions,  which  indi- 
cate that  such  an  individual  belongs  to  such  a 
people.  ^  But  these  circumstances  will  not  explain 
and  satisfactorily  account  for  all  die  peculiar 
characters  that  distinguish  nations  from  each 
other,,  without  having  recourse  to  the  will  of 
a  governing  and  all-directing  Power,  influ- 
encing circumstances  that  happen  in  the  com- 
mon course,  and,  according  to  the  established 
laws  of  nature,  to  answer  the  purposes  of  his 
Providence,  When  he  confounded  the  speech 
and  language  of  the  descendants  of  Noah,  con- 
gregated at  Babel,  he  first  made  a  division  of 
mankind  into  nsltions ;  ^^And  from  thence  did 
Jehovah  scatter  them  abroad  upon  the  face  of  aU 
the  earth.''  The  same  Divine  Power  that  effected 
this  distinction,  which  may  be  called  the  origin 
of  nationality,  also  decreed  that  nations  should 
be  further  separated  by  differences  of  form  and 
colour,  as  well  as  speech,  which  differences  ori- 
ginated not  in  any  change  operated  miraculously^ 
but  produced  by  second  causes,  under  the  direc- 
tion of  the  First.  When  we  are  told  expressly 
that  *'  The  hairs  of  our  head  are- all  numberedy'' 
and  that  in  God's  ^*  Book  cdl  tmr  members  are 
written^'  we  learn,  what  in  common  parlance  wc 
acknowledge,  that  it  is  according  to  God's  will 
that  we  are  made  so  and  so.  That  persons,  who, 
in  some  one  or  other  of  their  parts  and  organs^ 


DISTRIBUTION  OR  ANIMALS.  79 

exhibit;  an  approximation  to  races  different  from 
tbat  to  which  thqy  belong,  as  thick  lips,  a  pro* 
jBiim^t  &cial  angle,  a  difference  in  the  relative 
jpcaportion  of  certain  bones  to  each  other,  the 
curling  of  the  hair,  and  the  like,  occur  in .  all 
places,  must  be  obvious  to  every  ono. who  uses 
bis  eyes  and  intellects  It  is  evident  that  all 
these  variations  are.  produced  by  circumstances 
that  we  cannot  fuUy  appreciate.  Even  in  ani- 
mals, there  is  as  much  difference  in  general 
characters  between  the  Arabian  steed  of  high 
Uood,  fine  form,  indomitable  spirit,  and  winged 
^eed,  and  the  brewer's  dray-horse,  of  a  strikingly 
apposite  character,  as  there  is  between  the  Euro- 
pean high-bred  gentleman  and  the  African^  negro. 
The  long-legged  ^wine  of  France,  though  exhi- 
biting such  a  imtrked  difierence  in  the  relative 
length  of  some  of  their  bones,  are  still,  the  same 
species  with^the  short-legged  swine  of  Englsuad; 
The  same  argument  is  rtrengthaied  by  the  infir 
nite.varkties  of  the  dog,  the  erect  ears  of  the  tame; 
and  iiecunibent  ones  of  the  wild  horse/  It  is 
evident,  therefore,  from  fact  and  from  what  ordi- 
narily happens,  that  there  are  powers  at  work  at 
and^fter  conception,  and  while  the  foetus  is  in  the 
womb,  that  can  produce  variations  in  the  same 
people^  approaching  to  those  that  distinguish  the 
Negro,  the  red  man,  or  the  brown  man  ;  which, 

*  See  above,  p.  60. 


80  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

indeed,  can  produce  forms  much  more  singular 
and  extraordinary ;  for  instance,  the  monsters  that 
sometimes  make  their  appearance  in  the  woAA; 
as  the  Siamese  youths,  children  with  two  heads, 
&c.  The  mysterious  influence  that  the  excited 
imagination,  or  passions,  or  appetites  of  the  mo^ 
ther,  have  over  the  foetus  in  her  womb,  is  well 
known,  and  produces  very  extraordinary  conse- 
quences, and  malformations,  and  monstrosities. 
When  we  consider  that  all  these  facilities,  if  I 
may  so  speak — these  tendencies  to  produce 
variations  in  the  foetus,  are  at  the  disposal  of 
Him,  who  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  his 
power,. and  turns  them  to  the  fulfilment  of  his 
own  purposes, — ;we  may  imagine  that  thus  new 
types  may  be  produced,  which  may  be  continued 
in  the  ordinary  way  of  generation  ;  according  te 
that  observation  of  Humboldt,  that  "  The  exclu- 
sion of  all  foreign  mixtures  contributes  to  per- 
petuate varieties,  or  aberrations  from  the  common 
standard."^  That  what  at  first  were  family 
characters,  accompany  the  race  when  gro^ra  into 
a  nation,  is  evident  from  the  case  of  the  Jews, 
who,  wherever  dispersed,  exhibit  certain  common 
characters  by  which  they  are  every  where 
known ;  and,  with  respect  to  complexion,  they 
are  said  to  vary  according  to  the  climates  in 
which  they  reside.    A  singular  exception  to  this 

*  Personal  Travels,  v.  ii.  565. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  81 

h  furnished  by  the  black  Jews  of  Malabar,  men- 
tioned  by  Dr.  Buchanan.  At  Cochin,  he  says, 
there  are  two  classes  of  Jews,  the  white  and  the 
black  Jews.  The  latter  are  supposed  to  have 
arrived  in  India  soon  after  the  Babylonian  cap- 
tivity ;  at  least,  they  have  that  tradition  amongst 
thesi,  which  seems  confirmed  by  the  fact  that 
they  have  copies  only  of  those  books  of  the  Old 
Testament  which  were  written  previously  to  the 
captivity.  The  white  Jews  emigrated  from 
Europe  to  India  in  later  ages.  Now  here  is  a 
«iiigular  fact,  that  in  the  lapse  of  so  many  ages 
a  white  or  tawny  race  has  become  black.  Mr. 
White  endeavours  to  account  for  such  an  aberr 
cation  from  his  principle,  that  colour  does  not 
fe^ult  from  climate,  by  an  observation  not  alto- 
gether founded  in  fact — ^namely,  that  the  Jews 
have  gained  proselytes  in  every  country  in  which 
they  have  resided,  and,  being  at  liberty  to  marry 
tfaoejie  prosel3i;es,  this  would  produce  mixed 
Weeds.  But  though  the  Jews,  in  our  Saviour's 
time,  would  compass  sea  and  land  to  gain  one 
proselyte,  this  has  not  been  their  character  since 
the  dei^ruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  we  never  hear 
DOW  of  their  making  proselytes.  Indeed,  these 
black  Jews  of  Cochin  seem  to  have  been  settled 
there  long  before  any  white  ones  came  to  that 
place. 

With  regard  to  the  degradation  of  the  intellect, 
and   the   peculiar   acuteness  of  the  senses  or 

VOL.  I.  o 


82  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

memory  of  certain  races ;  these  furnish  no  proof 
whatever  of  specific  distinctions,  of  that  they 
could  not  be  descended  from  the  common  an- 
cestor of  our  species. 

Humboldt  has  an  important  observation  which 
will  explain  how  this  might  happen  without 
having  recourse  to  such  a  supposition.  Speak* 
ing  of  the  barbarism  of  certain  tribes  of  Ame* 
ricans  and  Asiatics,  he  observes  : — "  The  bar- 
barism that  prevails  throughout  these  different 
regions  is,  perhaps,  less  owing  to  a  primitive 
absence  of  all  kind  of  civilization,  than  to  the 
effects  of  a  long  degradation.  The  greater  part 
of  the  hordes,  which  we  designate  under  the 
name  of  savages,  descend,  probably,  from  nations 
more  advanced  in  cultivation."^  And  in  anoth^ 
place : — "  If  it  be  true  that  savages  are  for  the 
most  part  degraded  races,  remnants  escaped 
from  a  common  shipwreck,  as  their  languages, 
their  cosmogonic  fables,  a  crowd  of  other  indi- 
cations  seem  to  prove." 

Now,  what  is  it  that  degrades  man,  and  causes 
him  to  make  an  approach  towards  the  brute? 
Setting  up  sense  above  reason  and  intellect; 
sight  above  faith;  this  world  above  the  next. 
Experience  teaches  us,  that  those  faculties  of 
our  nature  that  are  most  cultivated,  become  most 
acute :  if  intellectual  pursuits  are  neglected,  the 

^  Personal  Travels.     E.  T.  iii.  208. 


MSTRIBUTION  OP  ANIMALS.  83 

intellect  itself  becomes  weakened ;  in  proportion 
as  the  senses  are  exercised,  they  are  strength* 
ened ;  in  proportion  as  the  pleasures  they  afford 
us  «tahd  high  or  low  in  our  estimation,  we 
graduate  towards  the  brute,  which  knows  no 
pleasures  but  those  of  sense,  or  towards  the 
angel  who  knows  no  pleasures  but  what  are 
spiritual.  There  is  a  governing  principle  in 
man,^  originally  enthroned  in  him  by  his  Creator, 
and  to  whose  sway  the  senses  were  originally  in 
complete  subjection.  But  when  man  fell,  a 
struggle  was  generated,  the  lower  or  sensual  part 
of  his  nature  striving  to  gain  the  rule  over  him, 
and  to  (tethrone  the  higher  or  intellectual.  This 
is  the  "  law  in  our  members  watTmg  against  the 
law  of  our  mindy''  mentioned  by  the  Apostle. 
Now,  we  know  that  the  same  individual,  at 
different  periods  of  life,  may  be  directed  in  his 
actions  first  by  one  and  then  by  the  other  of 
these  laws ;  he  may  begin  in  sense,  and  end  in 
spirit,  or  vice  versa.  If  the  former  takes  place 
in  him,  his  nature  and  character  are  elevated, 
and  he  is  become  more  intellectual ;  if  the  latter, 
they  are  degraded,  and  he  is  become  more 
sensual  and  nearer  to  a  brute,  and  yet  in  both 
cases  he  remains  the  same  man  as  before;  his 
species  is  not  altered.  Apply  this  to  nations, 
will  it  follow,  because  one  is  now  generally  gifted 

^  To  rjyefJioyiKOV. 


84  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

with  a  greater  degree  of  intellect,  and  anothaf 
remarkable  for  more  acute  sensation,  that,  there-^ 
fore,  they  cannot  be  derived  from  a  common 
origin  ?  Nations  are  often  led  by  custom  as  wdl 
as  individuals ;  they,  therefore,  usually  walk,  id 
the  path  that  their  ancestors  have  trod  before 
them,  and,  from  circumstances  connected  with 
this,  it  happens  that  some  apply  their  faculties 
to  higher  pursuits  than  others.  Those  that 
chiefly  cultivate  the  intellect  improve  it  by  that 
very  act ;  while  those  who  are  principaUy  en^ 
gat^  in  p.»mts  that  squire  the  caLat  a«l 
skilful  use  of  the  organs  of  sensation  acquire  a 
degree  of  expertuess  in  that  use  not  to  be  met 
with  in  the  others ;  but  the  intellect  being  em* 
ployed  only  upon  low  objects,  becomes  habitually 
degraded,  and  loses  all  taste  for  things  that  are 
not  idsible  and  tangible.  Though  in  an  indi- 
vidual, or  in  a  long  succession  of  individuals,  this 
might  not  produce  a  perceptible  contraction  and 
non-developement  of  the  organ  of  the  intellect,  or 
in  the  chamber  that  contains  it ;  yet,  in  the  lapse 
of  ages  and  generations,  this  effect  would  gradu- 
ally be  produced,  for  if  an  organ  is  not  used  for 
a  long  course  of  years,  it  becomes  contracted, 
and  from  long  habit  unapt  to  perform  its  natural 
functions.  Some  American  nations,  by  the  ap- 
plication of  boards  properly  shaped,  depress  the 
skull-bone  of  their  infants,  thinking  a  flat  head 
a  great  beauty,  whence  the  tribe  is  distinguished 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  85 

by  tbe  name  of  Pallotepallorg,  or  Flat-heads, 
Others,  by  the  same  means,  give  than  a  conical 
form;  there  is  no  difficulty,  therefore,  in  con- 
eeiving  that  with  a  gradual  contraction  of  the 
brain,  that  of  the  skull  might  take  place  in  the 
fietos,  which  would  accommodate  one  to  the 
other.  With  regard  to  the  memory,  it  is  not 
wonderfiil  that  a  being  who  occupies  his  time 
and  intellect  with  few  objects,  should  have  a 
more  distinct  recollection  of  certain  events,  than 
one  whose  attention  is  more  divided.  It  may 
be  observed  of  the  lower  orders  in  general,  that 
tiieir  memory,  for  the  same  reason,  of  matters 
within  their  own  sphere  of  comprehension,  is 
often  more  clear  than  that  of  persons  better 
educated  and  informed. 

I  remember  the  case  of  a  negro  who  resided 
near  Bury  St.  Edmunds,  who  was  an  educated 
man,  and  published  a  volume  of  poems  by  sub- 
scription, which  did  him  no  discredit.^  Hence, 
it  is  evident  that  there  is  a  difference  of  capacity 
in  negroes  as  well  as  whites,  which  admits  of 
improvement  from  instruction  and  study,  when 
they  come  among  civilized  people.  Little  stress 
will  be  laid  on  the  parasite  of  the  negroes,^  being 
specifically  distinct  from  that  which  infests  the 
whites,  when  we  reflect  that  the  horse  and  the 
ox  have  different  insect  parasites  and  assailants 

^  He  was  called  Ignatius  Sancko,     <  Pediculus  Nigritarum. 


86  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  LOCAL 

in  different  climates.  There  is  a  time  fixed  upon 
in  the  divkie  counsels  when  the  curse  shall  cease; 
and  it  will  then  be  found  that  by  reversing  the 
course  that  has  degraded  so  many  nations,  the 
apostacy,  namely,  from  God  to  idolatries  of  the 
most  debasing  kind — which  has  yielded  them  up 
a  prey  to  sensuality,  clouded  their  understandings, 
and,  instead  of  unirersal  good*will,  has  taught 
them  to  regard  those  that  are  not  of  their  own 
tribe  or  caste  as  objects  of  just  hatred  and  injury 
— ^when  this  course  has  been  reversed  and  they 
are  brought  back  to  God,  which  will  take  place 
in  his  time  and  at  his  word ;  and  by  the  means 
and  instruments  that  he  empowers  and  com- 
missions,^ they  will  become  more  elevated  in 
their  character,  and  assume  a  higher  rank  among 
the  nations :  and  they  will  make  good  their  claim 
to  the  same  inheritance  with  the  other  membeis 
of  the  Christian  family.  He  who  decreed  the 
end,  decrees  also  the  means.  When  the  Lard 
gave  the  wordj  great  was  the  company  of  those 
that  published  it.  This  was  the  case  at  the  fiist 
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  when  the  gross  darkness 
of  heathen  idolatry  covered  the  earth ;  this  also 
was  the  case  at  what  may  be  called  its  republi- 
cation at  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  when  the 
gros^  darkness  of  papal  idolatry  had  alnxost  put 
out  the  light  of  truth  in  the  church  ;  and  so  shall 

^  See  Appendix  y  note  16. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  87 

k  be  again,  ahould  another  and  perhaps  last 
cloud  of  error  epvelope  the  world  with  darkness,^ 
wJiich  seems  even  now  beginning  to  gather,  and 
may  we  not  hope  that  it  will  be  followed  by  that 
happy  time,  foretold  by  the  prophet,  when— Me 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cavei*  the  earth  tLS  the 
waters  cover  the  sea  ?  The  old  curse  on  Ham^s  off- 
spring shall  then  cease,  he  shall  no  longer  be  a 
servant  of  servants  to  his  brethren ;  then  shall  the 
curse  also  that  has  driven  the  children  of  Abra- 
ham after  the  flesh  into  every  region  of  the  globe, 
cease,  and  they  shall  look  on  him  whom  they 
pierced,  and  be  restored  to  the  favour  of  their 
God,  and  to  their  own  land ;  ^  and  next,  in  its 
own  day,  the  original  curse,  also  pronounced  upon 
Adam  and  his  posterity  shall  be  obliterated  and 
done  away  for  ever. 

Taking  all  the  circumstances  I  have  noticed 
into  consideration,  I  trust  I  have  made  it  clear, 
that  the  variations  observable  in  the  different 
races^of  men  are  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to  render 
it  impossible,  or  improbable,  that  they  should  all 
have  been  derived  from  a  common  stock ;  and  that 
the  degradations  observable  in  some  of  them,  and 
approxiipation  to  the  highest  of  the  brutes,  was 
caused  not  by  the  will  and  fiat  of  the  Creator, 
but  by  their  own  wilful  departure  from  him,  and 
voluntary  self-debasement.  Because  they  did  riot 
like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge^  he  gave 

*  See  Appendix,  note  17.  «  See  Appendix,  note  18. 


88  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTBiBUTlOK. 

them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind  to  do  tkme  things 
that  are  not  convenient:  further,  that  with  re^ 
spect  to  thoBe  characters,  which  distii^uish  one 
nation  from  another,  they  may  be  attributed  to 
the  action  of  physical  causes  directed  by  the 
Deity :  who,  to  use  tibe  language  of  a  pious  and 
excellent  poet, 

Lives  through  all  life,  extends  through  all  extent. 
Spreads  undivided,  operates  unspent. 


There  b  another  interesting  subject  connected 
with  the  geography  of  animals,  which  may  find 
its  place  here ;  a  subject  than  which  none  shows, 
more  evidently  or  strikingly  the  hand  of  a  benefit 
cent  and  ever  watchful  Providence,  holding  the 
reins ;  and  upon  certain  occasions  and  at  certain 
seasons,  directing  various  animals  to  change  their 
quarters,  and  seek  often  in  distant  countries  a 
more  genial  climate,  in  which  they  may  give  birth 
to  their  young,  or  find  a  better  supply  of  food  for 
their  own  support.  I  shall,  therefore,  now  devote 
a  few  ps^es  to  the  migrations  of  animals. 

The  most  general  principle  that  causes  emigrar 
tion  is  common  to  man  and  animals.  When 
a  country  is  over-peopled,  and  can  no  longer 
maintain  its  inhabitants,  unless  some  means  can 
be  devised  at  home,  by  which  the  pressure  may 
be  lightened,  and  the  suffering  classes  enabled 
to  procure  the  necessaries  of  life,  th^e  must  in- 


MIGRATIONS.  89 

fwitably  be  some  outbreak ;  when  the  rivers  can 
no  \on^  be  contained  within  their  natural  chan- 
nel they  will  overflow,  and  spread  desolation 
an>dnd,  till  they  have  passed  away  and  found  a 
place  in  the  great  receptacle  of  waters.  Thus,  in 
aincient  times,  the  great  northern  hive  sent  forth 
its  numberless  swarms,  and  overturned  and  di- 
vided amongst  them  a  considerable  portion  of 
that  mighty  empire  which  extended  its  iron 
sway  over  the  fairest  portion  of  the  globe.^ 

With  regard  to  their  migrations,  animals  may 
be  divided  into  two  classes.  The  first  will  consist 
of  those  that  migrate  casually,  under  a  certain 
pressure ;  and  the  second  of  those  that  migrate 
periodicalhf,  or  at  certain  seasons. 

1.  Of  the  first  description,  are  those  infinite 
sffmies  of  Locusts,  which,  when  they  have  laid 
bare  one  country,  as  an  overshadowing  and  dark 
doud  pregnant  with  the  wrath  of  heaven,  pass  on 
to  another ;  mighty  conquerors  of  old,  of  whom 
they  were  the  symbols,  from  Sesostris  to  Senna- 
cberib  and  Nebuchadnezzar,  also  mark  their  pro- 
gress by  devastation  and  ruin ;  to  use  the  graphic 
language  of  the  prophet — ''  The  land  is  as  the 
garden  of  Eden  before  them^  and  behind  them  a 
desolate  wilderness.''^ 

This  plague  has  generally  been  considered 
SL»   belonging  to  the  old  world,  in  which  they 

1  See  Appendix,  note  19. 

^  See  on  the  Locusts  Introd,  to  Ent.  1  Lett.  vii. 


90  GEOGRAPHICAL  DIOTRIBUTION. 

seldom  exceed  latitude  42''.  but  in  N.  America, 
there  is  a  species  of  Locust  or  Grass-hopper,  as 
Dr.  Richardson  informs  me»  according  to  the 
report  of  the  Indians,  becoming  prevalent  about 
once  in  twenty  years,  which  committed  great 
devastations  at  lord  Selkirk's  colony  of  Red  riv^, 
as  high  as  latitude  52"".  They  made  their  fint 
appearance  in  vast  flights  coming  frwa  the  plaias 
to  the  westward,  and  soon  destroyed  the  crops  of 
grain,  ^nd  every  thing  green.  They  re-appeared 
for  three  or  four  successive  summers,  each  year 
in  smaller  numbers,  and  now  for  several  years 
they  have  not  been  seen. 

These  were  evidently  insects  of  the  same  order 
and  tribe  with  the  locust,  though  perhaps  of  a  dif- 
ferent genus ;  but,  probably  the  tradition  of  the 
Indians  might  relate  to  another  North  American 
devastator,  which  is  also  called  there  the  Locust, 
but  belongs  to  a  genus  beloved  by  the  Greeks  for 
its  song,  and  hated  by  the  less  imaginative  Romans 
for  its  stunning  noise,  which  may  be  called  the 
Tree  Locust ;  a  species  of  which  is  said  to  ap- 
pear, about  once  in  every  seventeen  years,^  in 
such  prodigious  numbers  as  to  do  incalculable 
damage  to  the  fruit  and  forest  trees,  in  which  it 
deposits  its  eggs,  and  upon  which  it  feeds  inter- 
nally  in  the  grub  state,  but  the  oral  organs  of  the 
perfect  insect  are  only  calculated  for  suction. 

Amongst  quadrupeds,  the  analogues,  in  some 

^  Cicada  septendecim* — L. 


MIGRATIONS.  91 

respects^  of  the  locusts,  are  the  Lemmings,  a  kind 
of  mouse  or  rat.    These  little  animals,  which 
usually  inhabit  the  mountains  of  Norway  and 
Lapland,  in  certain  seasons,  emigrate  in  prodi- 
gious numbers  to  the  south ;  the  most  common 
species^  is  said  not  to  lay  up  any  winter  store, 
but  to  form  burrows  under  ground  in  summer, 
and  under  the  snow  in  winter  in  search  of  food ; 
but  that  found  in  Kamtschatka,^  which  is  larger 
than  a  rat,  is  stated  to  be  occupied  during  the 
summer  in  laying  up  provisions  for  the  winter 
in   holes  under  the  turf  divided  into  compart- 
ments, they  consist  of  various  kinds  of  roots, 
some  even,  poisonous,  but  which  agree  with  this 
animal,  and  of  which  it  collects  from  twenty  to 
thirty  pounds.    It  is  called  in  Kamtschatka  Te- 
gulchitch.    In  fine  weather  its  instinct  teaches 
it  to  spread  its  harvest  of  roots  in  the  sun  to  dry 
and  fit  them  for  keeping.    When  these  different 
species  of  Lanmings  make  their  excursions,  which 
take  place  only  in  certain  years  and  seasons,  and 
in  different  directions,  the  species  last  mentioned 
going  towards  the  west,  the  others  towards  the 
south,  like   certain  ants,   they   always    march 
straight  forward,   neither  turning  to  the  right 
hand  nor  to  the  left,  and  if  their  course  is  inter- 
rupted by  a  river,  they  cross  it  by  swimming. 
The  common  Lemmings,  when  they  migrate,  are 
r^arded  as  a  terrible  scourge ;  they  devastate 

1  Lemmus  vulgaris.  ^  Lemmus  CRcononfus, 


92  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

the  fields  and  gardens,  ruin  the  harvest,  and  ioAf 
what  is  kept  in  the  houses  escapes  them^  mi$ 
these  happily  they  never  enter.  Their  number, 
is  so  prodigious,  that,  when  they  die,  the  air  k 
infected,  and  much  sickness  is  the  consequeneea 
All  this  tribe  of  mice  appear  to  live  on  roots^ 
bulbs,  grain,  nuts,  &c.  and  have  generally  a  verjr 
short  tail. 

The  Campagnol,^  or  short-tailed  rat  of  Pennant, 
is  equally  destructive ;  in  some  years  their  num- 
bers are  so  prodigious,  that  they  overflow,  as  it 
were,  a  whole  district,  and  by  their  ravages  jmpo- 
duce  famine  and  desolation.  This  effect  is  stated 
to  have  been  produced  in  certain  parts  of  France 
where  an  extent  of  forty  square  leagues  was  A^ 
vastated  by  them.  In  their  progress  these  ani- 
mals are  preyed  upon  by  the  predaceous  quadm* 
peds  and  birds,  by  whose  incessant  attacks  their 
numbers,  in  ordinary  seasons,  are  kept  within  the 
bounds  assigned  them  by  the  Creator,  as  are  the 
Locusts  by  the  Locust-eating  Thrush,*  and  th6 
Aphides  or  Plant-lice  which  may  be  denominated 
the  Locusts  of  Britain,  and  which  are  stated 
sometimes  almost  to  darken  the  air,  by  the  lady<^ 
birds  and  apliidivorous  flies. 

All  these  migrations  are  produced  by  a  differmt 
cause  from  those  periodical  ones  which  take  place;^ 
after  certain  intervals,  or  at  certain  seasons,  in 
various  other  animals  of  every  grade ;  and  though 

1  Arvicola  arvalis,  *  Turdus  gryllivofus. 


MIGRATIONS.  03 

» ^arcity  of  food,  or  straitened  circumstances  or 
accommodations  may  be  the  impelling  motives, 
yft  these  are  produced  by  an  unusual  increase  in 
tbe  numbers  of  the  migrating  species,  so  that 
tbey  are  driven  to  seek  an  outlet  by  which  their 
dupemumeraries  may  pass  off  and  relieve  them 
^m  the  pressure,  or  the  whole  population,  de- 
serting an  exhausted  country,  may  establish 
themselves  in  better  quarters. 

In  all  the  instances  that  I  have  here  adduced, 
the  object,  at  the  first  blush,  as  far  as  the  Deity 
may  be  supposed  to  be  concerned  in  these  out- 
breaks, appears  rather  punitive  than  beneficent, 
but.  when  we  dip  below  the  surface,  and  look  to 
ultimate  consequences,  what  appears  to  be  alto- 
gether an  evil,  instead  of  a  dark  side,  turns 
round  and  shews  one  bright  with  good.  It  is 
true,  in  some  cases,  the  object  is  punishment  of 
an  offender,  and  in  hopeless  cases,  the  sentence 
is  pronounced,  ^'  Cut  it  down^  why  cumbereth  it 
tie  gratmd.''  But  before  this.  Divine  Mercy, 
which  willeth  not  that  any  should  perish,  employs 
those  correctives,  which  at  the  same  time  that 
they  give  pain,  and  wear  the  appearance  of  evil 
and  punishment,  tend  to  produce  that  change  of 
the  mind  and  conversion  of  the  heart,  that  will 
reconcile  the  sinner  to  God,  and  ensure  to  him 
the  blessed  inheritance  of  his  children.  But 
temporal  good,  as  well  as  spiritual,  is  often  the 
result  of  these  visitations,  the  devastations  of 


94  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

which  they  are  the  instriiments,  as  was  observed 
by  Sparrman  of  the  locusts,  are  often  followed 
by  fertility,  and  thei  fearful  scourge  is  replaced 
by  Amalthea's  horn. 

2.  We  are  next  to  consider  those  migrations 
that  take  place  periodically,  and  usually  at  certain 
seasons  of  every  year ;  the  general  intention  of 
which  appears  to  be  a  supply  of  food,  and  often 
a  temperature  best  suited  to  reproduction.  Pro- 
vidence, in  this,  taking  care  that  their  instincts 
shall  stimulate  them  to  change  their  quarters, 
when  these  two  obiects  can  be  answered  at  the 
*me  ttae.  and  byVstogle  re«.o.al. 

In  North  America,  that  ferocious  and  lion-like 
animal,   the  Bison^^  called  there  the  Bnffah, 
forms  regular  migrations,  in  immense  herds,  from 
north  to  south,  and  from  the  mountains  to  the 
plains,  and  after  a  certain  period  returns  back 
again.    Salt-springs,  usually  called  salt-licks  or 
salines,  found  in  a  clay,  compact  enough  for 
potter's  clay,  are   much   frequented    by  these 
animals,  whence  they  are  called  Buffalo  salt- 
licks.    Dr.   Richardson   informs   me  that  the 
periodical  movements  of  these  animals  are  regu- 
lated almost  solely  by  the  pastures :  when  a  fire 
has  spread  over  the  prairies,  it  is  succeeded  by  a 
fine  growth  of  tender  grass,  which  they  are  sure 
to  visit.    How  the  Bison  discovers  that  this  has 

'  Bos  Americanus* 


MIGRATIONS*  '  95 

taken  place  seems  not  easily  accounted  for; 
perhaps  stragglers  from  the  great  herdsy  when 
food  grows  scarce,  may  be  instramental  to  this. 

The  Musk  Ox,  a  ruminating  animal  between 
the  ox  and  sheep,^  has  the  same  habit,  extending 
its  migratory  mov^m^ats  as  far  as  Melville,  and 
other  islands  of  the  Polar  sea,  where  it  arrives 
about  the  middle  of  May,  and  gaing  southward 
towards  the  end  of  September,  where  it  has  been 
seen  as  low  as  lat.  67^  N.,  which,  as  Dr.  Richard- 
son states,  approaches  the  northern  limit  of  the 
Bkon :  its  food,  like  that  of  the  Rein-deer,  called 
in  North  America  the  Caribou,  is  grass  in  the 
summer  and  lichens  in  the  winter.  Its  hair  is 
very  long,  and,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Bison, 
which  has  been  manufactured  both  in  England 
and  America  into  cloth,  might  be  woven  into 
usefiil  articles.  This  animal  inhabits  strictly  the 
country  of  the  Esquimaux,  and  may  be  regarded 
as  the  gift  of  a  kind  Providence  to  that  people, 
who  call  it  Oamingmaky  and  not  only  eat  its 
flesh  but  also  the  contents  of  its  stomach,  as  well 
as  those  of  the  Rein-deer,  which  they  call  Nor- 
rooks,  which  consisting  of  licliens  and  other 
vegetable  substances,  as  Dr.  Richardson  remarks, 
are  more  easily  digested  by  the  human  stomach 
when  they  are  mixed  with  the  salivary  and 
gastric  juices  of  a  ruminating  animal. 
The  wild  Rein-deer  in  North  America,  in  the 

'  Ovibos  moschatus. 


96  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

summer,  as  the  excellent  man  and  author  lately 
mentioned  states,  seek  the  coast  of  the  Arctic 
seas :  it  is  singular  that  the  females,  driven  from 
the  woods  by  the  miisquitos,  migrate  thither 
before  the  males,  generally  in  the  month  of  Mayi 
(some  say  in  April  and  March),  while  the  latter 
do  not  begin  their  march  till  towards  the  end  of 
June.  At  this  time  the  sun  has  dried  up  the 
lichens  on  the  Barren  Grounds,  and  the  moist 
pastures  in  the  valleys  of  the  coast  and  islands  of 
the  above  seas  afford  them  sufficient  food.  Sooa 
after  their  arrival  the  females  drop  their  young. 
They  commence  their  return  to  the  south  in 
September,  and  reach  the  vicinity  of  the  woods 
towards  the  end  of  October.  After  the  rutting 
season,  which  takes  place  in  September,  the 
males  and  females  live  separately;  the  former 
retire  deeper  into  the  woods,  while  the  pr^nant 
herds  of  the  latter  remain  in  the  skirts  of  the 
Barren  Grounds,  which  abound  in  the  rein-deer^ 
and  other  lichens.  In  the  woods,  they  feed  on 
lichens  which  hang  from  the  trees,  and  on  the 
lo^g  grass  of  the  swamps.  The  males  do  not 
usually  go  so  far  north  as  the  females.  Co- 
lumns, consisting  of  eight  or  ten  thousand  of 
these  CaribotiSf  so  numerous  are  they  in  North 
America,  may  be  seen  annually  passing  from 
north  to  south  in  the  spring,  infested  and  attacked 

>  Cenomyce  rangiferina.    Achar. 


HIGIIATIONS.  97 

« 

in  their  pr<^ess  by  nnmbers  of  wolves,  foxes, 
and  other  predaceous  quadrupeds,  which  attack 
and  devour  the  stragglers. 

The  Pronged* fiarned  Antelope^  as  well  as  the' 
Rein-deer,  appears  to  go  northward  in  the  sum- 
mer, and  return  to  the  south  in  the  winter. 

Dr.  Richardson  remarks  to  me  in  a  letter, — 
"  The  Musk-ox  and  Rein-deer  feed  chiefly  on 
lichens,  and  therefore  frequent  the  Barren  Lands 
and  primitive  rocks,  which  are  clothed  with  these 
plants.  They  resort  in  winter,  when  the  snow  is 
deep,  to  the  skirts  of  the  woods,  and  feed  on  the 
lichens  which  hang  from  the  trees,  but  on  every 
fevourable  change  of  weather  they  return  to  the 
Barren  Grounds.  In  summer  they  migrate  to  the 
moist  pastures  on  the  sea-coast,  and  eat  grass, 
because  the  lichens  on  the  Barren  Lands  are  then 
parched  by  the  drought,  and  too  hard  to  be 
eaten.  The  young  grass  is,  I  suppose,  better 
fitted  for  the  fawns,  which  are  dropped  about  the 
time  the  deer  reach  the  coast."  In  all  this  we 
see  the  hand  of  Providence  directing  them  to 
those  places  where  the  necessary  sustenance  may 
be  had. 

The  same  gentleman  has  remarked  a  singular 
circumstance  with  regard  to  the  American  Black 
Bear."  In  general,  this  species  hybemates  in 
tlie  northern  parts  of  the  fur  countries ;  but  it 

*  Antilope  furcata,  2   Ursus  Americanus. 

VOL.  I.  H 


.98  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

has  been  observed  in  certain  years,  and  very 
severe  winters,  that  great  numbers  enter  the 
United  States  from  the  northward.  These  were 
all  lean,  and  generally  males.  The  natives 
assert,  that  a  be^r  that  is  not  fat  cannot  hyber- 
nate;  .therefore,^  those  that  have  not  acquired 
sufficient  fat  when  winter  overtakes  them,  neces- 
sarily emigi'ate  to  a  milder  climate.^ 

A  migration  of  an  animal  of  the  equine  genus 
was  observed  by  Mr.  Campbell  in  South  Africa, 
The  Quagga,  a  kind  of  wild  ass,  travels  in  bands 
of  two  or  three  hundred,  in  winter,  from  the 
tropics  southward  to  a  district,  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  Malalaveen  river,  reported  to  be  warmer  thaa; 
within  the  tropic  of  Capricorn,  when  the  sun  has 
retired  to  the  northern  hemisphere.  They  stay, 
here  for  two  or  three  months,  which  is  called  the 
Bushmen's  harvest.  The  lions,  who  follow  the 
quaggas,  are  the  chief  butchers.  During  this 
season,  the  first  thing  the  bushman  does,  when, 
he  awakes,  is  to  see  whether  he  can  spy  any 
vultures  hovering  in  the  heavens  at  a  great 
height ;  under  them  he  is  sure  to  find  a  quagga, 
which  %  lion  has  slaughtered  in  the  night. 

But  the  animals  which  are  most  noted  for  their 
migrations,  from  a  cold  to  a  warm  climate,  and 
vice  versttf  are  the  birds^  which,  as  having  domi- 
nion in  the  air,  are  enabled  to  transport  thein- 

1  Faun,  Boreal-americ*  i.  16. 


MIGRATIONS.  99 

»felves  with  greater  ease,  and  with  the  interpo- 
sition of  fewer  obstacles,  than  the  quadrupeds, 
the  theatre  of  whose  motions  is  the  earth,  inter- 
sected by  rivers  and  mountain  ridges,  which 
renders  their  periodical  transit  less  easy  to 
accomplish.  The  ntmber  of  birds  that  migrate, 
if  we  take  Dr.  Richardson's  scale,  for  those  of 
North  America,  as  a  rule,  compared  with  those 
that  reside  the  whole  year  in  a  country,  is  about 
five-sixths,  a  very  large  proportion ;  but  as  the 
summer  residents  are  replaced  by  winter  ones, 
the  difference  is  less  striking,  and  the  desertion 
less  apparent  and  annoying.  The  celebrated 
Dr.  Jenner,  in  a  very  ingenious  posthumous 
paper,  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for 
1824,  has  produced  many  arguments  to  prove 
that  the  periodical  migrations  of  birds  are  the 
result,  not  of  the  approach  of  the  cold  or  hot 
seasons,  but  of  the  absence  or  presence  of  a 
stimulus  connected  *  with  the  original  law,  "  In- 
crease and  multiply^  That  when  they  feel  it 
they  seek  their  summery  and  when  it  ceases  its 
sK^tion,  their  winter  quarters.  In  one  case,  the 
animal  winging  its  way  to  a  climate  and  country 
best  suited  to  the  great  purpose  impressed  upon 
it  by  its  Creator,  of  producing  and  rearing  a 
progeny ;  and  in  the  other  returning  to  a  home, 
most  congenial  to  its  nature,  and  best  supplying 
its  wants. 
The  cause  of  emigration,  in  both  cases,  had 


100  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

previously  been  attributed   to  the  changes  of 
the    temperature    gradually   produced    by  the 
change  of  seasons,  and  the  growing  scarcity  of 
food  resulting  from  it.     But  Mr.  Jenner  has  ob- 
served that  these  cannot  be  the  causes  that 
occasion  the  migration  of  those  birds  that  leave 
us  early  in  the  year,  as  the  cuckoo,^  which  dis- 
appears in  the  beginning  of  July ;  and  the  swift, 
which  takes  its  departure  early  in  the  following 
month.     At  these  times  they  can  feel  no  cold 
blast  to  benumb  them,  and  the  food  that  formd 
their  usual  support  is  in  the  greatest  abundance. 
There  seems  to  be  some  analogy  between  the- 
birds  that  migrate  annually  to  warmer  climates 
to  spend  their  winter,  and  those  animals,  which 
remaining  in  a  country,  seek  a  subterranean,  or 
other  close  retreat,  to  shelter  them  from  the 
rigours  of  that  season,  and  in  which  they  con- 
tinue in  a  torpid,  state,  till  spring  revives  them 
and  they  issue  from  their  hiding-places  to  fulfil 
the  first  law  of  their  Creator.     Several  instances 
also   are    upon    record,    even    with    regard   to 
birds    that    usually  migrate,    of   their    having 
been  found  torpid  in  the  clefts  and  cavities  of 
trpes ;  and  Spallanzani  relates  experiments  which 
prove  that  swallows  can  bear  a  certain  degree  of 
cold  when  torpid.     I  do  not  recollect  any  obser- 
vations which  serve  to  prove  that  fiybernating 

1  Cueuius  canorus,  ^  Cypselus  opus. 


MIGRATIONS.  101 

animals  are  regulated  by  the  temperature  as  to 
the  season  at  which  they  prepare  to  retire  for 
tl^e  winter,  except  as  to  insects,  which,  with  few 
exceptions,  are  of  that  description.  My  learned 
coadjutor,  Mr.  Spence,  in  our  Introduction  to 
Eutomology^  has  some  remarks  on  this  subject, 
which  seem,  at  first  sight,  to  prove  that  the  disap- 
pearance of  insects,  at  least  those  of  the  Coleoptera 
order  or  beetles,  is  not  preceded  by  any  remark- 
able  lowering  of  the  temperature ;  on  the  con- 
trary,  he  observed  a  great  number  of  various 

•  •  •  • 

genera  congregating  with  this  view  when  the 
thermometer  was  fifty-eight  degrees  in  the  shade.^ 
This  was  about  the  middle  of  October.    But  there 

■  •  • 

is  one  circumstance  to  which  he  has  not  adverted, 
which  may  tend  to  reconcile  this  fact  with  the 
received  opinion.  The  nights,  at  this  time  of  the 
year  are  often  cold  when  the  days  are  hot,  the 
latter  also  are  much  shortened  and  the  former 
lengthened,  so  that  the  sum-total  of  heat  received 
from  the  sun  is  very  much  diminished,  which 
may  be  the  exciting  cause  of  their  hybernating 
at  this  time,  when  the  diurnal  temperature  is  so 
considerable. 

With  regard  to  the  swift^  these  birds  seem  to 
avoid  heat,  they  lie  by  in  the  middle  of  the  day, 
and  only  appear  in  the  morning  and  evening. 
Their  early  migration  from  this  country  may 

*  Inirod.  to  Ent,  ii.  433. 


102  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

probably  be  caused  by  the  h^t ;  and  Bufibn  ^ays 
that  instead  of  warmer,  they  seek  colder  climate^. 
The  house-swallow/  which  remains  with  us  till 
October^  is  stated  to  winter  in  Africa,  so  that  its 
obje<:;t  is  evidently  a  warmer  climate.  It  is  re- 
markable that  the  birds  of  this  tribe,  when  ^ey 
visit  us  in  the  spring,  return  to  their  old  haunts. 
Dr.  Jenner  ascertained  this  by  cutting  off  two 
claws  from  the  foot  of  a  certain  number,  several 
of  which  were  found  in  the  following  year,  and 
one  was  met  with  after  the  expiration  of  seven. 
The  instinct  that  directs  these  little  beingf  so 
unerringly  across  continents  and  oceans,  ai:id 
leads  them  to  their  native  clime  is  wonderful, 
and  inexplicable  under  any  other  principle  than 
that  of  Divine  superintendent^.  But  upon  this 
I  shall  have  occasion  to  enlarge  hereafter. 

From  what  is  here  stated,  it  seems  most  pro- 
bable, that  it  is  not  only  the  increasing  heat  of 
the  southern  regions  which  induces  the  swallow  \ 
to  seek  a  less  ardent  clime  to  transact  her  loves 
and  rear  her  young ;  but  also  a  stimulus,  cfiused 
by  the  heat,  acting  upon  her  organization,  which 
aids  to  accomplish  that  important  purpose,  and 
is  the  leading  star  by  which  her  Creator  impels 
her  to  the  land  of  her  own  nativity,  and  which 
is  destined  to  be  that  of  her  offspring.  Only 
the  swift  leaves  a  colder  climate  for  one  more 
genial  and  better  suited  to  the  same  purpose, 

*  Hirundo  rustica. 


MIGRATIONS.  1(K) 

and  both  return  from  whence  they  came,  when 
the  errand  of  their  voyage  is  fully  accomplished. 
One  aent  away  by  too  great  heat,  and  the  other 
by  a  gradual  decreement  of  the  amount  of  heat, 
and  also  of  their  customary  food. 

Vieillot  say?,  that  all  the  swallows  do  not  quit 
the  warm  countries  to  which  they  betake  them- 
selves in  winter — that  one  part  migrates,  while 
anofther  remains  stationary,  during  the  whole 
year,  in  Eg3^t,  Ethiopia,  and  other  tropical 
tonntries  and  islands. 

But,  besides  the  insectivorous  emigratora,  many 
of  the  higher  and  more  powerfiil  tribes  are  ac- 
customed to  change  one  country  for  another. 
When  the  carcasses  of  animals  putrify,  and  birds 
multiply  under  the  influence  of  the  northern 
sun,  vultures,  eagles,  falcons,  hawks,  &c.  leave 
the  south  and  go  to  partake  of  the  feasts  pro- 
vided for  them  in  higher  latitudes. 

But,  besides  the  birds  that  visit  us  during  the 
more  genial  part  of  the  year,  and  add  so  greatly 
to  the  beauty  and  music  of  our  groves  in  spring 
and  summer,  there  are  others,  and  those  a 
humerous  tribe,  that  wing  hither  their  way  when 
the  reign  of  winter  has  commenced.  The  most 
numerous  of  these  are  the  birds  which  the 
Author  of  nature  has  fitted  to  disport  themselves 
and  seek  their  food  in  the  water,  or  which  fre- 
quent humid  and  watery  places.  When  the 
Arctic  seas,  and  lakes,  and  rivers,  present  an 


104  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

unbroken  field  of  impenetrable  ice,  the  varioos 
web-footed  birds,  the  swans^  and  geese,*  and 
ducks*  and  divers,*  and  coots,*  and  an  infinity 
of  others,  forming  their  angular  and  sometimea 
triangular  phalanxes,  each  in  turn  taking  the 
lead  and  first  cutting  the  air,^  fly  off,  often  at  a 
great  height,  to  seek  in  more  southern  climates, 
not  a  region  devoid  of  the  usual  concomitants  of 
winter,  frost  and  snow,  but  where  their  rigoara 
are  mitigated,  so  as  to  afford  to  these  creatures 
the  means  of  life.  Now,  also  the  waders,  usually 
distinguished  by  their  long  legs  and  long  beaks, 
as  the  woodcock,'^  the  curlew,  and  the  snipes,® 
leave  their  native  marshes  and  haunts  to  seek 
others  whose  unfrozen  or  partially  frozen  mo- 
rasses afford  them  a  supply  of  the  worms  and 
vermicles  or  similar  animals  that  form  their 
oisual  nutriment.  Many  a  time,  when  a  boy» 
have  I  pursued  the  field-fare,^  which  is  one  of 
our  winter  guests,  from  tree  to'  tree,  without  its 
affording  me  an  opportunity  of  taking  aim  at  it, 
as  if  it  was  aware  of  my  purpose,  and  could  sinell 
the  contents  of  my  musket ;  no  sooner  did  I  get 
within  a  couple  of  hundred  yards,  than,  with  all 
its  company,  it  flew  a  little  further,  and  thus 
kept  tantalizing  me  for  hours,  without  iny  eyea 

1  Cycnus.  *  Anser.  ^  Anas*. 

*  Mergus  and  Colymbus,  *  Fulica. 

«  N.  Diet.  D'Hist.  Nat.  xx.  544. 

''^  Rusticola  vulgaris  Vieill.     Numenius  arquatus, — Lath. 

^  Scalopax  Galiinago  and  Oallinula.        9  Turdus  pilaris^ 


MIGRATIONS.  105 

being  able  to  secure  one.  These  birds,  if  the 
weather  becomes  very  severe  here,  are  said  to  fly 
ftrrther  south  in  search  of  food,  and  to  return 
again. 

Thus,  we  see  the  change  of  seasons  brings 
wUh  it  a  change  in  the  winged  inhabitants  of 
every  country;  and  the  winter  immigration  of 
a  vast  variety  of  birds,  fit  for  food  and  oth» 
useful  purposes,  makes  up  in  some  degree  for 
the  summer  or  autumnal  emigration  of  those, 
wMdi  being  constantly  before  our  eyes  moving 
in  every  direction,  and  rendering  vocal  every 
grove  or  triee  and  even  the  very  heavens,  enter- 
tain our  senses  of  seeing  and  hearing  in  a  most 
delightful  manner.  Thus,  also,  all  countries 
partake  in  some  degree,  by  this  shifting  scene 
df  animal  life,  of  the  same  blessings  and  plea* 
sures  derived  from  the  same  instruments. 

Though  the  production  and  rearing  of  their 
young  forms  a  principal  feature  in  most  of  the 
migrations  before  noticed,  yet  it  is  most  promi- 
nent and  conspicuous  in  the  animals,  whose  an- 
nual motions  I  shall  next  advert  to.  And  here 
mankind  is  more  conspicuously  indebted  to  the 
fatherly  care  and  bounty  of  a  beneficent  Provi- 
dence for  a  supply  of  their  wants,  than  in  any  of 
the  cases  above  detailed ;  which  most  of  them 
minister  to  our  pleasures,  rather  than  our  sus- 
tenance.    W/ien  the  time  of  the  singing  birds  is 


106  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

come^  and  the  voice  of  the  nightingale  is  hecmi 
in  our  land;  when  the  swallow  and  the' swift 
delight  us  by  their  rapid  and  varied  motions^  noif 
skimming  the  surface  of  the  waters,  nbwdaitbg, 
either  aloft  or  with  more  humble  flight  over  the 
earth ;  when  the  carolling  latk  ascends  tdw^ds 
heaven,  teaching  us  to  look  up  and  leara  from  h& 
where  to  direct  the  best  affections  of  our  hearts ; 
these  all  excite  in  us  delightful  sensations,  and 
merit  our  gratefuV  acknowledgment,  but  still,  they 
contribute  little  or  nothing  to  the  means  of  life. 
The  locusts  indeed,  who  headed  the  list  of  enn- 
grators,  at  the  same  time  that  they  lay  waste  a 
country,  Supply  its  inhabitants  with  food,  anid 
thus  make  some  rec<»npense  for  their  ravages^; 
and  a  cmisiderable  proportion  of  the  winter 
birds  maitioned  Under  the  liast  head,  as  tl^ 
swimmers^  and  the  waders,^  furnish  our  tables 
with  dainty  meats ;  but  they  come  not  in  such 
numbers  as  to  add  materially  to  the  geheral 
stock  of  food,  or  to  contribute  to  the  main- 
tenance of  the  poor,  as  well  as  to  the  enjoy- 
ments of  the  rich.  The  animals  I  allude  to 
under  the  present  head,  form  the  sole  food  of 
some  nations^  and  contribute  a  vast  and  cheap 
supply,  that  covers  the  table  of  the  poor  man 
with  plenty*  The  migrating  Jishes  are  one  of 
the  greatest  and  most  invaluable  gifts  of  the 
Creator  to  his  creature  man,  by  which  thousands 

*  Natatores,  ^  Grallatores. 


MIGRATIONS.  107 

aaijl  thousands  support  themselves,  and  their 
faoailies;  and  which,  at  certain  periods,  form 
the  food  of  millions.  Of  the  proceedings  of  the 
principal  of  these  fishes,  I  shall  now  give  a 
brief  account. 

I  begin  with  one  of  the  cartilaginous  fishes — 
the  Sturgeon.  There  are  two  noted  species  of 
this  fish,  which  is  related  to  the  shark,  the  one 
is  called  the  sturgeon^  by  way  of  eminence,  and 
the  other  the  huso.^  The  latter  is  found  only  in 
the  Caspian  and  Black  seas,  and  the  Don,  the 
Volga»  and  other  rivers  that  flow  into  them.  It 
is  stated  to  be  much  laxger  than  the  sturgeon : 
Fallas  describes  one  that  weighed  2800  pounds, 
which  it  is  conjectured  must  have  been  nearly 
forty  feet  long.  Its  ordinary  length  is  stated  to 
}f^  twenty-five  feet,  which  is  the  maximum  of  the 
sfairgeon.  The  numbers  of  this  species  far  ex- 
ceed those  of  the  latter,  the  caviar  is  usually 
made  of  its  spawn,  which  equals  nearly  a  third 
of  thie  weight  of  the  whole  fish,  from  whence  we 
may  conjecture  the  infinite  number  of  eggs  that 
it  contains^  Professor  Pallas  gives  a  very  inter- 
esting history  of  the  manner  in  which  thesie 
enormous  fish  are  taken  in  the  Volga,  ^nd  the 
Saiek,  which  discharge  their  waters  into  the 
Caspian.  And  it  Sjsems  really  wonderful  that 
so  wild  and  illiterate  a  people  as  the  Tartars, 

^  Accipenser  Sturio,  ^  A.  Huso, 


108  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

•  •  •  •  * 

who  have  no  acquaintance  with  the  arts  and 
sciences,  should  on  this  occasion,  shew  as  much 
genius  and  invention  as  the  most  enlightened 
nations.  The  huso  enters  the  rivers  to  spawn 
earlier  than  the  sturgeon,  generally  about  mid- 
winter, when  they  are  still  covered  with  ice.  At 
this  time  the  natives'  construct  dikes  across  the 
rivers  in  certain  parts,  formed  with  piles,  leaving 
no  interval  that  the  huso  can  pass  through ;  in 
the  centre  of  the  dike  is  an  angle  opening  to  the 
current,  which  consequently  is  an  entering  angle 
to  the  fish  ascending  the  stream  ;  at  the  summit 
^of  this  angle  is  an  opening,  which  leads  into  a 
kind  of  chamber  formed  with  cord,  or  osier  hur- 
dlies,  according  to  the  season  of  the  year.  Above 
the  opening  is  a  kind  of  scaffold,  and  a  little 
cabin,  where  the  fishermen  can  retire  and  warm 
themselves  or  repose,  when  they  are  not  wanted 
abroad.  No  sooner  is  the  huso  entered  into  the 
chamber,  which  is  known  by  the  motion  of  the 
water,  than  the  fishermen  on  the  scaffold  let  fall 
a  door,  which  prevents  its  return  to  seaward,  they 
then  by  means  of  ropes  and  puUies  lift  the  mov- 
able bottom  of  the  chamber,  and  easily  secure 
the  fish. 

Gmelin  has  related,  in  a  very  lively  way,  the 
solemn  fishing  which  takes  place  at  the  be- 
ginning of  winter,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Astracan,  when  these  fish  have  retired  into 
vast  caves  under  the  seashore,  which  form  their 


MIGRATIONS.  109 

winter  quarters.  A  great  number  of  fishermen 
assemble,  over  whom  are  placed  a  director 
and  inspectors,  who  possess  considerable  au- 
thority and  influence ;  every  kind  of  fishing  is 
prohibited,  in  the  places  known  to  be  the  haunt 
of  the  husos ;  a  numerous  flotilla  of  boats  are  in 
readiness;  every  thing  is  prepared  as  it  were 
for  an  important  military  operation ;  all  approach 
in  concert  and  with  regular  manoeuvres  the 
asylum  in  which  the  fish  are  concealed,  the 
slight^t  noise  is  severely  interdicted,  so  that 
the  most  profound  silence  every  where  prevails. 
In  an  instant,  at  a  given  signal,  a  universal 
shout  rends  the  heavens,  which  echo  multiplies 
on  every  side.  The  astonished  husos,  in  the 
greatest  alarm,  rush  from  their  hiding  places, 
and  are  taken  in  nets  of  every  kind,  prepared 
to  intercept  them. 

The  huso  fishery  is  of  great  importance,  prin- 
cipally on  account  of  the  caviar  prepared  from 
the  roe  of  these  fishes,  and  the  isinglass  that  is 
made  from  their  air-vessel.  The  former  is  much 
in  demand  amongst  many  nations,  as  the  Rus- 
sians, Turks,  &c.;  the  Greeks  particularly  make 
it  almost  their  sole  food  during  their  long  fasts, 
and  the  latter  is  almost  universally  an  article  of 
commerce.  The  common  sturgeon  furnishes  the 
same  articles,  as  do  other  fishes  also. 

The  next  kind  of  fishes  that  migrate  for  the 
purpose  of  spawning,  which  I  shall  notice,  is 


110  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

one,  which  though  it  falls  far  behind  the  stur- 
geons in  size,  exceeds  them  infinitely  in  numbers 
and  dispersion,  and  in  the  vast  supply  of  food 
with  which  it  furnishes  the  human  race ;  it  will 
readily  be  seen  that  I  am  speaking  of  the  Cod- 
fish}    This  valuable  animal  belongs  to  the  class 
of  fishes  with  a  bony  skeleton,  and  the  tribe  of 
Jugulars^  or  those  whose  ventral  fins  are  nearer 
the  mouth  than  the  pectoral.    It  frequents  shal- 
lows and  sandbanks,  between  the  fortieth  and 
sixtieth  degrees  of  North  Latitude,  both  in  the 
Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans,  where  it  is  taken 
in  infinite  numbers.    The  fishery  for  it  employs 
both  European  and  American  seamen  and  ves- 
sels  in    abundance.     The  most  celebrated  id 
that  on  the  great  bank  of  Newfoundland,  where 
thousands  erf  men   are  employed  in  catching, 
salting,  and  barrelling  these  fish,  and  whence 
they  are  dispersed  principally  into  the  Catholic 
countries,  where  they  form  a  considerable  portion 
of  the  food  of  the  people,  especially  during  lent 
and  other  fasts. 

The  cod-fish  makes  for  the  coast  at  spawning 
time,  going  northward,  this  takes  place  towards 
the  end  of  winter,  or  the  beginning  of  spring. 
Leeuwenhoek  counted  more  than  nine  millions 
of  eggs  in  a  cod-fish  of  the  middle  size ;  allowing 
for  a  large  consumption  by  other  fishes  which 
devour  them,  still  enough  are  left,  that  when 

1   Gadus  Morhua, 


MIGRATIONS.  Ill 

hatched  produce  a  superabundant  supply.  They 
are  deposited  in  the  inequalities  of  the  bottom 
amongst  the  stones. 

The  Haddock^  is  another  species  belonging  to 
this  genus,  which  frequents  our  coast  in  great 
uumbers  in  mid-winter ;  they  are  stated  some* 
times  to  form  a  bank  twenty-four  miles  long  by 
three  broad.  They  pursue  and  devour  the  her- 
riags,  and  are  themselves  in  their  turn  devoured 
by  Sharks,  which  follow  their  shoals. 

The  next  tribe  of  migratory  fishes  is  one 
which  supplies  our  tables  with  a  very  acceptable 
successor,  when  the  cod-fish  is  out  of  season^ 
and  which  at  last  usually  becomes  so  plentiful 
and  cheap  as  to  form  a  part  of  the  poor  man's  bill 
of  jOare,  as  well  as  of  that  of  his  rich  neighbour « 
Every  one  will  see  that  I  here  allude  to  the 
Mqcharel.^  This  is  one  of  the  thoracic  fishes,  or 
these  whose  ventral  fins  are  situated  below  the 
pectoral.  It  is  very  widely  dispersed,  being 
found .  in  the  Arctic,  Antarctic,  and  Mediter?* 
ranean  Seas,  as  well  as  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean* 
It  hybernates  in  the  seas  first  mentioned,  where 
it  is  stated  to  select  certain  depths  of  the  sea 
called  by  the  natives  Barachouas,  which  are  so 
la^-locked,  ^that  the  water  is  as  calm  at  all 
times,  as  in  the  most  sheltered  pools ;  the  depth 
of  tkese  asylums  diminishes  in  proportion  to  the 

1   Gadus  CEgelfinus,  ^  Scomber  Scombrus. 


113  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

proximity  of  the  shore,  and  the  bottom  is .  geae^ 
rally  muddy  and  covered  with  marine  plants^ 
It  is  in  these  muddy  bottoms  that  the  mackoirel, 
directed  by  their  instinct,  pass  the  winter.  They 
plunge  their  head  and  the  anterior  part  of  theif 
body  in  the  mud,  keeping  their  tails  elevated 
vertically  above  it.  In  the  spring  they  emerge, 
in  infinite  shoals  from  their  hiding  places,  and 
proceed  southward  for  the  purposes  of  depositii^ 
their  eggs  in  more  genial  seas ;  more  than  half 
a  million  of  these  have  been  discovered  in  a 
single  female.^  These  fish  die  as  soon  as  they 
are  taken  out  of  the  water,  and  then  they  emit 
a  phosphoric  light.  The  Scomber  is  one  of  the 
fishes,  which,  according  to  Pliny,  was  used  for 
making  the  celebrated  Roman  pickle  named 
Gamin ^  and  he  calls  it  a  fish  good  for  nothing 
dse :  if  he  means  our  mackarel,  it  is  singular  that 
its  value,  as  an  article  of  food,  should  not  have 
been  discovered.  The  Garus  or  Ga;*Mm.  derived 
Its  name  from  a  crustaceous  animal  so^  called, 
from  which  it  was  sometimes  made.  Apicius  is 
said  by  Pliny  to  have  employed  the  liver  of  tte 
mullet  in  concocting  it. 

What  the  mackarel  is  to  the  north  of  Europe, 
the  Thimny  is  to  the  south.  It  deposits  its  e^s 
in  May  and  June,  when  it  enters  the  Mediteira- 
nean,  seeking  the  shores  in  shoals  arranged  in 

1  Scomber  Thynnus* 


MIGRATIONS.  11*1 

the  form  of  a  parallelogram^  or  ai  some  say,  a 
triangle,  and  making  a  great  noise  and  stir. 
They  appear  to  have  been  much  in  request  with 
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  are  now  an  impor- 
tant article  of  food  with  the  inhabitants  of  the 
coasts  and  islands  of  the  Mediterranean. 

But  no  fish  is  so  important  a  gift  of  Heaven^ 
as  affording  employment  to  a  large  number  of 
individuals  both  in  the  catching  and  preparing 
ft,  and  as  adding  very  largely  to  the  general 
stock  of  food,  especially  in  Catholic  countries, 
fis  that  of  whose  history  I  shall  next  give  a  brief 
sketch. 

Three  thousand  decked  vessels,  of  difierent 
sites,  besides  smaller  boats,  are  stated  to  be 
annually  employed  in  the  herring-fishery,  with 
a  proportionable  number  of  seamen,  besides  a 
vast  number  of  hands  that,  at  certain  seasons, 
are  occupied  in  curing  them. 

The  herring  to  which  I  now  allude  belcmgs  to 
the  tribe  called  abdominal  fishes,  or  those  whose 
?entral  fins  are  behind  Uie  pectoral,  and  may 
be  said  to  inhabit  the  arctic  seas  of  Europe^ 
Asia,  and  America,  from  whence  they  annually 
migrate,  at  different  times,  in  search  of  food 
and  to  deposit  their  spawn.  Their  shoals  con- 
sist of  millions  of  myriads,  and  are  many 
leagues  in  width,  many  fathoms  in  thickness, 
and  so  dense  that  the  fishes  touch  each  other ; 
they  are  preceded,  at  the  interval  of  some  days, 

VOL.  I.  I 


114  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

by  insulated  males.  The  largest  and  strongc^ 
are  said  to  lead  the  shoals,  which  seem  to  moi!i4 
in  a  certain  order,  and  to  divide  into  bajids 
as.  they  proceed,  visiting  the  shores  of  vari^w 
idands  and  countries,  and  enriching  their  in: 
habitants*  Their  presence  and  progress  ^r^ 
usually  indicated  by  various  sea-birds,  shark9, 
and  other  enemies*  One  of  the  cartilaginous 
fishes,  the  sea*ape,^  is  said  to  accompany  them 
constantly,  and  is  thence  called  the  king  of  the 
herrings.  They  throw  off  also  a  kind  of  oily 
or  slimy  substance,  which  extends  over  their 
columns,  and  is  easily  seen  in  calm  weather. 
This  substance,  in  gloomy  still  nights,  exhibits  a 
phosphoric  light,  as  if  a  cloth,  a  little  luminoufi 
was  spread  over  the  sea. 

Some  conjecture  maybe  formed  of  the  infinity 
numbers  of  these  invaluable  fishes  that  are  taken 
by  European  nations  from  what  Lacepede  relates 
-rthat  in  Norway  twenty  millions  have  been 
taken  at  a  single  fishing,  that  there  are  few  yeiu*s 
that  they  do  not  capture  four  hundred  millions, 
and  that  at  Gottenburgh  and  its  vicinity  seven 
hundred  millions  are  annually  taken ;  **  but  what 
are  these  millions,"  he  remarks,  '^to  the  incrq: 
dible  numbers  that  go  to  the  share  of  the  Engr 
lish,  Dutch,  and  other  European  nations." 

Migrations  of  these  fishes  are  stated  to  taka 

1  Chimara  monstrosa. 


MIGRATIONS.  115 

^aee  at  three  different  times.    The  first  when 
file  ice  begins  to  melt,  which  continues  to  the 
end  of  June ;  then  succeeds  that  of  the  summer, 
S)1Iowed  by  the  autumnal  one,  which  lasts  till 
the  middle  of  September.     They  seek  places 
for  spawning,  where  stones  and  marine  plants 
abound,   against    which    they   rub    themselves 
alternately  on  each  side,  all  the  while  moving 
their  fins  with  great   rapidity.    According  to 
Lacepede,  William  Deukelzoon,  a  fisherman  of 
Bieirvliet,  in  Dutch  Flanders,  was  the  first  person 
who  salted  herrings,  this  was  before  the  end  of 
the  fourteenth  century ;  others  attribute  this  in- 
vention to  William  Benckels  or  Benkelings  of 
Bierulin.     To  shew  his  sense  of  the  importance 
of  this   invention,  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  is 
stated  to  have  visited  his  tomb,  and  to  have 
eaten  a  herring  upon  his  grave.   The  smoking  of 
this  valuable  fish,  we  are  told,  was  first  practised 
by  the  inhabitants  of.  Dieppe  in  Normandy. 

Next  to  the  herring,  the  pilchard*  is  valuable 
to  our  own  country,  especially  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Cornwall  and  Devonshire,  to  whom  this  fish 
is  as  important  as  the  herring  to  other  parts  of 
the  kingdom ;  they  frequent  the  southern  coasts 
firom  the  middle  of  summer  to  the  end  of  autumn, 
and  many  thousand  barrels  are  annually  cured. 
Lacepede  says  that,  in  one  year,  a  milliard*  of 
these  fishes  has  been  taken. 

*  Clupanodon  Pilcardus,  ^  One  thousand  million. 


116  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

The  sprat'  and  the  anchovy,*  are  two  other 
fishes  of  the  present  tribe,  the  former,  at  certain 
seasons,  furnishing  a  considerable  supply  of  food 
to  the  lower  orders,  and  also  a  fertilizing  kind  of 
manure  to  the  farmer  and  hop-grower,  though, 
it  must  be  confessed,  very  annoying  to  the  tra- 
veller passing  through  a  country  where  it  is  so 
employed,  by  its  disagreeable  stench,  and  to 
those  who  inhabit  it  by  its  putrid  effluvia,  which 
I  have  known  to  produce  fevers ;  the  other  minis- 
tering to  the  enjoyment  and  luxury  of  the  wealthy 
by  its  piquancy  when  pickled,  or  reduced  to  an 
essence ;  but  on  these  I  shall  not  further  enlarge. 

The  next  tribe  of  migratory  fishes  is  one  whose 
several  species  are  intermediate  between  marine 
and  fresh- water  fishes,  roving  indifferently  in  the 
sea,  and  rivers,  and  lakes,  and  thus  is  fitted  by 
Providence  to  make  up  to  the  inhabitants  of 
inland  countries  their  distance  from  the  other 
migrators,  by  a  supply  brought,  as  it  were,  to 
their  very  doors.  The  fishes  in  question  belong 
also  to  the  abdominal  class,  and  form  the  salmon 
genus,  including  the  salmon,^  the  salmon-trouC 
the  trout,*  the  grayling,*  the  charr,^  the  smelt,' 
the  hucho,^  and  many  other  species.  I  shaD, 
however,  confine  my  observations  principally  to 

'  Clupea  Sprattus,  *  C  encrasicolus. 

3  Salmo  Salar,  *  S.  Trutta. 

«  .Sf.  Fario,  «  S,  Thymallus. 

7  S,  Alpinus,  *  S*  JEperlanus. 
9  S,  Sucho. 


MIGRATIONS.  117 

the  king,  as  it  may  be  called,  of  the  river  mi- 
grators,— ^the  Salman.  In  our  own  country  this 
Dohle  fish  is  too  high-priced  to  form  a  general 
article  of  food,  and  may  be  reckoned  amongst 
the  luxuries  of  the  rich  man's  table;  but  in 
others,  especially  amongst  some  of  the  North- 
western American  tribes,  they  are  gifts  of  Pro- 
vidence, which  form  their  principal  food  at  all 
seasons.  One,  which  Sir  George  Mackenzie 
fell  in  with,  in  his  journey  from  Canada  to  the 
Pacific,  were  perfect  Ichthyophagites,  and  would 
touch  no  other  animal  food.  These  people  con- 
struct, with  great  labour  and  ingenuity,  across 
their  streams,  salmon  weirs,  which  are  formed 
with  timber  and  gravel,  and  elevated  nearly  four 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  water ;  beneath  ma- 
chines are  placed,  into  which  the  salmon  fall 
when  they  attempt  to  leap  over  the  weir.  On 
either  side  is  a  large  frame  of  timber-work,  six 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  upper  water,  in  which 
passages  are  left  for  the  salmon,  leading  into  the 
machines.  When  they  catch  their  salmon  they 
string  them  and  suspend  them,  at  first,  in  the 
river.  The  women  are  employed  in  preparing 
and  curing  these  fish ;  for  this  purpose  they  ap- 
pear to  roast  them  first,  and  then  suspend  them 
on  the  poles  that  run  along  the  b^ams  of  their 
houses,*in  which  there  are  usually  from  three  to 
five  hearths,  the  heat  and  smoke  from  which 
contribute^  no  doubt,  to  their  proper  curing. 


118  G  EOGRAPUICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

Tho  salmon,  indeed,  frequents  e^eiywa^tte 
arctic  as  well  as  the  equatorial ;  it  is  found  eireit 
in  great  lakes  and  inland  seas,  as  the. Caspian; 
into  which  it  is  even  affirmed  to  make  its  way 
by  a  subterranean  channel  from  the  Persiaa 
Gulf — it  goes  as  far  south  as  New  Holland,  mid 
the  Australian  seas;  but,  it  is  said  never  to 
have  been  found  in  the  Mediterranean,  aod 
appears  to  have  been  unknown  to  Aristodei 
Pliny  mentions  it  as  a  river  fish,  preferred  to  all 
marine  ones  by  the  inhabitants  of  Gaul.  It 
traverses  the  whole  length  of  the  largest  rivcfK 
It  reaches  Bohemia  by  the  Elbe,  Switzedand 
by  the  Rhine,  and  the  Cordilleras  of  Americsa 
by  the  mighty  Maragnon,  or  River  of  AmazoiM^ 
whose  course  is  more  than  three  thousand  milesw 
In  temperate  climates  the  salmon  quits  the  sea 
early  in  the  spring,  when  the  waves  are  drives 
by  a  strong  wind  against  the  river  curr^otts.  It 
enters  the  rivers  of  France  in  the  beginning  of 
the  autumn,  in  September ;  and  in  Kamtchaitka 
and  North  America  still  later.  In  some  countries 
this  is  called  the  salmon -wind.  They  rush  into 
rivers  that  are  freest  from  ice,  or  where  they  are 
carried  by  the  highest  tide,  favored  by  the  wind; 
they  prefer  those  streams  that  are  most  shaded. 
They  leave  the  sea  in  numerous  bands,  foriMd 
with  great  regularity.  The  largest  individual, 
which  is  usually  a  female,  takes  the  lead,  and  is 
followed  by  others  of  the  same  sex,  two  and  two, 


MIQRAtlOMS.  lid 

Mohiptir  being  bM  the  distanoe  of^  from  three 
to^  mX'  feet  from  the  precedmg  one ;  next  come 
Uieold,  and  after  them  the  young  malea  in  the 
wae  order. 

r. The  noise  they  make  in  their  transit,  heard 
fern  a  distance,  sounds  like  a  far  off  storm.  In 
die  heat  of  the  sun  and  in  tempests,  they  keep 
tosr  the  bottom ;  at  other  times  they  swim  a 
little  bdow  the  surface.  In  fair  weather  they 
taiove  slowly,  sporting  as  they  go  at  the  surface, 
ahd  wandering  again  and  again  from  their  direct 
route ;  but  when  alarmed  they  dart  forward  with 
kieh  rapidity  that  the  eye  can  scarcely  follow 
Ibem.  They  employ  only  three  months  in 
Mgmding  to  the  sources  of  the  Maragnon,  the 
rarr^it  of  which  is  remarkably  rapid,  which  is 
at  the  rate  of  nearly  forty  miles  a  day ;  in  a 
wtooth  ^ream  or  lake,  their  progress  would 
ihcrease  in  a  fourfold  ratio.  Their  tail  is  a  very 
powerful  organ,  and  its  muscles  have  wonderful 
en^gy ;  by  placing  it  in  their  mouth  they  make 
^  it  a  Tery  elastic  spring,  for  letting  it  go  with 
violence  they  raise  themselves  in  the  air  to  the 
hdght  of,  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet,  and  so 
(bleai*  the  cataract  that  impedes  their  course ;  if 
they  fail  in  their  first  attempt,  they  continue 
their  efforts  till  they  have  accomplished  it.  The 
fi^nale  is  stated  to  hollow  out  a  long  and  deep 
excavation  in  the  gravelly  bed  of  the  river  to 


11H>  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

feceive  her  spawn,  and  when  dcqpoeifed  tx>  covet 
it  up,  but  thifi^  admits  of  some  doubt« 

Amongst  the  migrations  of  fishes,  I  must,  not 
n^lect  those  that  take  place  in  consequence  ^ 
the  water  in  the  ponds  or  pools  that  they  inhabit 
being  dried  up :  some  of  these  jure  very  extra** 
ordinary,  and  prove  that  when  the  Creator  ga^re 
being  to  these  annuals,  he  foresaw  the  circnm* 
stances ,  in  which  they  would  be  placed,  and 
mercifully  provided  them  with  means  of  es^pe 
from  dangers  to  which  they  were  necessarOy 
exposed. 

In  very  dry.  summers,  the  fishes  that  inhabit 
the  above  situations,  are  reduced  crften  to  the 
last  extremities,  and  endeavour  to  relieve  them** 
selves  by  plunging,  first  their  hi^ds,  and  after- 
wards their  whole  bodies,  in  the  tnud  to  a  ooa- 
siderable  depth ;  and  so,  though  many  in  such 
seasons  perish,  some  are  preserved  till  a  rainy 
one.  again  supplies  them  with  the  element  so 
indispensable  to  their  life.  Carp,  it  is  known, 
may  be  kept  and  fed  a  very  long  time  in  nets  in 
a  damp  cellar,  a:  faculty  which  fits  them  lor  re* 
taining  their  vitality  when  they  bury  themselves 
at  such  a  depth  as  to  shelter  them  ftom  the 
heat« 

But  others,  when  reduced  to  this  extremity, 
desert  their  native  pool,  and  travel  in  search  of 
another  that  is  better  supplied  with  water.  This 
has  long  been  known  of  eels,  which  wind,  by 


MIGJRATIOMS.  121' 

B^tf  tfiroogh  tlie  grass  in  search  of  water,  whea 
so  GiccufiastaiH^d.  Dr.  Hancock,  in  the  Zoolo- 
gnml  Joornal,  gives  an  account  of  a  species  of 
Ml,  oalted,  by  the  Indians,  the  Flat-head  Hassar, 
siid  belonging  to  a  genus  ^  of  the  family  of  the 
j^midans,  which  is  instructed  by  its  Creator, 
wken  tiie  pools,  in  which  they  commonly  reside, 
in  very  dry  seasons,  lose  their  water,  to  take  the 
msoiution  of  marching  by  land  in  search  of 
others  in  which  the  water  is  not  evaporated. 
These  fish  grow  to  about  the  length  of  a  foot, 
and  travel  in  large  droves  with  this  view ;  they 
move  by  night,  and  their  motion  is  said  to  be 
lake  that  of  the  two-footed  lizard*^  A  strong 
swrated  arm  constitutes  the  first  ray  of  its  pec- 
toral fin.^  Using  this  as  a  kind  of  foot,  it  should 
seem,  tl^y  push  themselves  forwards,  by  means 
of  their  elastic  tail,  moving  neariy  as  fast  as  a 
man  will  leisurely  walk.  The  strong  plates 
which  envelope  their  body,  probably,  facilitate 
their  progreias,  in  the  same. manner  as  those 
Huder  the  body  of  serpents,  which  in  some  de- 
gi^ee  perform  the  office  of  feet.  It  is  affirmed 
by  the  Indians,  that  they  are  furnished  with  an 
iBtemal    supply   of  water   sufficient   for  their 

^  Dortts,  *  Bipes. 

'  Plate  XII.  Fig.  1.  is  a  species  of  Callicthys^  a  fish  of  the 
same  habits  with  the  Doras.  Fig.  2.  is  the  pectoral  ray  of  ano- 
ther Siluridan,  which  was  dug  up  in  a  village  near  Barham,  but 
which  is  not  a  fossil  bone. 


122  G£OORAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

journey,  which  seems  confirmed  by  the  Jdtf-^ 
cumstance  that  their  bodies  when  takjea^odft 
of  the  water,  even  if  wiped  dry  with  a  dodi; 
become  instantly  moist  again.  Mr.  Campbell; 
a  friend  of  Dr.  Hancock's,  resident  in  £bb6:^ 
quibo,  once  fell  in  with  a  drove  of  these  animnlsi 
which  were  so  numerous,  that  the  Indians  filM 
several  baskets  with  them. 

Another  migrating  fish  was  found  by  tlunn 
sands  in  the  ponds  and  all  the  fresh  wateis  c(^ 
Carolina,  by  Bosc ;  and  as  these  pools  are  suIh 
ject  to  be  dry  in  summer,  the  Creator  has  fur- 
nished this  fish,  as  well  as  one  of  the  flyis^ 
ones,^  by  means  of  a  membrane  which  clo0^ 
its  mouth,  with  the  faculty  of  living  out  of  water,^ 
and  of  travelling  by  leaps,  to  discover  other  pools: 
Bosc  often  amused  himself  with  their  motions 
when  he  had  placed  them  on  the  ground,  and  be 
found  that  they  always  direct  themselves  towards 
the  nearest  water,  which  they  could  not  pos^bly 
see,   and  which  they  must  have  discovered  by 
some  internal  index ;   during  their  migratioBS 
they  furnish  food  to  numerous  birds  and  reptilet^ 
They  belong  to  a  genus  of  abdominal  fishes,^ 
and  are  called  swampines.    It  is  evident  ffoitt 
this  statement  that  these  fishes  are  both  fitted 
by  their  Creator,  not  only  to  exist,  but  also  move 
along  out  of  the  water,  and  are  directed  by  the  in- 
stinct implanted  by  him,  to  seek  the  nearest  pool 

'  Exoccetus,  '  Hydrargyra, 


mGRATIOH  s.  1 23 

thjbt  etrntsins  tbat  .element;  thus  furnishing  a 
stfPDg  {Mcoof  of  what  are  called  compensating  con- 
titTAnces ;  neither  of  these  fishes  have  legs,  yet 
tha  one  can  walk  and  the  other  leap  without 
them,  by  otha  means  with  which  the  Supreme 
Intelligence  has  endowed  it.  I  may  here  ob- 
terre  tlmt  the  serrated  bone,  or  first  ray  of  the 
pectoral  fin,  by  the  assistance  of  which  the  flat- 
head  appears  to  move,  is  found  in  other  Siluri- 
dara,  which  leads  to  a  conjecture  that  these 
BSBay  sometimes  also  move  upon  land* 

Another  fish,*  found  by  Daldorff,  in  Tranque- 
\m>  not  only  creeps  upon  the  shore,  but  even 
qtimbs  the  Fan  palm'  in  pursuit  of  certain  Crus- 
taceans which  form  its  food.  The  structure  of 
tliis  fish  peculiarly  fits  it  for  the  exercise  of  this 
eraiarkable  instinct.  Its  body  is  lubricated  with 
diime  which  facilitates  its  progress  over  the  bark, 
and  amongst  its  chinks ;  its  gill-covers  are  armed 
with  numerous  spines,  by  which,  used  as  hands, 
it  appears  to  suspend  itself;  turning  its  tail  to 
the  left,  and  standing,  as  it  were,  on  the  little 
^ines  of  its  anal  fin,  it  endeavours  to  push  itself 
upwards  by  the  expansion  of  its  body,  closing 
9t  the  same  time  its  gill-covers,  that  they  may 
dot  prevent  its  progress ;  then  expanding  them 
again  it  reaches  a  higher  point;  thus,  and  by 
bending  the  spiny  rays  of  its  dorsal  fins  to  right 
and  left,   and  fixing  them  in  the  bark,  it  con-> 

^  Perca  scandens.  *  Borcussus  flahellifomds. 


124  GEOGRAPHICAL  DUTKIBUTION. 

tinues  its  journey  upwards.  The  dorsal  and 
anal  fins  can  be  folded  up  and  received  into  a 
cavity  of  the  body. 

How  exactly  does  this  structure  fit  it  for  this 
extraordinary  instinct.  These  fins  assist  it  in 
certain  parts  of  its  route,  and,  wh^oi  not  em^ 
ployed,  can  be  packed  up  so  as  not  to  hinder  its 
progress.  The  lobes  of  its  gill-covers  are  so 
divided  and  armed  as  to  be  emplo3red  together, 
or  s^arately,  as  hands,  for  the  suispension  of 
the  animal,  till,  by  fixing  its  dorsal  and  anal 
fins,  it  prepares  itself  to  take  another  step ;  all 
showing  the  Supreme  Intelligence  and  Almighty 
hand  that  planned  and  fabricated  its  structure, 
causing  so  many  organs,  each  in  its  own  way,  to 
assist  in  promoting  a  common  purpose.  The  fan 
palm,  in  which  this  animal  was  tak^i  by  Daldorff, 
grew  near  the  pool  inhabited  by  these  fishes.  He 
makes  no  mention,  however,  of  their  object  in 
these  t^restrial  excursions ;  but  Dr.  V irey  ob- 
serves that  it  is  for  the  sake  of  small  Crustaceans, 
on  which  tliey  feed. 

I  shall  name  only  one  more  animal  that 
migrates  for  the  great  purpose  of  reproduction, 
and  this  is  not  the  least  interesting  of  them ;  and, 
though  it  does  not  furnish  so  large  a  supply  of 
food  to  the  countries  it  passes  through,  as  the 
migratory  fishes,  still  it  is  useful  in  that  respect : 
the  animal  I  allude  to  is  the  land-crab. 

Several,  indeed,  of  the  crabs  forsake  the  waters 


MIGRATIONS.  125 

fyr  a  time,  and  return  to  them  to  cast  theiiL 
spawn ;  but  the  moat  celebrated  of  all  is  that 
known  by  the  above  appellation,  and  alluded  to 
by  Dr.  Paley,  under  the  name  of  the  violet  crab, 
and  which  is  called  by  French  the  tourlourou.^ 
These  crabs  are  natives  of  the  West  Indies  and 
South  America.  In  May  and  June,  when  the 
rainy  season  takes  place,  their  instinct  impels 
them  to  seek  the  sea,  that  they  may  fulfil  the 
great  law  of  their  Creator,  and  cast  their  spawn. 
They  descend  the  mountains,  which  are  their 
usual  abode,  in  such  numbers,  that  the  roads 
and  woods  are  covered  with  them.  They  feel 
an  impulse  so  to  steer  their  course,  that  they 
may  travel  by  the  easiest  descent,  and  arrive 
most  readily  at  the  sea,  the  great  object  at  which 
they  aim.  They  resemble  a  vast  army  march* 
ing  in  battle  array,  without  breaking  their  ranks, 
following  always  a  right  line;  they  scale  the 
houses,  and  surmount  every  other  obstacle  that 
lies  in  their  way.  They  sometimes  even  get 
into  the  houses,  making  a  noise  like  that  of  rats, 
and  when  they  enter  the  gardens  they  commit 
great  devastations,  destroying  all  their  produce 
with  their  claws.  They  are  said  to  halt  twice 
every  day,  and  to  travel  chiefly  in  the  night; 
Arrived  at  the  sea-shore,  they  are  there  reported 
to  bathe  three  or  four  different  times ;   when 

« 

1  Gecarcinus  eamifex. 


126  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

retiring  to  the  neighbouring  plains,  or  woods, 
they  repose  for  some  time,  and  then  the  females 
return  to  the  water,  and  commit  their  eggs  to  thie^ 
waves.  This  business  dispatched,  they  end^^ 
vour  to  regain,  in  the  same  order,  the  country^ 
they  had  left,  and  by  the  same  route,  but  only 
the  most  vigorous  can  reach  the  mountains.  This 
greater  part  are  so  weak  and  lean,  that  they  are 
forced  to  stop  to  recruit  their  strength  in  the  first 
country  they  reach.  When  arrived  again  at  Aeir 
habitations,  they  have  a  new  labour  to  undergo, 
for  now  is  the  time  of  their  moult.  They  hide 
themselves  in  their  subterranean  retreats  for  this 
purpose,  so  that  not  a  single  one  can  be  seen : 
they  even  stop  up  the  mouth  of  their  burrows. 
Some  writers,  however,  affinn  that  they  change 
their  shells  immediately  after  their  oviposition. 

The  respiration  of  these  land-crabs,  for  along 
time,  had  puzzled  comparative  anatomists.— 
They  could  not  explain  how  animals,  breathing 
by  gills,  could  subsist  so  long  out  of  the  water 
without  these  organs  becoming  useless.  M.  M. 
Audouin,  however,  and  Milne  Edwards,  cleared 
up  the  mystery  by  the  discovery  of  a  kind  of 
trough,  formed  by  the  folds  which  line  and  con- 
stitute the  parietes  of  the  branchial  cavity,  and 
destined  to  contain  and  preserve  a  certain  quan- 
tity of  water  proper  to  moisten  the  gills.  One 
species^  has  more  than  one  pocket,  or  vesicle, 

1  Gecardnus  Uca* 


MIGRATIONS.  127 

i|li^  with  that  fluid.  This  traugh  exists  in  the 
bofsemeu  land-crabs,^  but  it  is  smaller,  and  a 
sp3qgy  mass  furnishes  the  requisite  moisture; 
The  gills  of  the  land*crabs,  in  other  respects,  do 
QOt  differ  from  those  of  the  tribe  in  general. 
God,  when  he  formed  these  animals,  would  not 
separate  them  from  their  kind  by  a  different 
mpde  of  respiration,  but  by  this  compensating 
C(»ttriyance  he  fitted  them  for  the  circumstances 
in  which  he  decreed  to  place  them,  and  for  a 
l9Qg  aojoum  out  of  the  water. 

What  is  the  great  object  of  this  law  of  the 
Cr^eator,  that  impels  them  to  seek,  in  many  cases, 
a  inoantain  retreat,  at  a  distance  from  the  ocean, 
nihich  forms  the  liquid  atmosphere  fitted  to  the 
great  body  o{  the  Crustaceans,  has  not  hitherto, 
for  want  of  sufficient  and  accurate  details  of  their 
Iv^tory,  been  made  fully  obvious.  When  insects 
leave  the  waters  to  become  denizens  of  the  earth 
aixdair,  the  object  appears  evidently  an  increase 
of  fcK>d,  not  only  for  terrestrial  animals,  whether 
moving  on  the  one  or  in  the  other,  but  to  mul- 
t^ly  even  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  waters. 
\^hQii  the  day-flies^  burst  in  such  myriads  from 
the  banks  of  rivers  which  they  inhabited  in  their 
fir^t  state,  the  fishes  are  all  in  motion,  and  often 
jump,  from  the  water  to  catch  the  living  flakes 
that  are  every  moment  descending. ,  When  in  the 

*  Ocypode,  ^  *  Ephemera. 


128  GEOGRAPHICAL  M8TEIBUTION. 

water,  or  under  it,  these  animals  and  the  may^ 
flies  are  defended,  or  concealed  from  the  flflbeft« 
and  therefore  are  not  so  easy  to  come  at;  but 
now  is  their  harvest,  and  when  they  drop  their 
eggs,  they  fall  towards  the  stream,  and  it  is 
deemed  a  shower  of  manna. 

The  same  object  brings  the  sererol  kinds  rf 
land-crabs  at  stated  times  to  sea,  to  depwit 
their  eggs  where  their  young  may  •  reach  a  csr^ 
tain  maturity,  if  not  undergo  a  metamorphosis; 
probably  at  this  period  there  is  an  assemblage  of 
aquatic  devourers  of  Crustaceans,  to  share  in  the 
expected  harvest.  And  during  the  route  of  At 
myriads  that  thus  migrate  to  the  sea,  beasts  and 
birds,  and  man  himself,  all  partake  of  the  feast 
thus  provided  for  them. 

If  we  give  this  subject  of  the  migration  of 
animals  due  consideration,  and  reflect  what 
would  be  the  consequence  if  no  animals  ev^ 
changed  their  quarters,  we  shall  find  abundant 
reason  for  thankfulness  to  the  Almighty  Father 
of  the  universe,  for  the  care  he  has  taken  of  bis 
whole  femily,  and  of  his  creature  man  in  par* 
ticular,  consulting  not  only  his  sustentation  and 
the  gratification  of  his  palate  by  multiplyiog 
and  varying  his  food,  but  also  that  of  his  otbef 
senses,  by  the  beauty,  motions,  and  music  of  the 
animals  that  are  his  summer  or  winter  visiters! 
did  the  nightingale  forsake  our  groves,  the 
swallow  our  houses  and  gardens,  the  cod-fish, 


MIGRATIONS.  129 

nmckarel,  salmon,  and  herring  our  seas,  and  all 
die  oilier  animals  that  occasionally  visit  us  their 
deveral  haunts,  how  vast  would  be  the  abstraction 
from  the  pleasure  and  comfort  of  our  lives. 

By  means  of  .these  migrations,  the  profits  and 

enjoyments  derivable  from  the  animal  creation 

aee  also  more  equally  divided,  at  one  season 

fisking  the  south,  and  enlivening  their  winter, 

and  at  another  adding  to  the  vernal  and  summer 

delights   of  the  inhabitant  of   the  less  genial 

legions  of  the  north,  and  making  up  to  him  for 

the  privations  of  winter.     Had  the  Creator  so 

wffled,  all  these  animals  might  have  been  organ- 

ued  so  as  not  to  require  a  warmer  or  a  colder 

climate   for  the  breeding  or  rearing   of   their 

young :  but  his  will  was,  that  some  of  his  best 

gifts  should  thus  oscillate,  as  it  were,  between 

two  points^  that  the  benefit  they  conferred  might 

fee  more  widely  distributed,  and  not  become  the 

mie  property  of  the  inhabitants  of  one  climate  : 

thus  the  swallow  gladdens  the  sight  both  of  the 

Briton  and  the  African ;  and  the  herring  visits 

the  coasts,  and  the  salmon  the  rivers  of  every 

r^on  of  the  globe.     What  can  more  strongly 

mark  design,  and  the  intention  of  an  all-powerfiil^ 

all-wise, .  and  beneficent  Being,  than  that  such 

a  variety  of  animals  should  be   so  organized 

and  circumstanced  as  to  be  directed  annually, 

by  some  pressing  want,  to  seek  distant  climates, 

and,  after  a  certain  period,  to  return  again  to  their 

VOL.  I.  K 


130  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION* 

former  quarters ;  and  that  this  instinct  should  be 
productive  of  so  much  good  to  mankind,  and,  at 
the  same  time,  be  necessary,  under  its  pres^ 
circumstances,  for  the  preservation  or  propaga^ 
tion  of  the  species  of  these  several  animals. 

There  is  another  view  that  may  be  taken  df 
this  subject,  equally  shewing  the  attention  of  tfad 
Almighty  Father  to  the  wants  of  every  descwp^ 
tion  of  his  creatures.  The  migrating  tribes  of 
almost  every  kind  are  attended  by  numerotti 
bands  of  predaceous  animals,  which,  as  wellitf 
man,  partake  in  the  general  harvest ;  the  beari, 
wolves,  foxes,  dogs,  and,  in  tropical  coun tries, 
other  beasts  of  prey,  hang  on  the  flanks  of  th« 
bands  of  emigrators,  and  capture  and  devour  tb^ 
stragglers.  The  vultures,  and  other  carnivorotw 
birds,  follow  and  share  in  the  spoil :  and  the  emi- 
grating fishes  are  attended  by  whole  tribes  <rf 
predaceous  birds  and  fishes,  which  thin  tkeif 
numbers  before  they  are  taken  by  the  nets  of  the 
fisherman. 


I  am  next  to  say  something  on  the  local  distrl^ 
bution  of  animals.  By  their  local  distribution,  I 
mean  their  station  in  any  given  country.  Under 
this  head  they  may  be  divided  into  terrestrial, 
amphibious,  and  aquatic. 

The  local  distribution  of  terrestrial  aninmls  is 


LOCAL.  131 

vdry  dtvear^ified.  Some  inhabit  the  loftiest  moun- 
tains, here  the  eagle  builds  its  aerie,  and  the 
ewd&r^  deposits  its  eggs  on  the  bare  rock ;  and 
heie  the  chamois^  often  laughs  at  the  efforts  of 
the  hunter,  astonishing  him  by  the  ease  with 
nhioh  it  scDui^  over  the  rocks,  or  with  which 
it  ascmids  or  descends  the  mosit  inaccei^sible 
precipices. 

Some  animals,  that  in  high  latitudes  are  found 
in  the  plains,  in  a  warmer  atmosphere  seek  the 
zftountains.  Of  this  descriptiqn  is  the  beautiful 
Apollo  butterfly,^  which,  in  Sweden  is  very  com- 
m<m  \n  the  country  and  gardens  about  Upsal, 
wJiile  in  France  it  is  found  only  on  mountains 
between  three  and  four  thousand  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  sea.  I  received  very  fine  specimens 
collected  by  a  friend  in  the  Pyrenees.  The 
(^mmon  viper  ^  also,  which  in  northern  Europe 
is  found  in  the  plains,  in  southern  is  found  only* 
&Ek  Alpine  or  Subalpine  mountains. 

It  has  been  observed  by  an  ingenious  and 
learned  writer,  that  the  terrestrial  globe  seems 
to  be  formed  of  two  immense  mountains,  set 
base  to  base  at  the  equator,  and  that  upon  each 
of  these  hemispheres  the  vegetables  and  animals 
lire  gaierally  placed  in  parallel  zones,  according 

^  Sarcorhamphus  Gryphus.  ^  Antilope  Rupicapra, 

*  Pumassius  Apollo.  *  Coluber  berus. 


132  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

to  the  degree  of  heat  or  cold.  The  exceptions  to 
this  rule,  he  further  observes,  are  easy  to  be  ap^ 
preciated,  and  confirm  its  truth,  since  the  raomi^K 
tains,  the  various  elevations  and  depressions  of 
the  country,  which  even  under  the  same  paraUd; 
modify  the  ordinary  temperature,  produce  ve^e^ 
tables,  and  often  anitnals,  analogous  to  ibm 
several  degrees  of  heat  or  cold.  The  lofty  mbnn'^ 
tains  in  tropical  countries,  exhibit  from  their  base 
to  their  snow-clad  summits,  the  same  gradatkiii 
as  these  hemispheres  present  in  going  from  the 
equator  towards  the  poles. 

The  majority,   however,   of  animals  do  not 
ascend  such  heights,  but  seek  their  subsist^ee 
in  the  plains,  and  less  elevated  regions ;  yet  heie 
a  considerable  difference  obtains  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  soil  and  country.     The  vast 
Sandy  desarts  of  Africa  and  Asia,  the  Steppes.of 
Tartary,  the  Llanos  mmd  Pampas  of  South  AmeV 
rica  have  their  peculiar  population  ;  in  the  for- 
mer the  camel,  and  his  master  the  Arab,  whose 
great  wealth  he  constitutes,  are  indigenous ;  ia 
the  latter  the  horse  and  the  Tartar  who  rides  and 
eats  him  ;   or  the  Hispano- American,  and  the 
herds  of  horses  and  oxen,  returned  to  their  wild 
and  primitive  type,  who  snares  them  with  his 
lasso,  and  reduces  them  again  to  the  yoke  of  mao. 
Numerous  also  are  the  peculiar  animal  produc- 
tions to  which  different  soils  afford  subsistence. 
The  sea-shore,  sandy  and  barren  wastes,  woods 


LOCAL.  133 

sfid  fcurasts,  arable  lands,  pasture,  meadow  and 
narsh,  all  are  thus  distinguished;  every  plant 
afanost  is  inhabited  by  insects  appropriated  to 
it,  every  bird  has  its  peculiar  parasite  or  louse ;  * 
^nd  not  only  are  the  living  animals  so  infested, 
but  their  carcasses  ai%  bequeathed  to  a  nume- 
lous  and  varied  army  of  dissecters,  who  soon 
reduce  them  to  a  naked  skeleton ;  nay,  their 
rety  excrements  become  the  habitation  of  the 
grdbs  of  sundry  kinds  of  beetles  and  flies. 

But  not  only  is  the  surface  pf  the  earth  and  its 
vegetable  clothing,  thickly  peopled  with  animals, 
but  many,  even  quadrupeds  and  reptiles,  as  well 
as  insects  and  worms,  are  subterranean,  and  seek 
for. concealment  in  dens,  caves  and  caverns,  or 
make  for  themselves  burrows  and  tortuous  paths 
at  various  depths  under  the  soil,  or  seek  for 
safety  and  shelter,  by  lurking  under  stones  or 
clods,  and  all  the  dark  places  of  the  earth. 

To  other  animals,  in  order  to  pass  gradually 
from  such  as  are  purely  terrestrial,  to  those  that 
are  aquatic.  Providence  has  given  the  privilege 
to  frequent  both  the  earth  and  the  water ;  some 
of  which  may  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the 
former,  and  frequenting  the  latter,  as  water  fowl 
of  various  kinds,  the  amphibious  rat,*  the  archi- 
tect beaver,^  many  reptiles,  and  some  insects ; 
others  again  as  belonging  to  the  latter,  and  fre- 

*  Nirmus,  ^  Lemmus  amphibius,  ^  Castor  Fiber. 


134  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

quenting  the  former ;  for  instance,  the  sea-^tler/ 
and  the  different  kinds  of  seal^  and  morse,'  ik» 
turtle,'^  the  penguin,^  several  insects,^  and  tfa^ 
water*newts/  Other  amphibious  animaki^  tf 
they  may  be  so  called,  are  aquatic  at  one  period 
of  their  life,  and  terrestrial  at  another;  thi($'il 
particularly  exemplified  in  some  insects,  l^s^ 
grubs  of  water-beetles,®  those  of  dragon-flies/ 
may-flies,"  ephemeral-flies,"  water-moths,"  gcatt 
or  mosquitos,"  and  several  other  two-winged  fliea, 
live  in  the  water,  while  the  perfect  insect  is 
either  amphibious  as  the  beetle,  or  terrestrial  as 
the  remainder. 

But  no  part  of  this  terraqueous  globe  is  more 
fully  peopled,  and  with  a  greater  vfeiriety  aad 

« 

diversity  of  beautiful,  or  strange,  or  monstrous 
forms,  than  the  waters,  from  the  infinite  ocean  to 
the  most  insignificant  pool  or  puddle.  Every  port 
and  portion  of  the  supposed  element  of  water ; 
nay,  almost  every  drop  of  that  fluid  teems  ifith 
life.  Thousands  of  aquatic  species  are  knows, 
but  myriads  of  myriads  never  have  been  seca 
and  never  will  be  seen  by  the  eye  of  man. 


*  Enhydra  marina.  *  Phoca, 

'  Trichechus.  *  Chelonia  Myda^, 

*  Aptenodytes,  *  Dyticus,  GyrinuSy  RfmatrUfSx^ 

'  Salamandra  aquatka,    ^  Dyticida,  Hydrophilida,  Gyrimit' 

*  Libellulina.  "  Trichoptera, 
"  Ephemeridm.  "  Hydrocampa, 
"  CuUx. 


LOCAL.  135 

Amongst  those  that  inhabit  fluids,  none  are 
firidre  wonderful  dian  those  that  are  termed  In- 
fdsofies;^  because  they  are  usually  found  in  in- 
fiisiems  of  various  substances,  &c. ;  when  dry, 
fihese  animals  lose  all  signs  of  life,  but  upon  im- 
mersion,  even  after  the  lapse  of  years,  they  im- 
mediately awake  fixnn  their  torpor  and  begin  to 
lool^  briskly  about.  Even  the  air,  according  to 
3pallanzani,  seems  to  contain  the  germes  or 
eggs  of  these  infinitesimals  of  creation,  so  that 
we  swallow  them  when  we  breathe,  as  well  as 
when  we  drink. 

With  respect  to  animals  more  entirely  aquatic^ 
some  inhabit,  as  the  majority  of  sea-fishes  and 
animals,  salt  waters  only,  some  salt  at  one  tin^e 
and  fresh  at  another,  as  the  species  of  the  salmon 
genus,  the  sturgeon,  &c. ;  and  some  frequent 
bmckish  waters,  as  some  flat-fish,  and  shell-fish. 

The  bed  of  the  mighty  ocean  is  not  only 
planted  with  a  variety  of  herbs,  which  aflbrd  pas- 
ture to  many  of  its  animal  inhabitants,  but  it  has 
other,  productions  which  represent  a  forest  of 
trees  and  shrubs,  and  are,  strictly  speaking,  the 
first  members  of  the  zoological  world,  connecting 
it  with  the  vegetable  ;  these  are  denominated 
Zoophytes  or  animal  plants,  and  Polypes  (Poly- 
pui).  This  last  name  has  been  adopted  from 
Aristotle ;  with  him  however  and  the  ancients, 

*  Infusoria,  Acrita,  Agastriuy  Amorphay  Microscopica, 


130  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

it  is  evidently  used  to  designate  the  Ai^Bmt' 
and  Nautilus  of  the  moderns,  and  also  to  include 
some  terrestrial  shells.  The  Zoophytes  however 
are  not  confined  to  the  ocean,  every  rivulet,  and 
stagnant  ditch  or  pool  affords  to  some  kinds, 
more  commonly  denominated  Polypes,  and  also 
to  some  sponges,  their  destined  habitation.  An 
infinite  army  of  shell-fish,  whether  multivalve, 
bivalve,  or  univalve,  also  cover  the  bed  of  the 
ocean,  or  move  in  its  waters,  and  some  dance 
gaily  on  its  surface  with  expanded  sails,  or  dash* 
ing  oars  when  tempted  by  fair  weather. 

From  this  brief  view  of  the  local  distribution  of 
animals  and  their  various  haunts,  we  see  the  care 
of  I)ivine  Providence,  that  no  place,  however, 
at  first  sight,  apparently  unfit,  might  be  witlioul 
its  anii&al  as  well  as  vegetable  population :  if 
the  hard  rock  is  clothed  with  a  lichen,  the 
lichen  has  its  inhabitant :  and  that  inhabitant, 
bi^ides  affording  an  appropriate  food  to  the  bird 
that  j^lights  upon  the  rpck,  or  some  parasite  that 
Ijias  been  hatched  in  or  upon  its  own  body) 
assists  in  forming  a  soil  upon  it.  There  b 
no  place  so  horrible  and  fetid  from  unclean  and 
putrid  substance,  that  is  not  cleansed  and  pnri- 
fied  by  some  apimals  that  are  either  its  constant 
or  nomadic  inhabitants.     Thus  life,  a  life  at- 

^  Argonauta. 


LOCAL.  137 

teiided  m  most  cases^  if  not  all*  with  some  enjoy- 
ment, swarms  every  where — ^in  the  air,  in  the 
^^th,  under  the  earth,  in  the  waters— there  is  no 
place  in  which  the  will  of  an  Almighty  Creator 
m  not  executed  by  some  being  that  hath  animal 
li^  What  Power  is  manifested  in  the  organiza- 
Uon  and  structure  of  these  infinite  hosts  of  exist* 
^ices !  what  Wisdom  in  their  adaptation  to  their 
several  functions  I  and  what  Goodness  and  stu- 
pendous Love  in  that  universal  action  upon  all 
these  difierent  and  often  discordant  creatures 
compelling  them,  while  they  are  gratifying  their 
own  appetites  or  passions,  and  following  the  lead 
of  their  several  instincts,  to  promote  the  good  of 
the  whole  system,  combining  into  harmony  almost 
universal  discord,  and  out  of  seeming  death  and 
destruction  bringing  forth  life  and  health  and 
universal  joy !  He  who,  as  an  ancient  writer 
i^eaks,  ''Contains  all  things,"^  can  alone  thus 
act  upon  all  things,  and  direct  them  in  all  their 
V?ays  to  acknowledge  him  by  the  accomplish- 
ment of  each  wise  and  beneficent  purpose  of  his 
will.  Philo  Judseus,  in  his  book  upon  agricul- 
ture,* speaking  of  those  words  of  the  Psalmist; 
**  The  Lord  is  my  shepherd^  therefore  can  I  lack 
nothing,''  has  the  following  sublime  idea,  illus- 
trative of  this  subject.     **  God,  like  a  shepherd 


^  Hermas. 

2  Uepi  yca>pytac.     152.  A.  Ed.  CoL  Allob, 


138  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

and  king;  leads;  according  to  right  and  law»  tba 
earth,  and  the  water,  and  the  air,  and  the  fire, 
and  whatever  plants  or  animals  are  therein 
things  mortal  and  things  divine;  the  j^yskal 
structure  also  of  the  heavens,  and  the  oirowt  oi 
the  sun  and  moon ;  the  revolutions  and  hariM- 
nious  choirs  of  the  other  stars;  placing  over 
them  his  right  Word  the  firstborn  Son,  who  faatb 
inherited  the  care  of  this  Holy  Flock,  as  the 
Viceroy  of  a  mighty  Kii^/' 


Chapter  III. 
Functions  mid  Instincts  of  Animals. 

Having,  in  the  last  chapter,  stated  how  the  dis- 
persion and  distribution  of  animals,  under  the 
Divine  superintendence  and  direction,  probably 
took  place  after  the  Deluge ;  and  having  Kke- 
wise  considered  those  temporary  changes  d 
place,  either  casual  or  periodical,  which  are  Btill 
in  operation,  I  shall  next  endeavour  to  give  a 
general  sketch  of  the  animal  kingdom,  its 
classes  and  larger  groups,  and  so  much  of  thdr 
history,  habits,  and  instincts,  as  may  be  neces^ 
sary  to  indicate  their  seYem{  functions  and  offices 
in  the  general  plan  of  creation,  so  as  to  illustMte 
more  strikingly  the  Goodness  that  willed^  the 


FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS^  139 

Wisdom  tlwt  planned,  and  the  Power  that  exe- 
cuted the  wondrous  whole ;  so  that  each  in  its 
place  and  station,  by  employing  the  faculties 
and  organs,  with  which  he  has  gifted  it,  in 
accomplishing  his  will,  praises,  though  uncon* 
seioudy,  its  Almighty  and  Beneficent  Creator, 
thus  loudly  calling  upon  man;  the  raitional  head 
of  the  creation,  to  tak6  up  the  strain  and  lead 
the  general  choir. 

Before  I  descend  to  particulars,  I  must  say  a 
few  words  upon  the  general  functions  of  the 
animal  kingdom.  These,  like  Janus,  have  a 
double  aspect; — on  one  side  they  affect  the 
vegetable  world,  and  on  the  other  their  own 
body. 

There  is  a  singular  contrast  and  contrariety 
between  the  majority  of  animals  and  vegetables. 
The  head  of  the  animal  and  the  root  or  base  of 
the  vegetable  perform  the  same  office,  that  of 
coUectii^  and  absorbing  the  nutriment  of  each. 
The  animal  derives  this  nutriment  from  organic 
matter,  the  v^petable  firom  inorganic.  The  plant 
gives  oxygen  to  the  heaven,  and  falling  leaves 
and  other  matters  to  the  earth.  The  animal 
gives  nitrc^n  to  the  former,  and  the  rejecta- 
menta of  its  food  to  the  latter.  The  most  beau- 
tifol  and  admired,  and  odorous  and  elevated 
palrts  of  the  plant  are  its  reproductive  organs 
ami  their  appendages,  while  in  the  animal  they 
are  the  very  reverse  of  this. 


140  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS* 

B lit,  in  all  this,  we  see  the  wisdom .  and  fore- 
thought of  the  Creator.  We  see  how  exactly^ 
by  this  mutual  inversion,  each  class  of  beings  is 
fitted  for  its  station  and  functions.  The  plaut 
to  take  root  in,  invest  and  ornament  the  earth, 
and  keep  the  atmosphere  pure  by  a  .constaoct 
supply  of  vital  air ;  the  animal  to  browse  and  trjxo 
the  vegetable,  and  by  checking  its  luxuriance 
promote  its  welfare,  to  furnish  it  with  a  product 
calculated  for  its  health  and  necessary  to  its 
existence ;  and  by  the  manure,  various  in  kind 
as  the  animals  themselves,  which  it  produces, 
supplying  to  the  earth  fresh  pabulum  for  its 
v^etable  tribes,  and  making  good  what  it  lost 
by  the  exhaustion,  occasioned  by  the  infinite 
myriads  that,  investing  it  on  all  sides  like  a 
garment,  derive  their  nutriment  from  it,  some 
plunging  deep,  and  others,  as  it  were,  skim- 
ming the  surface :  if  we  contrast  this  with  the 
returns  they  make,  we  shall  be  convinced  that, 
in  this  case,  the  expenditure  would  vastly  exceed 
the  income,  and  that  a  class  of  beings  was 
essentially  necessary  as  a  counterpoise,  whicJi» 
by  taking  little  or  nothing  immediately  from 
the  soil,  at  the  same  time  that  they  added  to  it, 
some  in  a  greater  and  some  in  a  less  degree^ 
might  afford  a  sufiicient  supply  of  those  princir 
pies  which  are  indispensably  requisite  for  the 
due  nutriment  and  developement  of  the  various 
members  of  the  vegetable  kingdom,  and  thus 


FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS.  141 

maintain  an  equilibrium,  and  make  good  the 
deficiency  j  ust  stated . 

There  is  another  function  which  is  devolved 
tkpon  animals  with  respect  to  the  vegetable 
kingdom  ;  to  keep  the  members  of  it  within  due 
ttmits,  and  to  hinder  them  from  encroaching  too 
flnich  upon  each  other.  All  organised  beings 
have  a  natural  tendency  to  increasie  and  mill- 
tiply  ;  and  while  there  is  space  this  tendency  is 
beneficial ;  but  when  plants  or  animals  exceed 
eeitain  limits^  they  stand  in  each  other's  way, 
and  prevent  all  further  growth  or  healthy  pro- 
gress. The  herbivorous  animals,  in  various 
ways,  serve  as  a  countercheck  to  this  tendency, 
arid  keep  the  vegetable  tribes  from  encroaching 
too  much  upon  each  other.  As  I  have  detailed  the 
effects  of  this  when  I  spoke  of  the  ravages  of  the 
locusts,  and  shall  have  occasion  again  to  notice 
it,  I  shall  not  now  enlarge  further  upon  it- 

I  am  next  to  consider  another  general  function 
of  animals,  or  the  effects  they  produce  upon  their 
own  body  :  and  here  the  reason  just  alluded  to, 
their  constant  tendency  to  multiply  so  as  to  be 
injurious  to  each  other,  and  alsor  to  vegetable 
productions,  especially  those  that  are  important 
to  man  or  beast,  which  in  the  present  state  of 
things  is  so  constantly  recurring,  renders  it 
necessary  that  some  bounds  should  be  set  to 
their  increase,  which  Providence  effects  by  let- 
ting them  loose  against  each  other.     The  great 


142  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

object  of  the  Creator  is  the  mainteoance  of  lite 
whole  system  of  creation  in  order  and  beauty^ 
and  this  he  is  pleased  to  accomplish,  not  always 
by  the  concord  but  by  the  seeming  discord  of  the 
agents  he  employs. 

When  we  take  a  first  view  of  nature  we  ture 
struck  by  a  scene  which  seems  to  be  one  of 
universal  conflict,  for  the  very  heavens  appear 
not  clear  from  the  charge :  the  philosopher  who 
studies  them  tells  us  of  antagonist  powers,  that 
are  perpetually  striving  with  each  other,  the  one 
to  absorb  all  things  in  a  common  centre,  the 
other  to  dissever  them,  and  scatter  them  in  illi^ 
mitable  space,  and  when  we  turn  to  the  earth, 
what  a  scene  of  destruction  is  before  us  I    The 
king  of  the  terrestrial  globe,  man,  constantly 
engaged  in  a  struggle  with  his  fellow  man,  often 
laying  waste  the  earth,  slaughtering  its  inhabilr 
ants,  and  deforming  its  productions — his  sulgectB 
of  the  animal  kingdom  following  the  example  of 
their   master,    and   pitilessly   destroying    each 
other — the  strong    oppressing   the   weak,   and 
most  seeming  bent  to  annihilate  the  races  to 
which  they  are  opposed ;    so    that,    humanly 
speaking,  in  the  lapse  of  ages,  we  might  expect 
that  one  species  of  animals  would  be  annihilated 
after  another,  till  the  whole  were  oUiterated 
from  the  face  of  creation,  and  the  sublime  Ian** 
guage   of  the   prophet  literally  verified ;    '  -  / 
beheld  tlie  earthy   and,   lo^  it  was  without  farm 


FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS.  143 

and  void;  and  the  heavens,  and  they  had  no  light. 
J  beheld  the  motaitains,  and,  lo,  they  trembled,  and 
aU  the  hUls  linoved  lightly.  I  beheld,  and,  lo, 
there  was  no  man,  and  all  tJte  birds  of  the  air 
werejied.^^ 

But  if,  with  our  spirits  depressed^by  the  prospect 
(^  so  universal  a  scene  of  mutual  struggles  and 
destraction,  we  listen  again  to  the  philosopher, 
be  will  tell  us  that  the  ceaseless  struggle  of  the 
antagonist  powers  of  the  heavens  prevents,  instead 
of  causing  disorder  and  confusion,  that  by  the 
powerful  and  mutual  counteraction  of  these 
mighty  opponents,  all  the  heavenly  bodies  of  our 
system  are  prevented  from  rushing  to  the  centre, 
or  being  driven,  dispersed  into  their  atoms, 
beyond  the  fiammantia  meenia  mundi ;  that  thus 
their  annual  and  diurnal  revolutions  are  main- 
tained, that  each  observes  its  appointed  course^ 
keeps  its  assigned  station,  and  ministers  to  the 
good  and  well-being  of  the  whole  system.  If 
then  we  turn  our  view  again  to  the  earth,  and 
take  a  nearer  survey  of  things — if  we  consider 
the  present  tendency  to  multiply,  beyond  mea- 
sare,  of  all  things  that  have  life,  we  shall  soon 
be  convinced  that,  unless  this  tendency  was 
laet  by  some  check,  the  world  of  animated  beings 
would  be  perpetually  encroaching  upon  each 
other,  and  would  finally  perish  for  want  of  suffi- 
cient food;  and  that  the  partial  evils  inflicted 
by  one  individual  or  one  class  upon  another,  to 
borrow  a  term  from   the   Political  Economist, 


144  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

proportions  the  demand  to  the  supply ;  that  thus 
both  vegetables  and  animals  are  so  accurately 
distributed,  weighed  so  nicely  against  each  other, 
as  never  to  go  a  step  beyond  what  God  decrees, 
and  what  is  most  beneficial  to  the  whole  system ; 
and  that  the  actual  number  of  every  kind  beaif 
due  relation  to  the  work  it  has  to  do ;  and,  upon 
closer  inquiry,  we  find,  that  though  since  the 
creation,  probably  in  consequence  of  the  great 
change  in  the  moral  state  of  the  world,  supeiin- 
ducing  physical  changes  also,  some  species  do 
longer  necessary  may  have  perished,  yet  that,  ii 
general,  they  have  maintained  their  ground  from 
age  to  age,  in  spite  of  the  attacks  of  the  great 
army  of  destroyers.  To  maintain  things  in  this 
state,  thus  to  ^^  order  all  things  in  measure^  mmr 
ber^  and  weight^''  as  the  wise  man  speaks,  to 
cause  all  so  to  harmonize,  and  so  out  of  death 
and  destruction  to  bring  forth  life,  indicates 
still  more  strongly  the  constant  and  wise  super** 
intendence,  and  powerful  arm  of  a  watchful 
Providence,  and  demonstrates  irrefragably  that 
there  is  a  Great  Being  constantly  at  work,  either 
mediately  or  immediately,  to  produce  effects 
that,  without  his  constant  superintendence  aod 
intervention,  could  never  take  place.  And  thus^ 
as  sings  the  bard  of  Twickenham, 

''  All  nature  is  but  art  unknown  to  thee, 
All  chance  direction  which  thou  canst  not  see. 
All  discord  harmony  not  understood , 
All  partial  evil,  universal  good." 


1 45 


Chapter  IV. 

Functions  and  Instincts  of  the  Tnfusory  Animals. 

As  at  the  original  creation  of  the  animal  king- 
dom, it  was  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Being  to 
bq^in  at  the  foot  of  the  scale  and  to  terminate 
with  man,  who  was  at  its  summit,  thus  making 
a  gradual  progress  towards  the  most  perfect 
being  it  was  his  will  to  create,  and  ending  with 
him :  so  I  think  it  will  best  manifest  his  power 
and  perfections  if  I  endeavour  to  trace  out  the 
footsteps  of  the  Deity  in  the  same  direction  as 
he  proceeded ;  and  instead  of  beginning,  as  is 
usually  done  by  systematical  writers,  with  the 
highest  grade  of  animals,  if  I  ascend  upwards 
from  the  lowest. 

Our  first  inquiry  must  be  what  are  these 
lowest  animals?  And  are  there  any  organized 
bodies  that  partake  of  two  natures,  that  are  either 
animal  at  one  period  of  their  existence  and  vege- 
table at  another,  or  else  are  partly  animal  and 
partly  vegetable  ?  These  doubtful  forms  must  be 
sought  for  amongst  what  have  been  denominated 
first-plants^  and  first-animals ; ^  amongst  the 
former  is  a  certain  genus  or  tribe*  of  plants, 

1  Protophpta,       *  Protozoa.        ^  OsdllatoriiB,     Vauch. 
VOL.  I.  L 


146  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

which  are  distinguished  not  only  by  their  simfde 
structure,  but  also  by  an  oscillatory  moveniiBQl; 
which  seems  to  connect  them,  in  some  degree, 
with  the  animal  kingdom.  When  collected  in 
masses  they  resemble  a  piece  of  green  velvet. 
Some  cover  considerable  spots  in  moist  places; 
others  live  in  the  water,  either  fixed  to  sub- 
stances contained  in  it,  or  floating  on  the  airface. 
They  are  generally  based  on  a  mucilaginous 
substance,  the  remains  of  those  that,  having 
fulfilled  their  functions,  are  become  a  caput 
mortuum.  The  filaments  of  which  the  living 
plant  is  composed  continually  oscillate  from 
right  to  left,  or  from  left  to  right,  but  very; irre- 
gularly, some  going  in  one  direction,  others  in 
another ;  some  remaining  stationary  while  others 
continue  in  motion. 

Professor  Agardh  inclines  to  the  opinion  that 
these  oscillating  plants  owe  their  existence  to 
different  species  of  animalcules^  which  at  fiist 
swim  about  as  animals,  and  afterwards  fix 
themselves  as  plants.  This  opinion  has  been 
adopted  by  others ;  and  lately  Mr.  linger  has 
stated  that  he  has  seen  animated  particles  sepa^ 
rate  from  the  parent  plant,  in  a  few  hours  cour 
verted  into  globules  of  vegetable  matter,  which 
subsequently  became  plants  perfectly  similar  to 
the  individual  from  which  they  were  produced. 

But  surely  the  motions  of  these  seeds  or 
germes,  may  be  merely  mechanical,  and  may  be 


INFUSORIES.  147 

becefisary  to  enable  them  properly  to  fix  them- 
selves, somewhat  analogous  to  those  mechanical 
contrivances  by  which  the  seeds  of  numerous 
plants,  as  those  of  the  dandelion  and  cranesbill, 
are  transported  to  a  distance  and  enabled  to 
enter  the  soil  and  fix  themselves  in  it. 

That  any  creature  should  begin  life  as  an 
animal  and  end  it  as  a  plant  seems  to  contradict 
the  general  analogy  of  creation,  and  requires 
much  stronger  proofs  than  appear  to  have  been 
adduced  in  the  present  case,  before  it  can  be 
admitted.  The  motions  of  the  oscillating  plants 
are  not  very  different  from  those  of  the  stamina 
of  some,  and  of  the  leaves  of  others,  as  the 
SLedysamm  gyrans;  yet  Adaiison  has  proved 
that  the  vibrations  of  the  filaments  are  the  same 
both  in  hot  and  cold  weather,  and  that  the 
aquatic  species  are  equally  sensible  with  the 
terrestrial,  therefore  the  movement  can  scarcely 
be  caused  by  the  temperature.  But  as  analo- 
gous motions  were  observed  by  Mr.  Brown  in 
spherical  and  other  molecules  obtained  from 
Vegetables,  it  is  evident  that  such  motions  do 
not  necessarily  indicate  aa  animal,  but  only  a 
kind  of  attraction  and  repulsion  produced  by  an 
uncertain  cause.  Another  argument  proves  their 
vegetable  nature,  these  plants  give  out  oxygen, 
whereas  if  they  were  animals  they  would  absorb 
oxygen  and  give  out  azote. 

Professor  Agardb  illustrates  his  opinion  just 


148  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

stated  by  the  following  faDciful  allusion.  When 
thus  fixed  he  considers  these  beings  as  no  longer 
having  any  animal  life,  but  as  preserving  the 
appearance  of  it,  **  Like  those  men  of  Plato," 
adds  he,  "  agitated  by  eternal  regret  with  which 
the  remembrance  of  a  happy  life,  the  sweetft 
of  which  they  formerly,  tasted,  inspires  them ; 
always  oscillating,  never  tranquil,  they  seieril 
aiming  at  the  recovery  of  that  happy  life  which 
they  have  lost."  The  locomotions,  however,  of 
the .  germes  of  these  Hydrophytes,  and  their 
oscillatory  movements  when  fixed,  indicate  at 
least  a  semblance  of  animality,  and  an  approach 
to  the  confines  of  the  animal  kingdom.  . 
.  Leaving,  therefore,  these  doubtful  forms,  as 
having  no  just  claim  to  be  considered  as  ani- 
mals, I  shall  now  proceed  to  those  whose  right 
to  that  title  is  generally  acknowledged.  And 
here  two  very  difierent  tribes  start  up  and  prefer 
their  claim  to  be. first  considered ;  the  Inftisories, 
namely,  and  those  which  have  been  called 
Polypes  and  Zoophytes.  But  since  the  first  of 
these  two  classes,  by  means  of  one  of  its  tribes,  as 
its  great  oracle,  Ehrenberg,  remarks,  approaches 
the  oscillating  plants, — I  shall  consider  it  as  the 
basis  on  which  the  Deity  has  built  the  animal 
kingdom.  Indeed,  though  the  Polypes  at  first 
sight  appear  most  to  resemble  the  higher  plants, 
in  their  general  configuration,  the  Infusories,  as 
well  as  coming  nearer  to  the  lowest  by  some  of 


INFUSORIES.  149 

their  members,  in  others  exhibit  no  slight  ana* 
logy  to  seeds. 

Of  all  the  groups  of  animals  those  of  the  least 
consequence,  one  would  think,  must  be  those 
fliat  for  the  most  part  escape  the  inquiring  eye 
unless  aided  by  a  microscope.  The  infusories, 
or  as  they  have  been  also  called  animalcules^' 
microscopic  animals^  acrita  or  indiscernibles, 
amarpha  or  without  form,  are  of  this  description. 
These  wonderful  little  creatures,  though  they 
are  every  where  dispersed,  remain  like  seeds; 
without  apparent  life  or  motion,  perhaps  after 
animation  has  been  suspended  for  years,  till 
they  come  in  contact  with  some  fluid,  when  they 
are  immediately  reanimated,  move  about  in  va- 
rious directions,  absorb  their  proper  nutriment, 
arid  exercise  their  reproductive  powers  according 
to  the  law  of  their  several  natures.  Yet  these 
IHtle  animals,  though  in  some  respects  they 
exhibit  no  slight  analogy  to  vegetables,  are  not 
only  distinguished  from  them  by  their  irritability, 
but  likewise  by  their  organization,  and  powers  of 
locomotion  and  voluntary  action.  Their  mode 
of  reproduction,  however,  is  not  far  removed 
from  that  of  some  vegetables ;  they  are  sponta- 
neously divisible,  some  longitudinally  and  others 
transversely,  and  these  cuttings,  if  they  may  be 
so  called,  as  in  the  Hydra  or  common  Polype, 
become  separate  animals.  They  are  also  propar 
gated  by  germes,  and  some  appear  to  be  vivipar 


150  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

rous.  The  species  of  Vibrio  found  in  diseased 
wheat  by  M .  Bauer  is  oyiparous,  as  is  evideoit 
from  his  observations  and  admirable  %ures, 
Lamarck  indeed  regards  them  as  having  aq 
volition  9  as  taking  their  food  by  absorption  like 
plants ;  as  being  without  any  mouth,  or  internal 
oiigan;  in  a  word,  as  transparent  gdatinoixs 
masses,  whose  motions  are  determined  not  I^ 
their  will,  but  by  the  action  of  the  medium  m 
which  they  move^  That  they  have  neither  hea4 
^es,  muscles^  vessels^  nerves,  nor  indeed  any 
particular  determinable  Organs  whether  for  respi*- 
ration,  generation^  or  even  digestion.  On  accouot 
of  these  supposed  negative  characters,  they  were 
called  by  De  Blainville^  Agastriay  or  stomachless, 
as  having  no  intestines ;  but  Ehrenberg^  who  has 
studied  them  in  almost  every  climate^  has  dis^ 
covered,  by  keeping  them  in  coloured  waters^ 
that  they  are  not  the  simple  animals  that  La- 
marck and  others  supposed,  and  that  almost  all 
have  a  mouth  and  digestive  organs,  and  that  nam* 
bers  of  them  have  many  stomachs.  Spallanzani^ 
and  other  writers  that  preceded  Lamarck,  bad 
observed  that  their  motions  evidently  indicated 
volition :  this  appeared  from  their  avoiding  each 
other  and  obstacles  in  their  way;  from  theif 
changing  their  direction  and  going  faster  or 
slower  as  occasion  required ;  from  their  passing 
suddenly  from  a  state  of  rest  to  moticm  without 
any  external  impulse ;  from  their  darting  eagerly 


INFUSORIES.  151 

at  particles  of  infused  substances;  fixxn  their 
in^es^ntly  revolving  on  themselves  without  a 
cfaiBinge  of  place ;  from  their  course  against  the 
ccrrrent;    and  from  their  crowding  to  shallow 
places  of  the  fluid  in  which  they  are :  each  species 
seems  also  to  exhibit  a  peculiar  kind  of  instinct. 
Lamarck  thinks  all  this   delusion  proceeding 
fram  errors  in  judgment,  and  the  result  of  preju- 
lices  inducing  people  readily  to  believe  what 
^Gord«  with  their  persuasions.   But  to  apply  this 
r^ark  to  such  observers  as  Spallanzani,  &c.,  is 
drawing  rather  largely  on  the  credulity  of  his 
readers,  who  might  very  justly  change  the  tables 
and  apply  it  to  himself,  who  is  certainly  as  much 
chained  by  system  as  any  one  can  be.    Admit* 
tiiig  that  the  observations  of  Spallanzani  just 
stated  record  facts,  it  appears  clearly  to  follow 
liom  them  that  these  animals  have  volition,  and 
therefore  cannot  properly  be  denominated  apa>^ 
theticy  or  insensible.    The  fact  that  they  almost 
all  have  a  mouth  and  a  digestive  system ;  many 
of  them  eyes,  and  some  rudiments  of  a  nervous 
(me,  implies  a  degree,  more  or  less,  of  sensa* 
tioQ  in  them  all,   and  consequently  that  they 
have  all,  whether  it  be  molecular  and  diffused  in 
their  substance,  or  confined  to  particular  organs^ 
I  say  that  they  have  all  a  nervous  influence  and 
excitement  sufficient  for  their  several  wants,  car« 
responding  with  their  several  natures* 


152  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

These  minim  animals  may  be  said.almott  to 
be  universally  dispersed ;  they  inhabit  the  seai 
the  rivers,  and  other  waters ;  are  supposed  to  Hmt 
in  the  air ;  they  are  found  in  the  blood  and  urme; 
in  the  tartar  of  the  teeth ;  in  animal  substaneelr^ 
in  vinegar ;  in  paste ;  in  vegetable  substances^; 
in  fruits,  seeds,  and  grain;  in  sand ; . am<»)gdt 
tiles ;  in  wells ;  on  mountains,  &c.  Their  mim^ 
bers  are  infinite ;  hundreds  of  thousands  may 
be  seen  in  a  single  drop  of  water ;  their  minute- 
hess  is  extreme,  some  being  not  more  than  vnrv 
part  of  a  line  in  length,  and  yet  these  atoms  of 
animals  have  a  mouth  and  several  stomachs,      i 

Let  a  man,  says  Dalyell,  the  translator  of 
Spallanzani,  conceive  himself  in  a  moment 
conveyed  to  a  region  where  the  properties,  and 
the  figure  and  motions  of  every  animal  are 
unknown.  The  amazing  varieties  of  these 
will  first  attract  his  attention.  One  is  a  long 
Blender  line;  another  an  eel  or  serpent;  some 
are  circular,  elliptical,  or  triangular ;  one  is  a 
thin  flat  plate ;  another  like  a.number  of  reticu- 
lated seeds ;  several  have  a  long  tail,  almnst 
invisible;  or  their  posterior  part  is  terminated 
by  two  robust  horns ;  one  is  like  a  funnel ; 
another  like  a  bell,  or  cannot  be  referred  to 
any  object  familiar  to  our  senses.  Certain 
animalcules  can  change  their  figure  at  plea- 
sure:*  sometimes  they  are  extended  to  immo- 

1  Plate  I.  Fie.  3. 


INFUSORIES.  153 

derate  length,  then  almost  contracted  to  nothing ; 
sometimes  they  are  curved   like  a  leech,    of 
cmled  like  a  snake;    sometimes  they  are  in- 
flated, at  others  flaccid ;  some  are  opaque  while 
Others  are  scarcely  visible  from  their  extreme 
transparence.     No  less  singular:  is  the  variety  of 
their  motions; — several  swim  with  the  velocity 
of  an  arrow,  so  that  the  eye  can  scarcely  follow 
them;  others  appear  to  drag  their  body  along 
with  difficulty,  and  move  like  the  leech;  and 
others  seem  to  exist  in  perpetual  rest ;  one  will 
revolve  on  its  centre,  or  the  anterior  part  of  its 
head ;  others  move  by  undulations,  leaps,  oscil- 
lations, or  successive  gyrations ; — in  short,  there 
is  no  kind  of  animal  motion,  or  other  mode  of 
{irogression,  that  is  not  practised  by  animalcules. 
^  Their  organs  are  equally  various.    Some  ap- 
pear to  take  their  food  by  absorption,  having'  no 
iDouth,    to  this  tribe  belong  what  have  been 
called  vinegar  eels ;  others  have  a  mouth  and 
several  stomachs,  but  no  orifice  for  the  trans- 
mission   of   their    excrements;    others,    again, 
ihave  both  a  mouth  and  anal  passage,  and  what 
38  wonderful,  in  such  minute  creatures,  some- 
times as  many  as  forty  or  fifty  stomachs ;  ^  though 
many  are  without  eyes,   others  are  furnished 
with  these  useful .  organs,    some    having    one, 
others  two,  others  three,  and  others  four ;  some 

*  LeucophrySy  Enchelts,  &c. 


154  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

have  processes  resembling  legs.    In  the  second 
Class  of  these  animals,  the  Rotatories,  to  which 
the  wheel-animalcules  belong,  the  internal  or-^ 
ganization  approaches  to  that  of  the    higher 
classes,  for  they  exhibit  the  rudiments   of  a 
nervous  system ;  their  alimentary  canal  is  simple ; 
they  have  a  branching  dorsal  vessel,  but  withoHt 
a  systole  and  diastole ;  their  pharynx  is  usually 
furnished  with  mandibles,  which  are  sometimes 
armed  with  teeth.    The  mouth  of  the  majority, 
especially  amongst  the  rotatories,  is  fringed  with 
xay-like  bristles,  which  Cuvier  thinks  are  eon- 
nected  with  their  respiration.      This    circum- 
stance of  a  circle  of  rays  surrounding  the  oral 
orifice,  is  found  in  the  polypes  and  several  other 
animals  of  a  higher  grade.    Their  use  in  the 
present  instance,  I  speak  more  particularly  of 
the  wheel-animalcules,  is  by  their  rotation  to 
produce  a  current  in  the  water  to  the  mouth  of 
the  animal,  bringing  with  it  the  still  more  minute 
beings  which  constitute  its  food. 
.    These    invisible    inhabitants    of  the   vii^bie 
world  created  an  early  interest  in  inquisitive 
minds;  Dr.  Henry  Power,   and  after  him  the 
celebrated  Hooke,  about  the  middle  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  or  earlier,  noticed,  what  were 
called  vinegar  eels*^    Sir  E.  King,  in  the  Phi- 
losophical Transactions^  described  some  experi* 

^   VUmo  Anguilla. 


INFUSORISS.  1A5 

ncttts  on  the  animalcules  found  in  pepper  water ; 
9Pid,  subsequently,  Mr.  Harris  made  observa* 
tk>ns  upon  a  variety    of  these    minute   crea- 
tures.   The  subject  was  afterwards  taken  up 
by  various  writers,  both  here  and  on  the  con- 
tioent    Am4>ngst  these  none  was  more  eminent 
tj^an  Spallanxani.    O.  F.  Miiller,  who  seems  to 
ha,ve  been  the  first  who  treated  the  subject  sys- 
tematically, embodied  these  animals  in  a  Class 
by  the  name  of  Inftt$ar%ts}    He  was  followed 
bgr  BfttguieK  and  Lamarck,  who  divided  it  into 
Orders  and  Sections.    But  the  system  of  these 
zoologists  has  for  the  most  part  been  set  aside 
by  Ehrenberg,  a  Prussian  naturalist,  before-men- 
tioned, who  devoted  ten  years  of  his  life  to  the 
iatestigation  of  these  animals,  for  which  he  was 
particularly  qualified  by  his  previous  studies  and 
emidoyment,  the  anatomy  of  the  MoUuscans  of 
the  Red  Sea,  by  which  he  had  been  accustomed 
to  the  use  qf  microscopes  and  micrometers*    His 
researches  on  the  Infusories,  during  Baron  de 
Humboldt's  last  journey,  extend  to  more  than 
fifty  degrees  of  longitude,  and  fourteen  degrees 
of  latitude ; — he  went  as  far  as  Dongola  in  Africai 
and  the  Altai  mountains  in  Asia,  and  examined 
these  animals  in  a  great  variety  of  situations.    He 
found  them  on  Moimt  Sinai ;  swarms  of  various 
species  in  the  wells  of  the  Oasis  of  Jupiter 

1  Infusoria. 


166  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Ammon;  and  at  a  considerable  depth  in  soiae 
Siberian  mines,  in  places  entirely  deprived  of 
light. 

He  considers  them,  it  should  seem,  as  fonniog 
a  Sub-kingdom,  which  he  denominates  Pkmti^ 
anhnals}  This  sub -kingdom  he  divides  into-  two 
Classes.  The  first,  from  the  number  of  stomach%^ 
with  which  the  genera  belonging  to  it  are  fiir? 
nished,  he  names,  Polygastrica^  or  many-sto* 
mached,  probably,  to  contrast  with  De  Blainville's 
name  before-mentioned.  The  second  class  he 
calls  RotatorieSf^  consisting  of  the  ciliated  Polypes 
of  Lamarck ;  ^  each  of  these  classes  he  subdivides 
into  two  parallel  orders,  the  first  containing  those 
that  are  naked,  and  the  second  those  that  are 
loricated,*  or  covered  with  some  kind  of  shell.    - 

In  the  first  of  these  classes,  the  Polygastiich 
the  animals  recede  further  from  the  organization 
of  the  higher  tribes,  and  approach  nearer  to 
that  oi  vegetables ;  but  in  the  second,  as  I  before 
observed,  rudiments  of  the  organization  of  those 
tribes  make  their  appearance.  Many  of  the 
former  are  known  to  derive  their  nutriment  from 
vegetable  substances,  but  what  the  majority 
subsist  upon  is  not  certainly  known ; — but  the 
latter  class,  the  Rotatories,  are  ascertained  to  be 
predaceous,  as  above  stated.     Their  mode  of 

*  Pkyto-zoa.  *  Plate  I.  Fig.  1. 

3  Rotatoria,  ♦  Plate  1.  Fig.  2. 

^  See  Appendix,  note  20. 


INFUSORIES.  157 

dirawing  their  corpuscular  food  within  the  vortex 
of  their  mouth  is  thus  amusingly  illustrated  by 
Spallanzani.  As  a  certain  species  of  whale, 
teys  he,  (sic  magnis  componere  parva  solehat)  after 
having  driven  shoals  of  herrings  into  a  bay  or 
strait,  by  a  blow  of  its  tail  produces  a  whirlpool 
of  vast  extent  and  great  rapidity,  which  draws 
the  herrings  into  its  vorte;s;  the  monster  then 
presenting  its  open  mouth,  the  herrings  are  pre- 
cipitated into  its  throat,  and  it  is  soon  satiated  : 
so  the  carnivorous  Infusories  produce  a  vortex  by 
their  tentacles,  and  satisfy  their  appetite. 
;  I  have  been  more  diffuse  upon  the  history  of 
the  animals  whose  functions  in  nature  I  am  next 
to  consider,  because  to  them  in  a  more  particular 
manner,  applies  Pliny's  observation  with  regard 
to  insects.  In  his  tarn  parvis,  atque  tarn  huUis, 
qtuB  ratio y  quanta  viSy  guam  inextricabilis perfectio  ! 
In  nothing  is  the  power  and  wisdom  of  their 
Almighty  Author  more  signally  conspicuous.  Or- 
ganization so  complex,  and  life,  and  spontane- 
ous motion,  and  appetite,  and  means  to  satisfy 
it,  and  digestion,  and  nutrition,  and  powers  of 
reproduction  in  animals  of  such  infinite  minute- 
ness f  Who  can  believe  it  ?  Yet  so  it  is,  and  that 
each  of  these  should  be  varied  in  the  different 
tribes  and  genera— that  these  less  than  the  lieast 
of  all  the  creatures  that  present  themselves  to 
the  observation  of  mankind,  and  which  till  within 
a  century  or  two  were  not  suspected  to  exist,  should 


158  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

out-niimber  beyond  all  statement  of  numbers,  all 
the  other  aniznal^  together  that  people  the  ^hAe 
globe,  that  they  should  probably  enter  into,  us 
and  circulate  in  our  blood,  nestle  between  mt 
teeth,  be  busy  every  where,  and  perceived  do 
where,  till  the  invention  of  the  microscope  dreir 
aside  the  veil  between  us  and  these  entities,  afl^d 
we  saw  how  God  had  filled  all  things  with  life, 
and  had  based  the  animal  kingdom  upon  living 
atoms,  as  well  as  formed  the  earth  and  the  world 
of  inert  ones.  But  to  us  the  wondrous  spectacle 
is  seen  and  known,  only  in  part ;  for  those  that 
still  escape  all  our  methods  of  assisting  sight,  and 
remain  members  of  the  invifflble  world,  may 
probably  far  exceed  those  that  we  know. 

We  may  conclude  that  this  vast,  or  rather  lig- 
nite, host  of  animalcules  was  not  created  merely 
to  be  born  and  die ;  was  not  sown,  as  it  were, 
over  every  part  of  the  earth's  surface,  luriLing  in 
seedsy  and  other  vegetable  and  animal  substances, 
till  coming  into  contact  with  fluid  matter  of  what- 
ever description  it  starts  into  life,  and  swarming 
in  the  ocean,  and  its  tributary  streams ;  it  was 
not  thus  dispersed  every  where,  either  alive,  or 
in  a  state  to  revive  and  live,  but  for  some  great 
purpose,  for  which  its  organization,  structure  and 
station  amongst  animals,  particularly  adapt  it. 

With  respect  to  its  immediate  action  upon  the 
vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms,  it  has  been  as- 
certained, as  to  many  species,  that  they  ascend 


INFUSORIES.  159 

with  tlie  sap  in  vegetables/  and  are  found  in  the 
Uood  and  excretions  of  animals/  who  knows  but 
th^y  may  act  an  important  part  in  the  animal 
frame ;  somewhat  similar  to  what  devolves  upon 
the  larves  of  certain  insects,  with  regard  to  stag* 
Asuul; .  waters,  they  may  be  depurators  where  they 
sire  thus  employed,  and  contribute  to  preserve  a 
healthy,  action.  It  is  true,  as  far  as  vegetables 
are  concejrned,  especially  grain,  they  appear  to 
destroy,  where  they  take  up  their  residence,  but 
when  we  discover  the  same  or  similar  species,  in 
sour  paste  or  vinegar,  they  seem  destined  to  con- 
i^xme  substances  that  cease  to  be  wholesome ;  and 
ia  fact,  in  all  fluids^  in  which  they  usually  so 
abound,  they  may  be  destined  to  fulfil  a  similar 
office,  and  it  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  in 
their  history  confirmatory  of  this  idea:  that 
these  animals,  though  animation  in  them  is 
often  suspended  for  a  long  time;  when  they 
swarm  in  infusions,  having  fulfilled  their  office, 
perish  in  a  few  days. 

It  is  probable  that  in  the  waters  of  our  globe 
aa  infinity  of  animal  and  vegetable  molecules 
are  suspended,  that  are  too  minute  to  form  the 
food  of  even  the  lowest  and  most  minute  animals 


I  Mr.  Bauer  found  Vibrio  Triiiriy  in  the  stalk  as  well  as  in  the 
ear  and  grain  of  plants  of  wheat,  which  were  raised  from  seeds 
inoculated  with  it.     Phil.  Trans.  1823.  3. 

*  See  above,  p.  152. 


100  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

of  the  visible  creation,  and  therefore  an  infioite 
host  of  invisibles  was  necessary  to  remove  thc« 
as  nuisances. 

But  the  principal  point,  and  that  in  whick 
their  utility  most  evidently  appears,  is  their  fur* 
nishing  a  principal  portion  of  the  food  of  innumer- 
able animals  of  a  higher  order  than  themselves 
Those  infinite  armies  and  forests  of  locomo- 
tive and  fixed  Polypes,  that  give  to  the  ocean 
one  of  the  features  that  distinguish  earth,  have 
their  mouths  surrounded  with  tentacles,  when 
expanded  assuming  the  appearance  of  so  many 
blossoms,  with  these  they  collect  their  food, 
which,  amongst  the  more  minute  ones,  con- 
sists often  of  our  Infusories.  A  single  stem  of 
these  compound  animals,  having  often  intmmer- 
able  osculai  or  mouths,  requires  a  vast  supply  of 
food ;  others  equally  compound,  as  the  Ascidians 
or  Alcyons,  by  alternately  absorbing  and  expelling 
the  sea  water,  draw  in  with  it  a  supply  of  animal 
food,  consisting,  in  part,  of  the  creatures  in  ques- 
tion, which  abound  in  the  oceanic  waters ;  some 
of  these  have  a  common  organ  for  this  purpose, 
and  in.  others  each  individual  of  the  system  is 
fitted  with  one ;  the  MoUuscans  and  an  infinity 
of  the  smaller  inhabitants  of  the  ocean,  doubt- 
less also  derive  a  considerable  portion  of  their 
nutriment  from  them,  the  minute  Crustaceans 
probably  do  the  same,  and  many  insects, 
whose  larvae  inhabit  the  waters,  some  by  pro- 


INFUSORIES.  161 

4uctng  a  vortex  like  the  rotatories/  thus  find  an 
atmndant  supply  to  carry  them  to  their  interme- 
diate state.  But  not  only  do  these  creatures 
lurikish  the  more  minute  animals  that  inhabit 
the  waters^  with  a  considerable  portion  of  their 
food,  but,  k  should  seem,  even  some  of  those 
&at  are  of  a  higher  grade,  and  larger  stature. 
Whoever  has  been  in  the  habit  of  keeping  gold 
and  silver  fish,^  in  glass  or  other  vessels,  is  aware 
that  they  require  no  other  food  than  a  fresh 
supply  of  water  every  second  or  third  day. 
Their  nutriment  therefore  must  be  derived 
from  what  they  find  in  the  water.  In  this  may 
often  be  seen  minute  Branchiopods  swimming 
here  and  there,  sometimes  with  a  bundle  of  eggs 
appended  to  each  side:  but  these  are  not 
{sufficiently  numerous  to  form  the  whole  of  their 
food,  the  water  must  therefore  contain  other 
nutritive  substances  which  may  contribute  to 
ttKir  subsidence,  and  as  it  is  known  that  various 
infusory  animalcules  inhabit  it,  we  may  conclude 
that  they  are  inserted  in  their  bill  of  fare.  It 
has  been  observed  by  an  eminent  writer, 
speaking  of  the  gold  fish,  "The  water,  when 
care  is  taken  to  renew  it  frequently,  appears  suf- 
ficient for  the  nutriment  of  these  fishes  during 
many  months ;  but  it  should  be  considered  that 
though  this  water    appears   to   us  very  pure, 

'  Culex,  StratyomiSf  &c,  2  Cyprinus  auratus, 

VOL.  I.  M 


162  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

it  always  contains  a  multitude  of  animalcules 
and  very  minute  plants,  which  the  fishes  are 
continually  swallowing." 

When  Creative  Wisdom  covered  the  earth 
with  plants,  and  peopled  it  with  aiiimqls,  he  laid 
the  foundations  of  the  vegetable  and  animal 
kingdoms  with  such  as  were  most  easily  con- 
vertible into  nutriment  for  the  tribes  imme- 
diately above  them.  The  first  plants  and  the 
first  animals  are  scarcely  more  than  animated 
molecules,^  and  appear  analogues  of  each  other ; 
and  those  above  them  in  each  kingdom  represent 
jointed  fibrils.-  It  is  singular  and  worthy 
of  notice,  that  the  Creator  after  the  creation 
of  inanimate  matter,  probably  first  imparted  the 
living  principle  to  bodies  of  the  same  form 
with  the  molecules  and  fibrils  into  which  that 
matter  is  resolvable,  thus  uniting,  by  conunon 
characters,  things  essentially  distinct,  and  pre- 
serving unbroken  that  wonderful  chain  which 
links  together  all  created  things. 

Every  body,  who  has  eyes,  is  aware,  that 
vegetation  takes  place  upon  almost  every 
substance,  upon  the  bark  of  trees,  upon  naked 
rocks,  upon  brick  walls  and  tiled  roofs,  and  even 
upon  glass  when  not  constantly  cleaned.  The 
first  plants,   that  take  on  these  their  station, 

'  For  instance,  Globulina  and  Monas. 

2  Oscillatoria  and  Vibrio.     See  Appendix,  note  21. 


INFUSORIES.  163 

usually  look  like  green  or  yellow  powder,  when 
they  decay  forming  a  little  soil,  in  which  others 
more  conspicuous  find  sufficient  nutriment,  and  so 
one  succeeds  another  till  a  sufiicient  portion  of  soil 
covers  the  rock,  &c.  to  afibrd  the  means  of  life 
and  growth  to  more  perfect  plants,  and  often  to 
arborescent  ones.  An  analogous  process  takes 
place  in  the  water.  The  matihre  verte  of  French 
authors  makes  its  appearance,  and  other  Hydro- 
phytes, in  conjunction  with  the  Infusories,  form 
as  it  were  a  first  soil  for  the  support  and  main- 
tenance of  animal  life,  both  for  those  which 
derire  their  nutriment  from  v^etables,  and 
thc^e  that  feed  on  beings  of  their  own  class. 
Thus  a  maintenance  is  provided  for  higher  forms, 
and,  at  last,  for  the  highest;  and  a  table  is 
spread,  both  on  the  earth  and  in  the  waters,  for 
every  living  thing,  from  that  which  the  eye  can- 
not discover,  to  man,  the  head  and  king  of  all. 

How  wonderful  and  adorable  is  that  Almighty 
Being,  who  thus  made  all  things  dependant  upon 
each  other,  and  based  the  visible  world,  in  the 
three  great  departments  into  which  we  see  it 
divided,  upon  an  invisible  basis,  and  in  which 
cohesion  and  life  are  maintained  by  those  powers 
which  God  has  placed  as  rulers  in  the  physical 
world,  and  by  which  he  still  acts  upon  the  uni- 
verse of  existences. 


164 


Chapter  V. 
Functions  and  Instincts.     Polypes. 

The  tribe  of  animals  to  which  we  arenextiD 
direct  our  attention,  though   not  invisible  Kk€ 
the  last,  are  almost  equally  concealed  from  our 
view  by  the  medium  that  they  inhabit ;  so  that, 
with  the  exception  of  those  that  abound  in  ffeA 
water,  and  are  easily  kept  alive  for  examin^Jon, 
the  great  body  of  them  inhabiting  the  ocean, 
can  seldom  be  studied  in  a  living  state.    All  the 
polypes  are  aggregate  animals,  in  which  they 
differ  from  the  majority  of  the  preceding  clasft. 
The  most  imperfect  of  them,  as  the  sponges  and 
some  of  the  alcyons,  seem  to  consist  merely  rf 
a  gelatinous  mass,  without  any  organs  of  pre- 
hension, which  by  its  alternate  contraction  and 
dilatation,  imbibes  or  sends  out  the  water  ffoto 
which  the  animal  derives  its  nutriment;  but  the 
great   majority    have   a  mouth   furnished  with 
arms .  or  tentacles  varying  in  number.     TEese 
are  described  as  tubes,  filled  with  fluid,  expand^ 
ing  at  the  base  into  a  small  cavity,  which  whe« 
contracted  necessarily  propels  the  fluid  into  the 
tentacles,   and  thus  extends  them ;   but  when 


POLYPES.  165 

the  tube  contracts,  the  fluid  flows  back  into 
the  cavity,  and  the  points  of  the  tentacles  con- 
verge over  the  mouth. 

These  parts  are  not  only  organs  of  sense,  but 
also  serve  many  other   purposes,    particularly 
those  of  prehension  and  motion ;  and  they  very 
probably  assist  in  respiration;   which   appears 
evidently  connected  with  the  alternate  contrac- 
tion and  expansion  of  these  animals.     They  are 
abo  so  constructed  as  to  lay  hold  of  every  sub- 
stance that  floats  within  their  reach,  whether  by 
means  of  any  gummy  excretion  like  bird-lime, 
a«  some  suppose,  or  whether  they  are  furnished 
with  very  minute  suckers  by  which  they  can 
adhere  to  any  substance,  has  not  been  ascer- 
tained.    Trembley    observed,    that    when    the 
common  polype  of  fresh  water  touched  any  little 
anilnal  with  one  of  its  long  tentacular  arms,  it 
was  immediately  arrested,   and  in  spite  of  the 
most  violent  efibrts  to  liberate  itself,  which  he 
compares  to  those  of    a    fish   that  had  been 
booked,  was  held  fast,  and  carried  to  the  mouth 
^the  polype  and  swallowed. 

The  body  of  polypes  is  formed  of  a  kind  of  in- 
spissated mucus,  with  confusedly  agglomerated, 
and  probably  nervous,  molecules  equally  distri- 
buted ;  it  is  covered  by  no  skin,  is  extremely  con- 
tractile, and  forms  an  alimentary  sac  open  at 
one  end,  serving  both  for  mouth  and  anal  pas- 
sage.   The  equal  distribution  of  nervous  mole- 


166  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

cules  through  the  whole  substance  of  these 
animals,  will  account  for  their  extreme  tenacity 
of  life.  In  fact,  this  uniform  gelatinous  mass, 
which  is  without  any  organized  structure,  may 
be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  primary  substance, 
which  possesses  characters,  in  some  respects, 
common  to  both  animal  and  vegetable  matter. 

This  substance  vnthout  any  nervous  centre 
— though  nervous  influence,  one  would  think 
must  be  in  most  force  round  the  orifice  where 
the  tentacles  are  in  action, — yet  foil  of  cere- 
bral matter,  sensible  to  the  light  without  any 
organ  of  sight ;  extremely  irritable ;  alternately 
contracting  and  expanding,  and  thus  moving 
without  any  apparatus  of  muscles ;  with  no  trace 
of  organization  but  the  tubular  rays  that  sur- 
round its  mouth,  which  appear  to  perform  the 
oflBice  of  eyes,  hands,  feet,  and  lungs;  this 
singular  substance  lends  a  clue  to  form  the 
class  into  Orders  according  to  the  circumstances 
in  which  it  is  placed* 

1 .  In  the  common  Polypes^  of  our  ditches  and 
stagnant  waters,  it  is  a  naked  branching  elemen- 
tary sac  or  canal,  without  any  internal  support, 
and  endued  with  powers  of  locomotion. 

2.  In  the  Madrepores  and  others,^  its  Maker  for 
mighty  purposes  has  enabled  the  animal  to  form 
for  itself  a  fixed  calcareous  house  or  polypary 

^  Hydra  viridis,  fusca,  &c.  ^  Lamellifera,  Lam. 


POLYPES.  167 

as  it  is  called,  consisting  often  of  innumerable 
cells,  each  containing  a  separate  individual  with 
its  mouth  and  tentacles,  united  to  the  general 
body  at  its  other  extremity,  and  each  with  an 
external  aperture,  by  which  they  are  protruded, 
and  expand  like  a  flower. 

3.  In  the  Coral  and  affinities,^  it  forms  an 
internal  calcareous  axis,  which  it  envelopes  as 
the  bark  does  the  tree :  it  is  fixed  by  its  base 
like  the  preceding  tribe ;  and  from  this  crust, 
or  bark,  the  tentaculiferous  mouths  of  the 
polypes  emerge.  In  some  the  axis  appears 
articulated. 

N.B.  In  these  two  last  the  base  by  which  the 
compound  animal  is  fixed  to  rocks,  or  other 
substances,  expands  like  the  base  or  root  of  a 
tree ;  and  by  their  ramifications  these  polypes, 
whether  the  polypary  is  external  or  internal, 
resemble  its  branching  stem. 

4.  The  Sponges^  and  Alcyons^  have  been 
generally  arranged  with  the  last  Order,  but,  from 
M.  Savigny's  observations,  it  appears  that  cer- 
tain of  these  animals  have  neither  stomach, 
mouth,  nor  tentacles,  the  animal  life  of  which  he 
thinks  might  be  disputed;  but  Mr.  Bell  has 
discovered  that  they  alternately  imbibe  and 
expel  that  fluid,  which  seems  to  prove  their 
animal  nature.     Perhaps  they  ought  to  be  con- 

^  Corticifera,  Lam.  2  Spongia,  ^  Alcyonitim. 


168  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

sidered  aB  nearer  to  vegetable  matter  ihua  tibe 
other  polypes. 

5.  Other  Alcyans^  seem  to  have  a  more  comn 
plex  organization  than  any  of  the  preceding 
polypes ;  they  are  stated  to  have  eight  parallel 
stomachs.  Only  four  genera  belonging  to  thU 
Order  have  been  described,  and  its  proper,  station 
seems  doubtful. 

6.  In  the  Sea-Pen^  and  others,'  the  animal 
envelopes  an  axis,  as  in  the  third  Order,  and 
has  a  tentacular  mouth,  but  it  is  not  fixed  by  itB 
base.  The  greater  part  of  these  animals  float  in 
the  waters,  but  others  remain  at  the  bottom, 
either  upon  the  surface  or  partly  plunged  in  the 
sand. 

Polypes  are  invariably  aquatic  animals,  some 
inhabiting  fresh  water,  but  the  great  body  are 
marine,  and  most  numerous  in  tropical  seas.  In 
very  high  latitudes,  only  cellarians,^  sertularians,* 
alcyons,  and  some  sponges  occur,  and  in  the 
vicinity  of  volcanic  islands  in  the  Polar  seas, 
corallines  and  gorgonians.  These,  multiply  a 
little  from  &"  to  9°  N.  L. :  then,  as  they  ap- 
proach the  tropics,  the  coral  reddens,  and  tbe 
madrepores  whiten,  and  at  33""  they  attain  their 
full  powers  of  growth  and  multiplication.  Some 
frequent  the  mouths  of  rivers,  where  there  is  a 
conflux  of  fresh  and  salt  water.     Some  lore* 

1  Polypi  tubiferi,  Lam.  «  Polypi  natantes,  Lam. 

*  Cellaria.  *  Sertularia. 


POLYPES.  169 

ajtmoispheric  influence,  while  others  avoid  it.  The 
marine  ones  frequently  plant  themselves  on 
rocks,  in  different  aspects,  often  regulated  by  the 
climate.  They  rarely  expose  themselves  to  vio-: 
lent  currents,  or'  the  direct  shock  of  the  waves. 
They  are  often  found  in  the  hollows  of  rocks 
or  submarine  grottoes,  and  in  gulfs  where  the 
water  is  less  agitated. 

It  was  observed  above  that  the  Infusories  pre- 
sent some  analogy  to  the  seeds  of  vegetables ; 
the  polypes  go  further,  and  represent,  often  most 
exactly,  the  developed  plant  from  the  tree,  by 
almost  all  the  intermediate  stages,  to  the  fungus,^ 
at  least  the  fixed  polypes :  these  appear,  as  it 
were,  to  take  root,  to  send  forth  branches  which 
produce  seeming  blossoms,  composed  of  what, 
appear  to  be  petals  arising  from  a  calyx, 
aminged  sometimes  in  a  single  and  at  others 
in  a  double  circle,  and  in  some  including  the. 
semblance  of  stamina;  they  are  also  very 
sensible  to  the  light,  and  turn  to  its  source,  and: 
like  plants  are  readily  propagated  by  cuttings 
and  buds;  so  that  all  the  older  naturalists  re- 
garded them  as  real  plants,  without  apparently 
suspecting  their  animal  nature.  Ancient  natu-^ 
ralists  were  very  apt  to  mistake  analogical 
resemblances  for  proofs  of  affinity,  but  in  the 
progress  of  science,  when  natural  objects  were 

1  Plate  II. 


170  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

submitted  to  a  stricter  examination,  more  correct 
ideas  were  substituted  for  these  mbtaken  ones, 
and  the  zoophytes,  or  polypes,  were  generally 
admitted  to  be  real  animals,  though  some,  after 
Linn6,  still  regard  them  as  something  b^ween 
animal  and  vegetable.    Trembley  was  one  of 
the  first  who  ascertained  their  animal  nature: 
he  saw  the  fresh*water  polypes/  by  means  of 
their  long  tentacles,  seize  and  swallow  certain 
grubs,  and   also  many  minute  Enta^nostracansj 
common  in  stagnant  water.    These  polypes  so 
used  their  tentacles  as  evidently  to  indicate  a 
degree  of  volition,  sometimes  using  one  and  scnue^ 
times  many,  as  circumstances  required.     When 
they  had  secured  their  prey,  they  contracted  and 
gave  a  curve  to  these  oi^ns,  so  as  to  bring  it  near 
the  orifice,  or  mouth,  at  their  anterior  extremityf 
which  then  began  to  open,  and  the  animal  they 
had  caught  was  gradually  absorbed*     He  has 
seen  them  attack  small  fishes,  also  worms,  larvae 
and  pupae  of  gnats,  parts  of  slugs,  entrails,  and 
even  pieces  of  meat 

The  marine  polypes  are  equally  ravenous  witb 
the  river  ones,  feeding  upon  whatever  they  can 
lay  hold  of,  sometimes,  like  the  wheel-animals^ 
or  rotatories,  producing  a  vortex  in  the  water, 
and  thus  causing  a  flow  to  their  mouth  of  the 
infusory,  and  other  animalcules  contained  in  that 

^  Monoculu 


POLYPES.  171 

elements  It  is  to  be  observed  that  these  inhabit 
a  common  house,  from  which  they  cannot  sepa- 
rate  themselves ;  their  sole  character  is  that  of 
being  attached  to  an  animated  mass,  so  that  each 
individual  partakes  of  the  life  common  to  the 
whole,  and  also  of  a  separate  life,  independent 
of  that  of  the  others.  Yet  the  nutriment  that 
one  of  these  individuals  takes,  extends  its  influ- 
ence to  parts  the  most  distant  from  the  place  it 
occupies. 

Having  made  these  general  remarks,  I  shall 
next  give  a  history  of  some  of  the  best  known 
and  most  interesting  species. 

1.  The  common  polypes  of  stagnant  waters, 
belonging  to  |the  first  Order,  have  met  with  an 
admirable  historian  in  M.  Trembley,  and  what 
I  have  to  communicate  with  respect  to  them  will 
be  chiefly  derived  from  him.  With  regard  to 
their  reproduction,  it  is  by  germs  and  cuttings. 
The  former  issue  gradually  from  the  body  of  the 
parent  polype,  as  the  trunk  of  a  tree  sends  forth 
a  branch.  The  bud  that  forms  the  commence- 
ment of  a  young  one,  is  a  continuation  of  her 
skin,  and  its  stomach  of  her  stomach.  When 
she  takes  her  food,  the  bodies  of  her  young  are 
seen  also  to  inflate  themselves  as  if  they  had 
taken  it  with  their  own  mouths,  and  the  food  may 
be  seen  passing  from  one  to  the  other.  After 
they  have  grown  thus  as  branches  for  some  time, 
and  even  have  pushed  forth  germes  themselves, 


173  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

they  detach  themselves  from  the  parent  stem; 
and  become  separate  animals.. 

It  is  stated  that,  by  this  mode  of  generatioD, 
in  the  space  of  a  month  a  single  polype  may  be 
the  parent  of  a  million  df  descendants.  Trembley 
observed  soine  long  branches  of  trees  that  had 
&illen  into  the  water,  which-  he  describes  ad 
being  as  full  of  polypes  as  a  peruke  of  hairs; 
and  that  though  their  innumerable  arms  were  at 
work,  there  was  no  confusion  amongst  them. 

But  these  animals,  as  is  well  known,  do  not 
multiply  solely  by  germes,  but.  also  by  cuttings, 
as  they  may  be  called ;  their  substance  is  so 
instinct  with  life,  that  nothing  appears  able  to 
destroy  it — a  circumstance,  perhaps,  arising  irom 
the  nervous  molecules  of  which  it  seems  almost 
to  consist.    If  divided  transversely,  each  segment 
will  become  a  distinct  animal,  send  forth  ten-^ 
tacles  round .  its  upper  aperture,   and  close  th^ 
lower  one;  if.it  is  divided  longitudinally,  each 
half  will  form  a  separate  tube  in  an  hour,  and 
begin  to  ply  its  tentacles  in  a  day;    even  ii 
divided  into  longitudinal  strips,  instead  of  the 
sides  turning  in,  as  in  the  former  case,  each  strip 
becomes  inflated,  and  a  tube  is  formed  within  it: 
and  what  is  still  more  wonderful,  and  seems  next 
to  a  miracle,  these  animals  may  be  turned  inside 
out,  like  the  finger  of  a  glove,  without  destroying 
either  their  vitality,  their  power  of  producing 
germes,  and  of  catching,  swallowing,  or  digesting 


POLYPES.  173 

thdr  food :  so  that  they  have,  properly  speaking, 
neither  a  within  nor  without  j  both  surfaces  of  their 
alimentary  canal  being  equally  fitted  for  digestion. 
This,  however,  is  not  so  entirely  anomalous  as  it 
may  at  first  sight  appear ;  for  cuttings  of  some 
^e^tablesy  if  planted  inversely,  will  take  root,  the 
top  bearing  the  root,  and  the  bottom  the  branches 
and  inflorescence. 

The  fresh-water  polype  usually  remains  fixed 
by  its  closed  extremity  to  one  spot,  from  which 
it  seldom  moves,  exhibiting  no  other  trace  oi  an 
animated  being  than  the  motions  of  its  arms; 
bat  when  the  want  of  light  or  heat  causes  it  to 
i^ift  its  quarters,  it  moves  slowly  by  fixing 
alternately,  like  a  leech^  its  head  and  tail  to  what 
it  is  moving  upon. 

.  The  majority  of  the  marine  polypes  are  at- 
tached, in  some  way,  to  a  calcareous  support 
formed  by  themselves,  which  is  called  by  Amou^ 
reux,  Lamarck,  and  other  continental  writers, 
their  Polypary;^  and  they  are  none  of  them 
locomotive  except  the  last  order. 

4.  The  polypes  of  the  second  Order,  the 
sheathed  polypes  of  Lamarck^^  as  the  most  im-r 
pcn^tant  and  interesting  of  this  class  of  the  animal 
kingdom,  I  wish  to  leave  last  upon  the  reader's 
memory.  I  shall,  therefore,  next  make  a  few 
brief  observations  upon  those  sponges  and  alcyons 

,  *  Fr.  Polypier.  '  Polypi  vaginati. 


174  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

that  have  no  tentacles,  and  form  the  fourth  Order. 
These  are  included  by  Lamarck  amongst  those 
just  mentioned,  but  they  appear  not  properly  to 
bdong  to  them,  and  to  have  a  still  more  simple 
oi^anization.  In  this  tribe,  as  was  before  observed, 
nutrition  seems  carried  on  by  a  kind  of  systole 
and  diastole,  the  sea  water  being  alternately 
absorbed  and  rejected  by  the  tubes  composing 
the  substance  of  the  sponge,  they  having  no 
organs  to  collect  their  food  in  any  other  way. 

Many  of  these  productions  are  remarkable  for 
being  hoUowed  internally,  and  in  their  external 
shape  resembling  cups,  bowls,  and  vases :  several 
gigantic  specimens  of  this  kind  were  collected  in 
India  by  the  late  lamented  Sir  Stamford  Raffles, 
to  whose  indefatigable  exertions,  judicious  ar- 
rangements, and  uncommon  ardour  in  her  cause, 
science  is  so  deeply  indebted,  and  presented  by 
him,  with  the  rest  of  his  valuable  collections,  to 
the  Museum  of  the  Zoological  Society,  where 
they  are  now  to  be  seen.  Their  general  structure 
also,  as  well  as  form,  fits  them  for  receiving  a 
large  quantity  of  water,  as  well  as  for  parting 
with  it,  in  proportion  to  the  pressure,  when 
received :  in  the  living  animal,  this  pressure  is 
produced  by  its  expansion. 

What  particular  function,  or  office,  has  been 
devolved  by  the  All-wise  Creator  upon  these 
zoophytes,  which  are  produced  so  rapidly,  and  in 
such  numbers,  on  the  bed  of  the  ocean  and  its 


POLYPEfiL  175 

rocks,  has  not  been  ascertained.  As  in  the  case 
of  a  vast  variety  of  other  marine  animals,  tliey 
probably  derive  their  nutriment  firom  the  contents 
of  the  water  absorbed  by  their  tubes ;  they  may 
contribute  their  part  to  the  depuration  of  the 
oceanic  waters,  and  to  the  maintenance  of  the 
equilibrium  amongst  their  inhabitants,  however 
minute,  which  is  necessary  to  the  general  welfare. 
Doubtless,  in  their  creation,  He,  who  inhabiteth 
Eternity,  to  whose  view  all  time  as  well  as  all 
space  is  present,  had  in  view  the  benefit  of  his 
creature  man,  to  whom  they  form  a  very  useful 
present,  and  which  he  has  long  applied  to  his  pur- 
poses. Sponges  were  in  use  as  early  as  Aristotle's 
time,  when  the  people  that  employed  themselves 
in  collecting  them  observed,  that  when  they 
attempted  to  pluck  them  up  they  appeared  to 
?esist,  whence  they  concluded  they  had  some 
sensation  .^  They  now  form  a  very  considerable 
article  of  commerce.  The  fishery  for  them  is 
chiefly  carried  on  in  the  Mediterranean,  particu-* 
larly  in  the  Grecian  Archipelago.  The  collection 
oi  them  is  attended  with  danger,  as  they  are 
fixed  to  the  rocks  at  the  depth  of  several 
fathoms,  so  that  the  sponge-fishers  must  be  excel- 
lent divers.  Toumefort  says,  that  no  youth  in 
these  islands  is  allowed  to  marry,  till  he  has 
given   proofs  of  his  capacity  in  this  respect. 

'  Aristot.  Hist.  Anim.  B.  i.  c.  1,  comp.  B.  v.  c.  16. 


176  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Amongst  plants,  as  Mr.  W.  S.  Mac  Leay  bas»  I 
think,  remarked,  sponges  present  i^ome  analogy 
to  the  puff-balls.^ 

5.  A  fifth  Order  of  polypes,  worthy  of  atten- 
tion, is  that  to  which  the  red  coral  belongs,  in 
these  the  animal  instead  of  being  covered,  or  in 
any  way  sheltered  by  its  polypary,  invests  it 
completely,  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of  bark  over 
every  part  of  it ;  on  this  account  the  name  has 
been  changed  by  writers  on  these  animals,  and  it 
is  denominated  their  axis^  since  upon  it  they  are^ 
as  it  were,  "suspended,  and  run  their  prescribed 
race.    This  axis  consists  of  a  much  more  rigid, 
solid  and  lapidose  substance,  than  the  polypary 
of  the  really  sheathed  polypes,  presenting  when 
polished   the   smooth   substance  and   lustre  of 
marble,  without  any  appearance  of  pores  or  other 
orifices — when  broken  it  exhibits  the  same  kind 
of  fracture  as  a  stick  of  red  sealing-wax ;  this 
description  refers  particularly  to  the  red  coral,* 
for  in  some  other  genera  belonging  to  the  Order 
the  axis  is  jointed.'  and  in  others,  very  flexible/ 
The  sheathed  corallines  appear  in  some  sort,  to 
be  analogues  of  those  animals  whose  bodies  are 
covered  and  defended  by  an  external  crust  or 
shell,  like  the  Testaceous  MoUuscans,  the  Crusta- 
ceans and  the  Insects ;  while  the  tribe  in  question^ 


*  Lycoperdon,  '  Corallium, 

^  IsiSy  &c,  *  Antipatkes,  Gorg<mia, 


POLYPES.  177 

espedally  those  having  a  jointed  axis,  present 
some  analogy  to  the  vertebrated  animals,  in 
which  the  muscles  cover  the  bones.     It  should 
seem,  from  the  solid  and  compact  substance 
generated  by  them^  that  these  Polypes  absorb 
from  the  sea^ water  a  greater  quantity  of  the 
matter  which  is  converted  into  carbonate  of  lime 
dian  the  rest  of  the  class,  so  as  to  enable  them 
to  condense  it  into  the  smallest  compass,  and 
therefore  Providence  has  gifted. them  with  the 
faculty  of  making  up  in  virtue^  so  to  speak,  what 
&ey  may  want  in  volume,     A  singie-stemmed 
spedes,  however,  belonging  to  the  flexible  ge- 
vm  Antipathe^^  found  by  Professor  Eschscholtz, 
(Hi^  the  north-west  coast  of  America,  was  ten  feet 
long.    The  fioot,  or  base  by  which  the  common 
poral  i3  attached  to  the  rocks,  as  indeed  is  the 
case  with  the  whole  section  to  which  it  belongs, 
is  remarkably  expanded ;  it  rises  at  first  with  a 
single  stem  of  varying  magnitude,  which  soon 
divides  into  a  small  number  of  branches,  in  their 
turn  dividing  and  subdividing  irregularly  into  a 
great  number  of  others,  so  as  to  resemble  a  leaf- 
less shrub,  rising  to  the  height  of  about  eighteen 
inches.     After  pearls,  this  is  the  most  precious 
production  of  the  ocean,  and  has  always  been  a 
valuable  article  of  commerce.     As  well  as  the 
common  sponge,  it  is  principally  the  produce  of 
the  Mediterranean,  and  is  formed  with  such  rapi- 
dity, that  a  place  which  has  been  quite  exhausted 

vot.  I.  N 


178  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

by  the  coral  fi^ermen,  in  the  course  of  a  very 
few  years,  is  again  replenished  with  it.  It  is 
probably  enabled,  by  its  broad  well  fixed  base 
and  rigid  axis^  to  withstand  the  violent  acUoa  ^ 
the  8tr<xig  currents  of  the  sea  juat  mentioned* 

6.  The  Floating  Polypes^which  toTiaJjaim^f^^^ 
last  order,  chiefly  difier  from  the  coral  in  beiag 
locotnotive,  and  sometimes  swimming  freely  about 
in  the  sea,  though  some  usually  remain  stationary, 
trat  never  fixed.  Their  oviform  germes,  Hke  those 
of  many  other  marine  polypes,  are  ejected  by  ^e 
mouth.  The  most  noted  species,  from  its  sia*' 
gular  resemblance  to  a  quill  with  its  plumes,  is 
called  the  sea-pen.^  It  is  a  pho^horic  anims4, 
and  emits  a  light  sa  brilliant  that  by  it  the 
fishermen  c^n  see  the  fishes  swimming  near  it, 
so  as  to  be  able  to  cast  their  nets. 

The  vast  number  of  marine  animals  that  are 
endued  with  the  remarkable  faculty  of  emitting 
light,  indicate  that  it  answers  some  important 
purpose  in  their  economy.  A  fact  observed  by 
the  celebrated  Navigator  Peron,  renders  it  pro- 
bable that  its  object  is  defence;  he  remarked  that 
when  the  Atlantic  Pyrosome^  was  irritated,  as 
well  aa  when  it  was  contracted,  its  pbosphores^ 
cence  was  augmented.  A  variety  of  hypothestes 
with  respect  to  the  phosphorescence  of  the  ooeaa 
have  been  started ;  at  first  it  was  attributed  to 

1  Ptnnatula  argentea.  ^  Pytosoma  atlaniieum* 


POLYPEg.  170 

tbe  revolutions  of  the  earth,  to  electricity i  8tc.; 
dien  to  (mtrescent  tnarine  animals,  which  cer- 
ttinly  do  emit  light;  but  it  is  now  generally 
known  tb  be  the  property  of  a  variety  of  the 
more  frail  inhabitants  of  the  deep,  and  the  above 
remark  renders  it  ei&tremely  probable  that  it  was 
^[fen  thfem  by  their  Creator,  to  defend  them  from 
Ae  attack  of  their  enemies,  i¥hom  a  sudden 
alimentation  of  the  intensity  of  their  light  may 
fr^ten  from  their  purpose. 

2.  But  the  most  celebrated  polypes,  and  those 
which  produce  the  most  wonderful  effects  in 
some  parts  of  the  globe  that  we  inhabit,  belong 
to  the  section  in  which  the  polypary  is  lamdli- 
fefous,  Of  having  the  star-^shaped  oscula,  or 
month,  from  which  the  polype  exerts  its  tenta- 
cles, lamellated  or  divided  into  various  channels, 
separated  from  each  other  by  elevated  processes, 
xesemblii^  the  gills  of  a  mushroom :  these,  with 
serehtl  others  related  to  them,  Linn4  regarded 
as  belonging  to  one  genus  which  he  denominated 
Madrepora,  but  which  Lamarck  has  divided  into 
eighteen!  It  is  amongst  the  species  of  this 
genus,  even  as  circumscribed  by  the  author  just 
motioned,  that  we  are  to  look  for  the  polype, 
which  is  instructed  by  its  Creator,  not  only  to 
erect  rocky  reefs  of  vast  extent  and  wonderful 
solidity— which  often  arrest  and  perplex  the 
course  of  the  navigator,  and  greatly  increase  the 
perils  of  navigation — and  submarine  mountains 


180  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

that  keep  gradually  diminishing  the  mass  of 
waters,  but  also  islands,  which  emerging  from 
the  ocean,  in  process  of  time  are  covered  with 
vegetation,  and  fitted  to  receive  and  maintain  an 
animal  population  with  man  at  their  head.  The 
species  principally  engaged  in  this  great  work  is 
the  coral,  called  by  Linn6  the  muricated  Mddre- 
porCy^  and  generally  known  by  the  name  of  white 
coral ;  but  Lamarck  seems  not  to  have  been  satis- 
fied as  to  this  species,  since  it  is  excluded  from 
his  list  of  madrepores,  though  he  refers  to  four, 
if  not  five,  varieties  of  it  as  distinct  species.  Its 
polype,  though  so  celebrated  for  its  wonderful 
works,  seems  to  be  unknown.  Rumphius  how- 
ever has  described  that  oiihe  fungus  Madrepore, 
and  recently  an  Italian,  Vincent  Rosa,  whose 
description  I  shall  copy,  another  species. 

"  From  every  cell,"  says  he,  "  issues  a  cylindri- 
cal animal,  resembling  an  intestine,  transversely 
wrinkled,  about  half  an  inch  long  and  two  lines 
in  diameter,  and  of  which  the  upper  extremity  or 
mouth  is  surrounded  by  about  twenty-two  very 
short  tentacles.  These  animals,  which  are  pen- 
dent,  because  this  madrepore  is  always  fixed 
under  the  projections  of  the  rocks,  and  vibrates 
at  the  will  of  the  waves,  are  always  of  a  lively 
orange  colour,  they  contract  as  soon  as  they  are 
touched,  and  they  die  upon  being  taken  out  of 

^  Madrepora  muricata.     Plate  II.  Fig.  I. 


POLYPES.  181 

tke  water."  Whoever  examines  a  fragment  of 
the  polypary  of  any  of  the  varieties  of  white 
coral,  will  find  it  to  consist  of  innumerable  ra- 
diating tubes,  variously  intercepted,  all  of  which 
a|)pear  to  issue  from  a  common  base ;  these  are 
the  receptacles  of  the  general  body  of  the  polype, 
while  the  connected  individuals  with  their  blos- 
soms inhabit  an  infinity  of  cells  opening  exter- 
nally, from  which  the  tentacles  issue  to  collect 
their  food. 

The  seemingly  insignificant  creatures  here 
described,  and  which  seem  as  little  animalized 
as  any  animal  can  be  to  retain  a  right  to  the 
name,  all  whose  means  of  action  are  confined 
to  their  tentacles,  and  whose  sole  employment 
appears  to  be  the  collection  and  absorption  of 
the  beings  that  form  their  food,  are  employed 
by  their  Creator,  to  construct  and  rear  mighty 
fabrics  in  the  bosom  of  the  deep.  He  has  so  or- 
ganized them,  that  from  their  food  and  the  waters 
of  the  ocean,  which  by  a  constant  expansion 
and  contraction  they  absorb  and  expel,  they  are 
enabled  to  separate,  or  elaborate,  calcareous  par- 
ticles with  which  they  build  up,  and  are  con- 
tinually enlarging,  their  structures ;  forming  them 
into  innumerable  cells,  each  inhabited  by  an  in- 
dividual animal,  which  however  is  not  insulated 
and  separated  from  the  parent  body,  but  forms  a 
part  of  a  many  headed  and  many  mouthed  mon- 
ster, which,  at  every  oral  orifice,  is  collecting  the 


1 82  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

means  of  BtiU  increafting  its  coral  palace,  and 
thus  it  goes  on  till  it  has  fwmed  a  kabitatioD, 
not  £(Mr  itself,  but,  as  I  said,  for  man,  iu  the 
midst  of  the  w<Mrld  of  waters. 

One  of  their  most  celebrated  historians,  Amim^ 
reux,  thus  expresses  himself  upon  this  part  of  tfas^ir 
history.  ^'  Some,  by  their  union  or  aggregalabii) 
form  a  Icmg  narrow  ridge  or  reef,  which  exteads 
unintemiptedly  several  degrees,  opposing  an  im- 
movable rampart  to  the  great  currents  of  the  s^ 
which  it  often  traverses,  the  solidity  and  magoi*- 
tude  of  which  increases  daily.  Sometimes  this  lioe 
of  tnadieporic  rocks  assumes  a  circular  form ;  the 
polypes  that  inhabit  it  gradually  elevate  their 
rocky  dwelling  to  the  surface  of  the  sea,  working 
then  in  a  sheltered  basin,  they  by  little  and  little 
fill  up  its  voids,  taking  the  precaution,  howevcir, 
to  leave  in  the  upper  part  of  this  impenetrable 
wall  openings  by  which  the  water  can  enter  anil 
f^re,  so  aa  to  renew  itself,  and  furnish  dMa 
with  a  constant  supply  of  their  alim^it,  and  ^ 
the  material  with  which  they  erect  their  haM- 
tation." 

They  do  not  always  Novate  their  pdypwes 
from  the  depths  of  the  waters  to  their  sur&ce, 
49ome  extend  themselves  horizontally  upon  the 
bottom  of  the  sea,  following  its  curvatures,  decli- 
vitiea,  and  anfractuosities,  and  cover  the  soil  of 
old  ocean  with  an  enamelled  carpet  of  various  and 
l»illiant  colours,  sometimes  of  a  single  colour  as 


POLYPES.  183 

dtzasUng  as  tbe  purple  of  the  ancients.  Many  of 
theae  beings  are  like  a  tree  which  winter  has 
stripped  of  its  leaves,  but  which  the  spring 
adorns  with  new  flowerSt  and  they  strike  the 
beholder  by  the  eclat  of  petal*like  animals,  with 
wbich  their  branches  are  covered  from  the  base 
to  the  extremity. 

Captain  Beeehey  has  given  a  most  interesting 
QQeount  qf  lybe  proceeding  and  progress  of  these 
animals  in  erecting  these  mighty  works,  and  of 
the  manner  in  which  the  sea  forms  ridges,  when 
the  animals  have  carried  their  work  as  high  as 
they  can  :  up<m  these  at  length  a  soil  is  formed 
beyond  the  reach  of  its  waves;  a  vegetation  next 
commences,  in  time  plants  and  trees  spring  up, 
awnals  arrive,  and  man  himself  finds  it  a  con- 
venient residence.  Qis  account  is  too  long  to 
copy,  I  must  therefore  refer  the  reader  to  it,  but 
I  must  give  here  his  statement  of  some  proceed* 
ing9  of  these  animals,  which  have  a  bearing  upon 
the  principal  design  of  the  present  work,  and 
se^n  to  indicate  an  instinctive  sagacity  in  the 
polypes  far  above  their  rank  in  the  animal  king- 
dom, and  quite  inconsistent  .with  their  organiza- 
tion. 

^peaking  of  Ducies  Island,  a  formation  of  the 
coral  jsmimals,  he  describes  it  as  taking  the  shape 
of  a  truncated  cone  with  the  face  downwards,  the 
form  best  calculated  to  resist  the  action  of  the 
ocean,  and  then  proceeds  to  say,  ''The  north- 


1 84  FUNCTIONS  AND  IN8TINCTS. 

eastern  and  south-western  extremities  are  {or- 
nished  with  points  which  project  under  water  with 
less  inclination  than  the  sides  of  the  island,  and 
break  the  sea  before  it  can  reach  the  barrier  to 
the  little  lagoon  formed  within  it.  It  is  singdar 
that  these  buttresses  are  opposed  to  the  only  two 
quarters  whence  their  structure  has  to  appr^end 
danger,  that  on  the  north-east,  from  the  constant 
action  of  the  tirade  wind,  and  that  on  the  odier 
extremity,  from  the  long  rolling  swell  from  the 
south-west  so  prevalent  in  these  latitudes ;  and 
it  is  worthy  of  observation,  that  this  barrier, 
which  has  the  most  powerful  enemy  to  appose, 
is  carried  out  much  farther  and  with  less  abrupt^ 
ness  than  the  other/'  We  should  feel  some  sar- 
prise  if  a  bee,  in  the  construction  of  its  comb, 
should  strengthen  the  points  most  exposed  to  in- 
jury ;  but  that  an  animal  apparently  gifted  with 
the  lowest  degree  of  sensation,  and  no  intellect^ 
should  know  where  to  erect  buttresses  so  as  beet 
to  provide  for  the  security  of  its  structure  indi- 
cates in  a  striking  degree  the  superintendence  of 
Providence  directing  it&  blind  efforts  and  un- 
conscious operations. 

After  considering  all  the  wonderful  fkcts  here 
stated  with  regard  to  the  proceeding  and  progress 
of  these  seemingly  insignificant  animals^  a  specu- 
lative imagination  may  not  only  picture  to  itself, 
with  respect  to  any  group  of  coral  islands,  its 


POLYPES.  185 

coffveiBion  into  one  vast  plain »  yielding  forests 
of  bread-fruit  and  other  trees,  and  ultimately 
sustenance  to  a  numerous  population,  and  a 
ir&riety  of  animals  subservient  to  their  use,  but 
taking  a  wider  range  and  still  further  enlarging 
ite  view,  might  behold  the  tropical  portion  of 
the  vast  Pacific,  not  only  studded  with  these 
islands,  but  exhibiting  them  in  such  frequent 
etosters  and  so  large,  as  almost  to  form  a  kind  of 
bridge  of  communication  between  Asia  and  Ame- 
rica. Indeed,  at  present,  we  know  not  how  far 
these  founders  of  islands  may  have  been  concerned 
in  rearing  a  considerable  portion  of  those  conti- 
nents that  form  the  old  world.  Calcareous  strata 
and  ridges  occur  every  where,  and  though  other 
causes  may  have  contributed  to  their  formation,^ 
yet  it  is  not  improbable,  that  at  the  time  when 
oar  northern  climates  were  inhabited  by  tropical 
animals,  our  seas .  also  might  abound  in  madre- 
pores, &c.  which  might  bear  their  part  in  the 
erection  of  some  of  our  islands. 

Professor  Buckland,  in  the  appendix  to  Cap- 
tain Beechey's  Voyage,  states  that  even  within 
the  arctic  circle  there  are.  spots  that  can  be  shewn 
to  have  been  once  the  site  of  extensive  coral 
reefe.  The  old  coral  reefs'that  existed  previously 
to  the  deluge,  by  that  great  catastrophe,  in  many 
cases,  might  be  formed  into  chalk  ridges.    This 

1  See  Lyell's  Geol.  1.  130.  210. 


186  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

indeed  seems  proved  by  the  remains  of  marine 
animals,  especially  sea-nichins,  which  froisi  this 
circumstance  the  common  people  know  by  the 
name  of  chalk-eggs^  and  which,  we  learn  from 
Captain  Beechey,  abound  on  the  snbmei^ged 
ledges  of  some  coral  Islands;  and  at  the  same 
poiod,  it  is  surely  no  improbable  suppositicB, 
under  the  directing  hand  of  Him  who  willed 
to  destroy  the  earth  by  the  waters  of  a  flood; 
and  at  the  same  time  d^ermined,  aacording 
to  the  good  pleasure  of  bis  will,  the  precise 
mode  of  its  renoTatkHi,  that  in  the  course  <rf 
the  rise,  prevalence,  or  subsidence  of  the  mighty 
waters,  which,  for  the  principal  part  of  a  year, 
acted  with  irresistible  force  upon  the  earth, 
considerable  additions  might  be  made  from  the 
debris  of  the  earth's  disrupted  crust,  to  the  reeft 
of  coral  that  were  left  unsubveited,  ami  so  ma&y 
idands  be  formed  or  enlarged. 

When  the  Creator  formed  the  coral  anwiate, 
what  foresight,  as  well  as  power  and  wisdom  did 
he  manifest !  That  a  minute  p<Hich  of  animated 
matter,  with  no  other  organs  than  a  few  tentacles 
surrounding  its  mouth,  should  be  iGitted  to  se- 
crete calcareous  particles  from  food  cdlected  by 
it,  to  transpire  or  regui^tate  them  so  as  to  con* 
struct  for  itself  a  limestone  house,  that  it  should  be 
empowered  perpetually  to  send  forth  germes  that 
could  also  act  the  same  part ;  and  thus  in  prooess 
of  time,  by  their  combined  efforts,  build  up  in  the 


POLYPES.  187 

midtt  of  tlie  fluctnating  ocean,  not  merely  itisig* 
Bificimt  idets,  but  whole  groups  of  islandg,  which 
in  doe  time  are  rendered  fit  for  the  habitation  of 
man  htmselfy  and  do  in  £sict  become  his  perma- 
MDt  abode— but  not  only  this,  but  should  so 
Mfder  all  other  circumstances  connected  with  this 
procedure,  as,  for  instance,  the  action  of  the  waves 
aad  winds  upoa  this  nascent  little  world,  that 
when  the  animal  has  built  up  to  that  point, 
which  its  nature,  for  it  cannot  exist  when  removed 
from  the  influence  of  its  native  element,  enables 
it  to  attain,  should  take  up  the  wonderful  work 
aad  complete  the  design  of  the  Great  Creator, 
and  give  the  structure  its  due  elevation  and  con* 
soUdation,  should  furnish  it  with  fountains  and 
streams  of  water;  should  cover  it  with  a  aoii 
capable  of  affording  sufficient  nutriment  to  trees 
9nd  plants,  which  should  in  their  turn  afford  food 
for  some  part  of  the  animal  kingdom,  and  finally 
for  man  hims^f.    How  evidently  does  all  this 
shew  the  adaptation  of  means  to  an  end.    What 
a  number  of  calculations  must  be  made,  what  a 
number  of  circumstances  tak^i  into  considera- 
tion, what  a  number  of  contingences  provided 
against,  what  a  number  of  conflicting  elements 
made  to  harmonize  and  subserve  to  the  promo- 
tion of  a  c<Hnmon  purpose,  which  it  is  impossible 
could  have  been  eff^ted  but  by  the  interventicm 
and  constant   guidance    of   an  unseen   Being, 
causing  all  things  so  to  concur,  as  to  bring 


188  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

about  and  establidi  what  he  designs  I  And,  when 
we  further  consider  the  multiplicity  of  aspects 
in  which  the  subject  must  be  viewed,  in  order 
to  get  a  clear  and  correct  idea  of  the  co-opera- 
tion of  so  many  causes^  seeming  often  at  yarianee 
with  each  other ;  we  may  further  affirm,  without 
fear  of  contradiction, .  that  the  whole  must  be 
the  plan  and  the  work,  as  the  primary  and  only 
intelligent  cause,  of  a  Being  infinite  in  power, 
wisdom,  and  goodness. 

There  are  two  circumstances  in  the  above 
account  of  the  proceedings  of  these  animals,  that 
more  particularly  demonstrate  Divine  interposi- 
tion. One  is  the  precaution  to  which  they  have 
recourse  when  they  build  a  circular  reef  in  the 
sea,  that  they  leave  an  opening  in  this  part. for 
the  entrance  of  the  tide  and  its  reflux,  so  that  a 
constant  renovation  of  the  waters  takes  place, 
without  which  they  could  not  proceed  in  their 
operations,  for  want  of  their  necessary  aliment. 

The  other  is,  not  only  that  they  erect  their 
buildings  in  the  form  best  calculated  to  resist  the 
action  of  the  ocean,  but  also  erect  break-waters 
to  strengthen  the  weakest  points,  and  those  from 
which  the  greatest  danger  is  to  be  apprehended. 

It  is  clear  that  beings  so  little  organized,  with 
scarcely  any  sense  or.  feeling,  are  not  sufficient 
of  themselves  to  take  these  precautions,  they 
must  be  directed  and  impelled  by  some  power 
acting  upon  them ;  which,  foreseeing  the  want, 


POLYPES.  189 

pitrvides  for  it ;  this  can  be  no  pliysical  power, 
for  that  is  equally  without  intelligence,  and  acts 
necessarily,  but  it  must  be  the  result  of  the  will 
and  original  action  of  Supreme  Intelligence,  who 
either  so  organized  the  animal  as  to  direct  it  to 
certain  acts,  when  placed  in  certain  circum- 
stances, by  the  agency  of  physical  powers ;  or 
by  his  own  immediate  employment  of  these 
powers,  influenced  its  action,  as  the  occasion 
required. 

I  cannot  conclude  this  history  of  the  Polypes 
without  adverting  to  another  circumstance  which 
proves  in  a  very  striking  manner  the  interven- 
tion of  the  Deity :  and  that  they  could  not  have 
assumed  the  various  forms  under  which  we 
behold  them,  from  peculiar  circumstances,  to 
the  influence  of  which,  in  the  lapse  of  ages  they 
were  exposed.  When  we  see  animals,  biiried  in 
the  bosom  of  the  ocean,  symbolize  the  whole 
vegetable  world  from  the  tree  to  the  moss  and 
lichens  that  vegetate  on  its  trunk,  and  the  agaric 
or  other  funguses  that  spring  up  beneath  it,  we 
are  naturally  led  to  inquire  into  the  reason  dF 
this  system  of  representation,  exhibited  by  beings 
that  have  no  aflBnity,  nor  are  even  contrasted 
with  each  other  by  juxta-position. 

One  of  the  general  objects  of  the  vegetable 
kingdom  was  to  ornament  the  dry-land  with 
what  was  fair  to  look  upon^  as  well  as  with  what 
was  good  for  food.    But  the  depths  of  ocean, 


190  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

tiiough  planted  witk  various  vegetables,  fteeia 
unapt  to  exhibit  in  beauty  the  frail  blossoms  of 
the  plant,  which  though  they  can  bear  the  flue- 
tuati(»i8  of  their  own  atmosphere,  must  often  be 
destroyed  by  the  greater  weight  and  more  irre* 
sistible  agitations  of  a  denser  element.  To 
ornament  the  bosom  of  the  deep,  therefore,  mow 
solid  form«,  sending  forth  blossoms  capable  cS 
sustaining  the  action  of  such  an  element,  were 
requisite :  and  therefore  God,  who  gifted  bis 
creature  man  with  an  inquiring  spirit,  and  with 
an  appetite  for  knowledge  of  the  wothA  <of 
creation,  to  furnish  him  with  objects  for  inquiry^ 
and  to  gratify  that  appetite  to  the  utm(^t,  not 
only  placed  before  his  eyes  upon  the  ear&  aa 
innumerable  host  of  creatures,  of  which  he  cocdd 
gain  a  notion  by  only  opening  his  eyes  and  by 
observing  their  beauties,  and  experiencing  their 
utility,  might  praise  his  Ms^ker  for  them ;  but  also 
filled  the  deep  with  inhabitants,  and  ornamented 
it  with  animals  that  appeared  to  vegetate  Aad 
blossom  like  plants,  that  his  curiosity  being 
excited,  he  might  also  study  the  inhabitants  of 
the  water,  and  glorify  his  Maker  for  the  erea&)& 
of  them  also. 

But  we  may  derive  another  use  from  the  cou- 
sideratimi  of  these  plant-like  animals,  if  the 
sceptic  endeavours  to  persuade  us,  froM  tibe 
gradual  progress,  observable  in  natural  objects 
from  low  to  high,  and  from  the  narrow  interval 


POIYPES.  191 

that  often  separates  those  in  the  same  series  from 
each  other,  that  by  the  action  of  certain  physical 
causes,  consequent  upon  certain  established  laws 
and  a  fixed  order  of  things,  and  by  the  stimulus 
of  certain  appetencies  in  themselves,  animals 
^dually  changed  their  forms  and  organization, 
wd  thus,  by  slow  degrees,  kept  improving  in  all 
lespects,  till  at  lairt  the  monkey  became  the 
mm^  if  the  sceptic  thus  attempts  to  pervert  us, 
we  may  turn  round  upon  him,  and  ask  him,  how 
it  was  that  the  zoophyte,  buried  in  the  depths  of 
the  ocean,  should  imitate  the  plant  ?  can  a  studied 
imitation  every  where  denoting  purpose  and  de- 
Sttgn,  u  mighty  structure  including  innumerable 
forms  and  parts  connected  with  each  other  and 
fefemed  evidently  according  to  a  preconceived 
pkin^  be  the  result  of  the  operation  of  blind, 
%ngmded  physical  agents,  acting  by  the  appe- 
trades  of  these  organized  beings  ?  How  indeed 
could  they  have  any  appetency  to  put  on  the 
appearance  of  a  set  of  objects  they  never  saw  ? 
The  thing  is  morally  impossible.  In  fact,  when 
we  survey  the  whole  series  of  natural  objects, 
and  find  throughout  a  system  of  representation, 
as  well  as  a  chain  of  affinities,  it  is  as  clear  as 
the  light  of  day,  that  an  infinite  Intelligence 
must  .first  have  planned,  an  Alm^ty  hand  then 
executed,  and  that  infinite  Locre  still  sustains  the 
whole* 


192 


Chapter  VI. 

Functions  and  Instincts.     Radiaries.         * 

It  happens  nat  seldom  to  the  student  of  the 
works  of  creation,  when  he  is  endeayouriilg  to 
thread  the  labyrinth  of  forms  in  any  of  the  three 
kingdoms  of  nature,  and  has  arrived  at  any  giveti 
point,  to  feel  doubtful  which  course  to  pursue- 
The  road  divides,  perhaps,  into  two  branelies, 
which  both  promise  to  lead  him  right.  At  the 
very  outset  of  the  animal  kingdom,  as  vfb  have 
seen,  there  was  some  uncertainty,  whether  we 
should  begin  by  the  Infusories  or  Polypes,  and 
now  the  Tunicaries,  or  Ascidians  as  some  call 
them,  at  the  first  blush  seem  more  closely  con^ 
nected  with  the  Polypes,  than  the  Radiaries, 
which  Lamarck  has  placed  next  to  them;  but 
when  we  consider  that  the  organization  is  mucfe 
more  advanced  in  the  former  than  in  the  .latt^, 
not  only  in  the  organs  of  digestion,  but -in  those 
of  sensation,  respiration,  and  circulation,  we  feel 
satisfied  that  the  latter,  where  the  object  is  to 
ascend,  should  first  be  considered.  I  shall,  there- 
fore, now  give  some  account  of  the  Radiaries. 

The  animals  forming  this  class  receive  this 
appellation,  because  they  exhibit  a  disposition 
to  form  rays,  both  in  their  internal  and  external 


RADIARIES.  193 

parts,  a  disposition  which  begins  to  show  itself, 
as  we  have  seen,  both  in  the  polypes  and  the 
infusories^  with  respect  to  their  oral  appendages, 
and  is  found  also  in  the  tunicaries  and  cepha- 
lopods,  or  cuttle-fish.  And  this  tendency  in  the 
works  of  the  Creator  to  produce  or  imitate 
radiation,  does  not  begin  in  the  animal  kingdom ; 
the  Geologist  detects  it  in  the  mineral,  and 
Ibe  Botanist  in  the  vegetable,  for  Actinolites, 
Pyrites,  and  other  substances  exhibit  it  in  the 
farmer,  and  a  great  variety  of  the  blossoms  of 
I^ants  in  the  latter.  We  may  ascend  higher,  and 
say  that  irradiation  is  the  beginning  of  all  life, 
from  the  seed  in  the  earth  and  the  punctum 
sdiens  in  the  egg,  to  the  foetus  in  the  womb ;  and 
still  higher  in  the  physical  world,  sound  radiates, 
light  radiates,  heat  radiates*  If  we  further  sur- 
vey the  whole  universe,  what  do  we  behold  but 
radiating  bodies  dispersed  in  every  direction. 
Suns  of  innumerable  systems,  shedding  their 
rays  upon  their  attendant  planets ;  and  the  Great 
%>iritual  Sun  of  the  universe,  even  God  himself, 
is  described  in  Holy  Scripture  as  that  awful 
Being,  **  Whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of 
old^from  everlasting.^'' 

Cuvier,  and  after  him  several  other  modern 
Zoologists,  have  considered  Lamarck's  Class  of 
Radiaries  as  forming  a  group  or  class  of  the 

*  See  above,  p.  154,  166,  &c. 
VOL.  I.  O 


194  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS, 

zoophytes;  but  when  we  recollect  that  they 
cannot,  like  the  infusories  and  .polypes,  be  pro* 
pagated  by  cuttings  and  offsetts,  this  seems  to 
indicate  an  animal  substance  in  which  the  nervoiia 
molecules  are.  less  dispersed,  and  that  some  ten^ 
dency  to  nervous  centres  has  been  established* 
In  the  upper  classes  of  invertebrated  animals,: 
indeed,  many  will  reproduce  an  oigan  wheft 
mutilated,  and  some  even  a  head,  but  none  bill; 
the  polypes  and  infusories  multiply  themseliifes 
in  the  way  above  stated «  It  seems,  therefore, 
most  advisable  to  adhere  to  Lamarck's  system^ 
by  considering  the  animals  in  question,  as  form*, 
ing  a  group  by  themselves,  and  to  adopt  his 
name  of  Radiaries. 

These  are  distinguished  from  the  class  imno^- 
diately  preceding,  the  polypes,  by  being  limited 
as  to  their  growth  to  a  certain  standard,  as  to 
their  form  by  the  general  appearance  of  radiation 
they  usually  present,  being  either  divided  in|j» 
rays,  as  in  the  star-fish ;  or  having  rays 


by  their  crust  as  in  the  sea-urchins ;  or  embedded 
in  their  substance,  forming  appendages  to  theic 
viscera,  as  in  the  sea-nettle  or  jelly-fish,  .  They 
have  not,  like  the  polypes,  a  terminal  mouth  or 
orifice  surrounded  by  food-collecting  tentacles; 
but  one  placed,  most  commonly,  underneath 
their  body.  Their  digestive  organs  are  distinct 
and  more  complex.  They  are  never  fixed,  and 
are  to  be  met  with  only  in  the  sea  and  its  estu- 


RADIARI£S.  195 

aries.    Lamarck  has  divided  this  class  into  two 
ordors,  the  Gelatines^  and  the  Echinoderms? 

1.  The  Gelatinesy  which  some  consider  as  a 
distiact  class  under  the  name  of  Acaiephes^^  are 
distinguished  by  a  gelatinous  body,  and  a  soft 
smd  transparent  skin;  they  have  no  retractile 
«>be.  i«.Lg  from  the  l>.dy  ;  ..  .od  p<^ge ; 
no  hard  parts  in  the  mouth ;  and  they  have  no 
interior  cavity,  their  viscera  being  imbedded  in 
their  gelatinous  substance. 

Some  genera  ^  in  this  Order,  like  the  fishes, 
are  remarkable  for  an  air-vessel  which  they 
can  fill  or  empty,  and  so  rise  to  the  surface,  or 
sink  to  the  bottom  at  their  pleasure,  but  it  differs 
from  that  of  the  fishes  in  being  external ;  others 
are  distinguished  by  a  dorsal  crest,  which  they 
erect  and  use  as  a  saiL^ 

2.  The  Echinoderms  have  an  opaque,  leathery ^ 
or  cnistaceous  skin,  mostly  covered  with  tuber- 
des^  or  even  moveable  spines,  and  generally 
jHerced  with  holes,  disposed  in  rows ;  retractile 
tubes  which  respire  the  water,  and  are  used  also 
for  locomotion  and  prehension,  emerge  from 
these  holes ;  a  mouth  generally  situated  below, 
and  arined  with  hard  parts ;  and  a  cavity  simple 
er  divided. 

To  begin  with  the  Gelatines — ^in  walking  upon 

1  Rad%aire$  molasses,      *  R.  Echinodertnes,      '  Acalepha, 
^  Physsophora.  &c, ,       *  Vellela, 


196  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  sea-8hore,  I  have  occasionally  remarkeii  ah 
animal  of  this  tribe  left  by  the  waves,  n6t  miidh 
larger  than  a  nutmeg,  of  a  spherical  form,  with 
several  longitudinal  ridges,  and  nearly  as  trans- 
parent as  the  purest  crystal.  If  at  all  injured  by 
the  touch,  it  immediately  dissolved.  Such  deli- 
cate creatures  has  the  Creator  exposed  to  this 
action  of  the  oceanic  waves^  and  they  sail  gaily 
on,  by  means  of  their  ciliated  tails,  receiving 
no  injury,  frail  as  they  are,  except  in  being  some- 
times cast  upon  the  shore.  These  lucid  gems  of 
the  waters,*  which  abound  equally  within  fie 
polar  circle  and  near  the  equator,  are  eminiently 
phosphoric.  Bosc  says,  he  has  seen  millions, 
which  he  could  scarcely  distinguish  during  the 
day  from  the  water  in  which  they  lived,  but 
which  in  warm  and  calm  nights  ajSorded  the 
most  brilliant  spectacle.  From  their  rotatory 
motion,  they  seemed  then  globes  of  fire  whicb 
rolled  upon  the  surface  of  the  water.  The  more 
rapid  their  motion,  the  more  intense  the  light, 
and  their  tails  always  emitted  more  than  their 
body.  They  doubtless  absorb  animalcules  with 
the  water  that  they  inspire,  and  they  swim  by  a 
motion  combining  rotation  with  contraction  and 
dilatation.  They  are  found  from  a  line  to  six 
inches  in  diameter.  Providence  has  destined 
them  to  be  the  food  of  a  vast  number  of  fishes, 
even  the  whale  dpes  not  disdain  them  ;  and  we 
may  conjecture  the  havoc  that  one  of  these  giants 

1  Beroe, 


RADI  ARIES.  197 

pjf  the  ocean  would  make  in  their  ranks.  The 
mitiiner  in  which  they  are  propagated  has  not 
b^en  ascertained,  but  from  then-  infinite  num- 
bers in .  every  sea,  their  progeny  must  be  incon- 
QeiVable. 

Another  phosphoric  animal  of  the  present 
itribe  is  distinguished  by  a  dorsal  crest,  resem^ 
jbling  a  vesicle  full  of  air,  and  which  it  is  said  to 
1106  as  a  sail,  like  many  of  the  Molluscans,  to 
<:pndu)Ct  it  over  the  surface  of  the  waves.  It  is 
connected  with  the  body  only  by  its  middle,  its 
i^tremities  being  at  liberty,  which  enables  the 
aaimal  to  steer  its  course  in  any  direction. 

I  shall,  mention  one  more  of  these  gelatines, 
which  falls  under  the  observation  of  every  one 
who  is  fond  of  sailing,  or  rowing,  in  a  boat  on 
the  ocean  or  in  its  estuaries.  If  he  cast  his  eye 
j^ppn  the  water  in  fair  weather,  he  will  see  mim- 
(bers  of  animals,  in  shape  resembling  an  expanded 
umbrella,  with  some  flesh-coloured  organs  round 
,the  summit  or  centre,  carriied  with  the  rising  or 
ialUng  tide,  and  dancing  along  with  a  seemingly 
tundiilating  motion:  these  belong  to  what  are 
VttJgarly  called  the  jelly-fish,  or  sea-nettles} 
Though  the  body  of  the  aniinals  of  this  tribe  is 
,gelaJ:inous  and  easily  melts,  yet  its  weight  is 
considerable,  and  it  is  said  that  they  can  render 
themselves  heavy  or  light  at  pleasure,  which 
some  effect  by  means  of  a  natatory  vesicle,  but 
the  means  in  all  has  not  been  ascertained ;  unless 

•  Plate  III.  F^g.  1. 


198  FUNCTIONS  AND  IlffiTINCTS. 

they  were  thus  gifted,  as  their  iqiedfic  gravity 
exceeds  that  of  the  water,  they  could  not  raise 
themsdVes  to  the  sur&ce,  where  they  are  wti, 
swimming  yery  gracefully;  as  it  were,  by  an 
alternate  systole  and  diastole,  admitting  and  re- 
jecting the  sea*water.  Sereral  of  them,^  fw  it  is 
not  common  to  them  all,  wh^a  touched,  cause  a 
sensation  similar  to  that  produced  by  the  sting  of 
a  nettle : '  it  is  supposed  by  some  that  this  is  done 
by  their  tentacles,  which  are  conjectured  to  have 
little  suckers,  as  indeed  is  very  probable,  which 
adhere  to  the  skin.  This  faculty,  whic^  is  sup- 
posed to  be  the  lowest  degree  of  the  electric  power 
peculiar  to  several  fishes,  is  found  in  other  geoeia 
of  this  tribe ;  for  instance^  the  Jamaica  sea-nettle,^ 
is  said  to  afiect  the  hands,  when  touched,  stiU 
more  severely.  Probably  this  faculty  was  given 
to  them  by  Providence,  either  for  the  defence  of 
their  frail  forms  against  their  assailants,  or  to 
enable  them  to  secure  their  prey,  this  being  the 
general  use  of  their  numerous  tentacles  and 
other  oi^ans.  Lamarck  observes,  that  some  of 
these  animals  are  so  large  as  to  be  more  than  a 
foot  in  diameter,  and  that  some  weigh  as  much 
as  sixty  pounds.  Their  multitudes  are  prodi- 
gious, and,  as  well,  as  the  6erM,  they  are  said  to 
form  part  of  the  food  of  the  whale :  they  are 
even  devoured  by  some  of  their  own  class.    The 

1  Rhizostoma*  Cuv.     Cephea  Rhizostoma,  Lam. 
^  See  Appendix,  note  22. 
3  P ky salts  pelagica. 


RADIABIES.  199 

mode  by  whiefa  these  creatures  are  produced 
»«cb  Lfioit.  t^wim  i.  at  pr»e.t  .^.wn. 
They  do  not  reproduce  mutilated  parts ;  therefore 
k  cannot  be,  as  in  the  polypes,  by  the  diyision 
o£  their  bodies. 

A¥lien  we  consider  the  i^iLtreme  fragility  and 
detiquescent  nature  of  the  animals  constitutii^ 
this  offder  of  the  Radiaries,  that  a  touch  almost 
cUaorganizes  their  structure,  and  moreover  that 
they  form  part  of  the  food  of  the  most  gigantic 
animals  in  creation,  we  should  be  led  to  think  it 
impossible  that  they  could  withstand  all  these 
€<Hnb|ned  actions  upon  them,  and  that  bowever 
mimerous  and  prolific,  they  must  at  length  be 
utterly  annihilated.  Nothing  less,  indeed,  than 
Afanighty  Power,  and  Infinite  Wisdom  and  pre* 
science,  and  a  Goodness  that  is  interested  in  the 
wel£ure  of  the  meanest  as  well  as  the  mightiest 
of  the  animals  he  has  brought  into  being,  could 
faaTC  preserved  them  firom  such  a  fate.  He  who 
0ade  all  things  decreed  their  mutual  relations, 
limited  their  numbers  by  certain  laws,  and  ap- 
{lointed  the  means  by  which  those  laws  should 
be  executed.  We  may  say,  that  in  some  sense 
tb&  whales  were  created  for  the  gelatinous  radia- 
neS'^aad:  numberless  other  animals  with  which 
the  seas  frequented  by  these  monsters  abound, 
and  that  these  gelatinous  radiaries  were  created 
for  the  whales.  The  enormous  mouth  of  the  last* 
named  animals  is  not  armed  with  tusks  or 
grinders,  but  fitted  instead  With  vast  numbers  of 


200  FUNCTIONS  AND  IMSTINCTi. 

oblique  laminee  of  a  softer  subrtance,  xisifaHy 
denominated  whalebone,  which  is  adapted  mAj 
for  the  crushing  and  masticating  of  soft  bodies ; 
therefore  instead  of  a  prey  more  pr<qH)f  timmd  to 
their  bulk,  they  contentedly  make  their  meaL^off 
these  small  but  innumerable  gelatines,  whidb^  jiy 
their  number,  make  up  for  thdr  want  of  magni|- 
tude,  and  are  exactly  suited  to  the  masticaiiag 
organs  of  their  devourer ;  and  though  the  waste 
of  animal  life  seems  almost  infinite,  yet  was  it 
not  for  this  check,  so  great  appear  to  be  the 
powers  of  multiplication  of  the  smaller  creatares 
that  swarm  under  the  ice  of  the  Arctic  seas^  tfaaeite 
would  be  more  than  could  be  maintainedjiam- 
sistently  with  the  general  wel&re* 

The  object  of  Providence  throughout'  our 
globe,  as  has  been  bdbre  observed,  is  sal  to 
balance  the  respective  numbers  of  the  diffosant 
kinds  of  animals,  from  the  invisible  monaCl  to 
the  gigantic  whale,  that  a  certain  proportion  may 
be  preserved,  with  regard  to  thdr  numb^s, 
between  them,  so  that  each  may  be  in  sufficient 
force  to  accomfdish  the  end  for  which  it  was 
created.  We  may  observe  that  though  the  wbale 
devours  myriads  of  millions,  yet  the  quantum  of 
suffering  is  less  than  if  he  were  enabled  to  make 
his  meal  o£f  larger  animals,  and  his  jaws,  like 
the  shark's,  were  fitted  with  laniary  teethe  ..in 
fact  the  gelatines  are  incapable  of  suffering  pain, 
having  no  digested  nervous  system,  and  when 


RADIARIES.  201 

east  upon  the  shore  they  dissolve  into  a  fluid 
^actly  re^mbling  sea  wat^. 

V   The  Eehinodenm^  fwm  the  second  order  of 

Ihe  Radiaries.     This  name  was  first  given  by 

JBtnigui^res  to  a  class  formed  solely  of  Linn^'s 

genera  Echinus  and  Astenas^  but  Lamarck  has 

added  others  to  it.    He  has  divided  it  into  three 

se^ions,  the  Stelieridansj  Echinidans^  and  Fis-' 

tuhdans ;  in  all  these  the  outward  envelope  is  of 

a  much  harder  substance  than  in  the  gelatines, 

in  the  first  and  last  of  these  sections  resembling 

leather,  and  in  the  other,  consisting  of  the  sea- 

mchfaiB,^  it  is  a  crust  in  some  d^ree  like  that  of 

crabs  and  lobsters.    The  animals  of  this  Order, 

though  their  nervous  system  is  obscure,  have  a 

kigh  degree  of  muscular  motion  and  are  fitted 

vitib  motive  organs . 

To  look  at  a  star-jish  one  would  wonder,  at 
first,  how  it  could  move  progressively,  its  rays 
seeming  not  at  all  calculated  for  that  purpose, 
this  however  is  wisely  provided  for.  Those  of 
one  family  send  forth  a  number  of  tentacles, 
from  a  furrow  in  the  underside  of  the  rays  into 
which  their  body  is  divided,  each  terminating 
in  a  Gup*shaped  sucker,  which  they  can  lengthen 
or  shorten,  and  fix  to  hard  bodies.  These  ten- 
tacles, or  legs,  as  Cuvier  calls  them,  are  similar 

^  Echinodermata.  ^  Echinus, 


202  FUNCTIONS  And  instincts. 

in  structure  in  all  the  E^hinoderms.    They  are 
separately  retractilis,  their  form  is  nearly  that 
of  a  long  ampuUaceous  tube,  filled  with  a  subtle 
'fluid;  the  elongated  tubular  part  is  that  which 
appears  without  the  shell ;  the  spherical  porti<Hi 
remaining  within  the  body :    by  means  x)f  the 
above  fluid,  as  in  the  Polypes/  the  tube  is 
darted  forth,  or  retracted.     Belon  counted  6080 
of  thiese  suckers  in  one  species.     In  the  sea- 
urchin  star-fish'  th^e  are  twenty  rays,  and  tht 
dickers  are  so  thick  as  to  touch  each  oth^* 
They  may  probably  be  of  use  to  them  also  as 
organs  of  prehension  to  seize  their  prey.     Those 
of  the  family  to  which  the  Medusa  star-ftsh 
belongs,  move  in  a  different  way.  The  diverging 
raya  are  firm  and  haM,  have  few  spines,  and  no 
^channel  with  suckers ;    they  are  used  by  the 
animal  as  legs,  and  as  they  are  regularly  placed 
it  can  move  in  any  direction  that  suits  it.    To 
go  towards  any  particular  spot,  it  uses  the  two 
rays  that  are  nearest  to  it,  and  another  that  is 
most  distant  from  it ;  the  twa  first  curve  at  their 
extremity  so  as  to  form  two  hooks,  which  beitig 
applied  to  the  sand  drag  the  body  forwardi^, 
while  the  posterior  is  curved  vertically,  and  per* 
forms  the  part  of  a  repelling  lever.  The  suck^te, 
which  in  this  genus  issue  from  the  sides  of  the 
rays,  at  the  junction  of  the  upper  and  lower 

'  See  above,  p;  164.  '  Asterias  echmiies. 


RADIARIES.  203 

cmr&oed,  appeiu*  short,  but  being  retractile,  they 
can  be  lengthened,  and  doubtless  are  used  to 
seiae  the  animals  that  come  in  their  way.  What 
tan  more,  strikingly  indicate  the  contrivance  and 
design  of  an  Intelligent  Being  than  the  structure 
of  these  <steUated  animals  by  .which  they  are 
waUed  to  inoye  ini  different  directions,  and  to 
seeore  their  prey  ? 

The  extmor  envelope  of  the  sea-urehins  is 
formed  by  two  membranes,  the  one  external 
and  thicker,  and  the  other  a  very  thin  pellicle. 
Birtweeh.  the  membmnes  is  a  tiiick,  solid,  calca- 
reous shell  composed  of  a  great  number  of 
pdyg&nal  pieces  of  a  fibrous  tissue,  evidently 
immoveable,  but  not  s^dered  during  the  growth 
oCthe  animal.  The  shell  of  the  common  species^ 
i£  doisely  examined,  when  denuded  of  its  spines 
and  other  organs,  will  be  found  to  be  divided 
into  twenty  longitudinal  portions,  ten  of  which 
are  covered  with  breast-shaped  protuberances,^ 
varying  in  size,  which  bear  the  spines,  and  ten 
Borrow  ones  perforated  with  a  number  of  small 
orifices,  from  which  the  tentacular  suckers 
^aerge,  which  last  Linn6  named  all^s  ;*  I 
flhalt  therefore  call  the  ispinerbearing  ones^rc^e^. 
These  last  are  alteraatdly  wide  and  narrow,  and 
of  a  lancecdate  &mxk ;  the  wide  ones  having 
six  rows  of  the  larger  tubercles,: and  the  narrow 

*  Echinus  edulis.  L.  '  Plate  III.  Fig.  2.  a. 

'  Ambulacra,  Ibid*  b» 


204  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

ones  only  two;  between,  each  of  these  gB(»fes 
is  an  alley  ccmtainuig  nearly  thirty  oblique 
double  .rows  of  orifices,  eight  or  ten  in  each  mw: 
These  alleys  terminate  in  a  point  at  the  upp^ 
aperture  of  the  shell  and  are  truncated  at. the 
lower.  Each  of  the  larger  groves,  if  examined 
intemaUy,  will  be  found  to  consist  of  aboiit 
twenty  parallelograms  arranged  trans¥^»ely  aii4 
united  by  an  harmonic  s^tu^e,  m  which  the  edges 
are  merely  applied  to  each  other  without  any 
inequalities.  These  larger  groves  have  a  central 
longitudinal  ridge,  at  which  it  readily  divides  and 
discovers  a  beautifully  dentated  suture,  resent 
bling  the  dog's  tooth  of  a  gothic  arch  ;^  on  the 
side  next  the  alleys  the  dentitions  of  the  sutuK 
are  much  less  prominait  and  conspicuous^  The 
smaller  groves  have  the  same  ridge  and  divide  m 
the  same  way,  and  seem  to  form  one  piece  mih 
the  alleys  on  each  side  of  it :  so  that  one  of  4be 
narrow  groves  with  its  two  alleys  forms  the 
support  of  one  of  the  frames  of  the  jaws.^  Those 
narrow  groves  consist  of  about  sixty  transverte 
pieces,  and  when  divided  of  double  that  number: 
thus  wonderfully  is  the  house  in  which  theae 
animals  reside,  formed  by  its  Divine  Builder. 
The  sutures  of  the  human  skull,  as  anatcmtifits 
observe,  admit  of  its  more  easy  formation  isto  a 
spherical  box :    the  shell  of  the  searurohin  is 

'  Pjlate  III.  Fig.  3,  a,  »  Ibid.  Fig.  3,  d. 


RADIARIES.  205 

Bdaf^ted  with  equal  skill  and  wisdam,  th^  longi- 
tudinal sutures  favoring  the  prefer  flexure  one 
ira%  $Lnd  the  transverse  ones  allowing  a  curvature 
in  a  contrary  direction : .  and  besides,  by  this 
Btkieture,  as  Mr.  Gray  has  observed  and  J)e 
^Blainville  intimates,  the  gradual  increment  o£ 
Ihe'dhell,  by  the  deposition  of  fresh  matter  in  all 
^hese  parts,  is  rendered  easy. 

But  the  spines  and  suckers  of  these  animals 
ftre  equally  worthy  of  our  notice  and  investiga- 
t«m ;  the  former  as  instruments  of  defence  and 
locomotion,  and  the  latter  as  instruments  of 
kicomotian,  prehension,  and  respiration.  I 
mentioned  the  protuberances,  large  and  small, 
die  latter  usually  planted  round  the  former, 
shaped  like  a  breast  with  a  central  elevation 
resembling  the  nipple,  these  aiSbrd  a  basis  with 
Which  the  spines  articulate,  being  united  to  it  by 
a  membranous  ligature  or  sac,  so  as  to  form  a 
kind  of  ball-and-socket  articulation,  working 
upon  these  protuberances  by  means  of  the  mem- 
brane,  the  spines  can  as^ime  every  inclination 
between  vertical  and  horizontal,  and  may  be 
uded  both  as  motive  and  defensive  organs.  The 
great  zoological  and  physiological  luminary  of 
Greece,  Aristotle,  observed  of  these  animals  that 
they  use  their  spines  as  legs  for  change  of  place,^ 
and  Reaumur,  who  paid  particular  attention  to 

1  Hist.  Anira.  B,  iv^c.  5,  ad  iiti. 


300  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

their  motions^  found,  that  whether  they  moved  m 
a  horizontal  position,  as  they  usually  do,  or  in  a 
reversed  one,  or  upoa  their  sides^  they  prineir 
pally  used  their  spines.  As  they  can  more  in>aiiy 
direction,  soone  are  used  as  legs  for  progreasm 
movement,  others  as  points  of  support  to  prevent 
a  retrognessive  one.  It  is  by  means  of  thtir 
spines,  also,  some  performing  one  office  and  Boms 
another,  that  they  bury  themselves  in  the  moist 
sand  on  the  sea  shore.^ 

It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  by  what  medianism 
the  spines  are  moved;  the  protuberances  on 
which  they  move  are  fixed,  and  thjere  appean  to 
be  no  communicaticm  between  the  interior  of  the 
shell  and  the  membranous  sac  by  which  they 
are  attached  to  them.  'Mt  is  v^y  difficult," 
says  Cuvier,  M  to  see  the  fibres  that  move  these 
spines  at  the  will  of  the  animal,  for  nothing  n 
observable  in  their  articulation  but  a  very  solid 
ligamentous  substance,  which  it  is  very  diffictdt 
to  cut.  I  have  examined,  with  a  lens  of  con* 
siderable  power,  the  shell  both  within  and 
vrithout,  and  have  been  able  to  discover  no 
pores  on  ^ther  side,  round  the  base  of  the 
protuberances  or  elsewhere;  so  that  it  seem 
impossible  for  any  muscular  threads,  however 
fine,  to  pass  from  the  body  of  the  animal  to 
the  connecting  ligament  by  which  it  could  move 
it  and  so  give  the  spine  its  difierent  inclinations. 

<  Oder  in  Philos.  Tr.  1826. 


RADI  ARIES*  207 

Yet  as  the  spines  are  employed  by  the  sea- 
urefain  to  effect  its  motiotis,  there  must  be  some 
intasmedtate  agent,  hitherto  undiscovered,  which 
it  has  at  its  command,  by  which  it  can  act  upon 
them.  Dr.  Carus'  remarks  on  the  zoophytes  in 
general  are  very  ap{dicable  in  the  present  in- 
aiBQce — "  When  we  find,"  says  he,  "  that  there 
can  be  respiration  without  lungs ;  that  nutrition » 
growth,  and  secretion  may  exist  without  a  circu*^ 
lation  of  fluids;  and  that  generati<m  may  take 
place,  without  distinct  sexes,  &c.  why  should 
we  doubt  that  sensitive  life  may  exist  without 
nerves,  or  motion  without  muscular  fibres  ?"  It  is 
importaat  to  be  observed  here,  that  these  spines, 
however  strongly  attached  they  may  appear  in 
the  living  animal, .  in  the  dead  CHie  fall  off  upon 
the  slightest  toiich,  which  proves  that  the  cause 
of  their  adhesion  is  connected  with  its  life. 

But  thoi^h  it  is  difficult  to  detect  the  muscu* 
lar  fibres  that  move  the  spines  of  the  common 
searurchin,  I  had  an  opportunity,  when  correcting 
tibia  piXM>f  containing  the  preceding  paragraph, 
^ough  the  kindness  of  my  friend  Mr.  Owen, 
of  the  Hunterian  Museum,  well  known  for  his* 
admirable  anatomical  description  of  the  animal 
of  the  pearly  Nautilus,^  of  examining  a  prepa- 
ration of  the  large  spines,  with  their  sacs,  o£ 
the  mammillary  Sea-urchin,^  in  which  the  mus- 

1  Nautilus  Pompilius. 

«  Cidaris  matnillatus.  Plate  III.  Fig,  4. 


208  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

cular  fibred  were  distinctly  visible,  enveloping 
the  base  of  the  spine,  when  the  sac  was  removed; 
so  that,  reasoning  from  analogy,  it  may  be  coa- 
eluded  that  the  spines  of  the  common  speeiei 
have  a  similar  muscular  apparatus. 

The  spines  vary  much  in  their  form  smd 
sculpture.  In  the  species  last  named  they 
seem  to  be  of  a  horny  substance,  varying  in 
magnitude  and  length,  the  larger  ones  tapering 
from  the  base  and  being  blunt  at  the  tip,  they 
are  beautifully  fluted  like  the  shaft  erf"  a  Co- 
rinthian pilkr.^  The  part  enveloped  by  the 
membrane  before  motioned,  is  thicker  than  the 
rest  of  the  shaft,  perfectly  smooth,  but  terminates 
in  a  bead :  they  are  tinted  with  violet,  but  the 
base  and  tip,  or  the  pedestal  and  capital  d"  the 
pillar  are  white.  The  base  is  concave  so  as  to 
play  upon  the  levigated  centre  of  the  above 
protuberance.  Besides  these  larger  spines,  there 
are  some  bristled-shaped  ones  terminating  in  a 
subovate  knob,  which  when  unfolded  appears 
to  resemble  a  tripetalous  flower  with  acuminated 
petals,  and  which  are  supposed  to  be  polypes** 
Those  parts  void  of  spines,  called  the  adley^i 
distinguished  by  rows  of  orifices  disposed  in 
pairs,  are  furnished  with  a  quite  different  kind 
of  organ,  I  mean  the  suckers'  before  alluded  to 
and  described,  by  which  the  animal  can  also  move 

1  Cidaris  mamillatus,  Plate  III.  Fio.  14. 

•  Pedicellana,  Ibid.  Fig.  12,  13.  ^  Ibid.  Fig.  14. 


RADIARIES,  209 

'  f 

OT  fix  itself  to  any  substance ;  it  is  thought  also, 
as  they  are  perforated,  that  it  uses  them  to  absorb 
tie  water  for  respiration.  The  length  of  these 
iuekei:^  or  tentacles,  for  so  they  may  be  cilso 
called,  when  they  are  fully  extended,  is  always 
greater  than  that  of  the  spines,  so  that  they  may 
serve  as  so  many  anchors  to  fix  the  animal  and 
enable  it  to  resist  the  mass  of  waters  that  pres^ 
ujjon  it.  They  are  stated  to  be  more  numerous 
mar  the  mouth  than  in  other  parts,  by  which 
arraQgement  Divine  Wisdom  has  fitted  them  to 
maintain  a  horizontal  position,  which  is  their 
E£|.tural  one.  These  suckers  fix  the  animal  so 
firmly  to  the  rocks,  that  it  is  with  the  greatest 
difficulty,  and  seldom  without  crushing  the  shell, 
that  they  oan  be  separated. 

The  most  powerful  and  complex  organs  with 
which  the  Creator  has  gifted  the  Echinidans 
are,  their  jaws  and. teeth.  Their  mouth  has 
adapted  to  it  a  remarkable  frame-work,  cop^ 
fisting  of  five  piec^,  corresponding  with  five 
Segments,  into  which  the  shell  may  be  divided ; 
each  of  these  pieces  formis  an  arch,^  and  the 
whole  a  pyramidal  frame,  which  was  compared 
by  Aristotle  to  a  Ian  thorn  without  a  skin.  To 
these  are  attached  the  moveable  part  of  the 
jftpparatus,  consisting  of  five  jaws,  each  con- 
taiDiiiag  ^  long  tooth ,^  the  teeth  converging  in 

'Plate  III.  ¥iG.3.d.  ^  /Airf,FiG.  10, 11. 

VOL.  !•  P 


210  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  centre  close  the  mouth.^  Altogether  thb 
complex  machine  consists  of  twenty-fiye  pieced 
moved  by  thirty-five  muscles.  The  dispositioft 
of  these  pieces,  Lamarck  observes,  and  of  their 
moving  muscles,  indicate  that  the  parts  of  this 
machine  can  have  only  a  common  movement, 
and  no  one  of  them  an  individual  or  separate 
one ;  but  it  appears  jfrom  Cuvier's  elalxMrate  de- 
scription of  this  wonderful  and  complex  machi- 
nery, if  I  understand  him  right,  that  the  action  d 
certain  muscles  will  give  to  any  one  of  the  teetb 
that  form  the  pyramids  an  independent  motion. 
This  powerful  apparatus,  which  the  animal  caa 
incline  in  different  directions,  indicates  a  kind  of 
food,  less  easy  to  bruise  and  masticate  than  what 
we  have  seen  satisfies  the  whale,  and  these  or- 
gans afford  a  singular  contrast  to  those  by  which 
that  enormous  monster  masticates  its  food. 

The  Echinidans,  whose  station  appears  te 
be  often  near  the  shore  upon  submerged  ledges 
of  rock,  feed  upon  whatever  animal  they  caa 
sei^e.  We  have  seen  that  they  sometiffiee 
turn  upon  their  back  and  sides,  as  well  as 
move  horizontally,  this  enables  them  more 
readily  to  secure  their  food,  with  the  aid  of 
the  numerous  suckers  in  the  vicinity  of  their 
mouth,  which  when  once  they  are  fixedj  neyer 
let  go  their  hold  till  the  animal  is  broiigbt 
within  the  action  of  their  powerful  jaws.    La- 

'  Plate  III.  Fig.  9. 


RADIARIES.  ^1 1 

marck  thinks  they  do  not  masticate  but  only 
lacerate  their  food ;  but  as  two  faces  of  each  of 
their  pyramidal  oi^gans  answer  those  of  the  twe 
adjoining  ones»  and  these  faces  are  finely  and 
Uandverseiy  furrowed/  this  looks  like  masticating 
surfaces.  Bobc,  who  appears  to  hare  seen  them 
take  their  food,  says  it  consists  principally  of 
young  shell-fish,  and  small  crustaceous  animals ; 
as  the  latter  ate  very  alert  in  their  motions,  it  is 
difficult  for  the  sea-urchins  to  lay  hold  of  them : 
but  when  once  one  of  these  animals  suffers  itself 
to  be  touched  by  one  or  two  of  the  tentacles  of 
its  enemy,  it  is  soon  seized  by  a  great  number 
<tf  otfaiors,  and  immediately  carried  towards  the 
BiGiith,  the  apparatus  of  which  developing  itsdf> 
soon  reduces  it  to  a  pulp. 

Who  can  say  that  the  All- wise  Creator  did  not 
f<»resee  all  d^  situations  into  which  this  animal 
would  be  thrown  >  so  as  to  jMrovide  it  with  every, 
thing  thnt  its  station  and  functions  require? 
Considering  its  internal  organization  and  the 
nature  of  the  animal  itself,  and  that  it  holds  a 
middle  station  between  the  polype  and  the  Mol- 
luscans,  in  the  former  of  which  the  developement 
of  muscle  is  very  obscure,  and  in  the  latter 
very  conspicuous,  and  that  it  cannot,  like  the 
former,  fix  itself  by  its  base,  and  so  support  a 
polypary,  or  if  endued  with  locomotive  powers 
^arry  with  it  a  heavy  shell ;  these  things  con- 

•  Plate  lU.  Fig.  11. 


212  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

sidered,  and  the  nature  of  its'  food,  and  the  force 
necessary  to  prepare  .it  for  digestion,  it  was 
evidently  requisite  that  it  should  be  defended  by 
a  crust  sufficient  to  afford  a  support,  and  give 
effect  to  its  powerful  oral  apparatus,  and  yet 
light  enough  to  yield  to  the  efforts  of  its  motive 
powers;  but  as  this  crust,  from  its  composition 
and  nature,  was  liable  to  be  crushed  by  a  very 
slight  pressure,  it  required  further  means  of 
defence,  and  witli  these  its  Almighty  and 
Beneficent  Creator  has  amply  provided  it,  by 
covering  it,  like  a  hedge-hog,  with  innumerable 
spines,  varying  in  length,  and  capable  of  various 
movements.  The  long  ones,  when  erected, 
defend  it  on  all  sides,  both  from  the  attack  s^ 
enemies  and  from  the  effects  of  accidental  pres- 
sure, and  we  miay  conjecture  that  when  the 
longer  ones  are  couched  to  answer  any  particular 
-  purpose,  the  short  ones  may  come  into  play,  and 
assist  in  keeping  any  pressure  from  the  crust. 
Perhaps,  as  in  the  hedge-hog^  the  ordinary 
posture  of  the  longer  spines  is  couchant,  and 
they  are  only^  erected  when  the  animal  is  in 
motion  or  under  alarm. 

The  wonderful  apparatus  which  closes  ihe 
mouth  of  the  common  or  typical  sea-urchin,* 
is^  another  ahd  striking  proof  that  Creative 
Wisdom  employs  diversified  means  to  attain  a 
common    end,    the    nutrition    of    the    animal 

*  Echinus  edulis. 


RADIARIES.  213 

The  mouth  of  this  animal  is  under  its  body, 
a  situation  far  from  favourable,  according  to 
appearance,  for  the  mastication  or  bruising  of 
its  food :  if  its  j  aws  moved  vertically,  like  ours 
or  the  mandibles  of  a  bird ;  or  if  they  moved 
horizontally  like  those  of  insects,  it  would  have 
been  attended  with  no  small  trouble  to  an  animal 
whose  mouth  was  underneath,  but  its  five  pyra- 
midal jaws  with  the  points  of  the  teeth  in  the 
centre,  admit  an  action  more  accordant  with  the 
situation  of  the  mouth.  By  means  of  its  nume- 
rous muscles  it  can  impart  a  variety  of  action 
to  the  mass  and  individual  pieces  that  form 
its  oral  apparatus,  so  as  to  accommodate  it  to 
circumstances,  a  power  not  possessed  by  the 
higher  animals.  In  those  Echinidans,  whose 
mouth  is  in  the  margin  of  the  anterior  part  of 
the  shell,^  no  such  powerful  apparatus  is  obser-- 
vable,  its  situation  being  in  front  of  the  animal, 
it  is  not  as  it  were  under  restraint,  it  has  less 
occasion  for  the  aid  either  of  tentacles  in  its 
vicinity,  or  of  a  powerful  apparatus  of  masti- 
cating organs. 

By  furnishing  these  animals  with  a  set  of 
peculiar  organs  to  act  the  part  of  hands  as  well 
as  feet,  we  have  another  instance  of  the  care  of 
Divine  Providence  to  adapt  every  creature  to  the 
situation  and  circumstances  in  which  it  is 
placed.     The  legs  and  arms  of  the  higher  ani- 

AnanchiteSf  Spatangus,  Sfc. 


914  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

maid  would  be  rather  an  incumbratiee  to  an 
Echinidan,  as  well  as  a  deformity;  it  is  therefore 
furnished  with  a  set  of  organs  better  adapted  t& 
its  peculiar  station,  wants,  and  functions,  in  a 
numerous  set  of  retractile  tubes^  capable  of  the 
necessary  extension,  fitted  at  their  extremity  vitb 
a  cup  acting  as  A  cupping^lass  or  sucker,  and 
enabling  the  animal  to  adhere,  with  irresistible 
force,  to  any  substance  to  which  it  appi^  them, 
and  discharging  at  the  same  time  the  functions 
of  hands  to  lay  hold  of  their  prey  and  contey  it 
to  their  mouth,  of  legs  and  feet  to  stay  themsdrei 
upon,  and  of  lungs  to  assist  in  their  respiration. 

The  workmanship  also  in  these  animal  struc* 
tures  is  as  beautiful  and  striking  as  the  contri- 
vance manifested  in  th^n  is  wonderful.  Their 
protuberances,  especially  in  the  mammillaiy 
sea*urchin,  their  variously  scidptmred  spines^ 
their  tentacular  suckers,  all  by  their  parfeet 
finish  and  admirable  forms  declare — The  hand 
that  made  ms  is  divine-^ince  they  exceed  in  aH 
these  respeets  the  most  eiabomte  human  widca 

The  third  and  last  section  of  the  EcliiiMdems, 
or  spiny-skinned  Radiaries,  are  the  FubdiiaMs^ 
Amongst  these  we  may  notice  the  Sea-anemioimf 
marine  animals,  fixing  themselves  to  the  rock^ 
but  having  the  power  of  locomotion,  which  fioa 
a  common  base  send  forth  what  appear  to  be  a 

*  PlaI'E  III.  Fig.  5.  '  Fistulicks,  Lam. 

'^  Actinia, 


RADI  ABIES.  215 

munber  of  stalks  terminating  each  in  what 
se^sos  a  many-petaled  flower  of  various  hues, 
so  that  those  who  have  an  opportunity  of  ohserv- 
ing  them  from  a  diving  bell,  may  see  the  sub- 
merged rocks  covered  with  beautiful  blossoms  of 
various  colours,  and  vyjing  with  the  parterres 
i^  the  gayest  gardeps.  EUis,  who  was  the  first 
Englishman  who  opened  his  eyes  to  the  beauties 
and  singularities  that  adorn  the  garden  which 
God  has  planted  in  the  bosom  of  the  ocean,  has 
naiBed  many  of  these  from  flowers  they  seem 
to  represent,  as  the  daisy,  the  cereus,  the  pink| 
the  aster,  the  sunflower,  &c. 

These  animals,  at  first,  appear  tQ  com^  very 
aeitr  the  polypes,  especially  the  fresh*water  ones,^ 
bearing  a  number  of  individuals,  springing,  as 
it  were,  from  the  san^e  root,  each  sending  forth 
fipm  its  moujth  a  number  of  tentacles,  which  aite 
stated  to  terminate  in  ;»  sucker,  and  by  which 
also,  like  the  other  Echinoderms,  they  respire 
and  rgect  the  water ;  they  also  reproduce  their 
tenktacles  when  cut  .off.  Portions  of  the  base 
whea  divided  are  reproductive,  but  they  do  not 
separate  from  the  parent  till  their  ten;tacles  an 
completely  forxaed.  Tl^ir  internal  .organization^ 
however,  is  mujch  more  advanced  than  that  oi 
the  polypes^  They  have  a  separate  alimentary 
sac  or  tube,  surrounded  by  longitudinal  piuscleo^ 

'  Hydra. 


216  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

and  even  nervous  nodules  or  ganglions,  and  also 
several  ovaries. 

In  mild  calm  weather,  when  the  sun  diines, 
they  may  be  seen  in  places,  where  the  water  is 
not  very  deep,  expanding  their  many-coloured 
flowers  at  the  surface  of  the  waters — ^butupon 
the  slightest  indication  of  danger,  the  flowers 
suddenly  disappear,  the  animal  contracts  itseif 
and  wears  the  aspect  of  a  mass  of  flesh.  They 
as  it  were,  vomit  up  their  young,  or  the  germes 
formed  in  the  ovaries :  but  they  sometimes  force 
their  way  out  from  other  parts.  When  inclined 
to  change  their  station  they  glide  upon  their 
base,  or  completely  detaching  themselves,  com- 
mit themselves  to  the  guidance  of  the  waves. 
Reaumur  observed  them  use  their  tentacles  like 
the  Cephalopods,  for  locomotion.  They  fix 
themselves  with  so  much  force,  that  they  cannot 
be  detached  without  crushing  them. 

It  is  not  wonderful  that  so  many  of  the  lower 
aquatic  animals  should  have  been  mistaken  fer 
plants,  when  they  so  exactly  represent  their 
forms,  their  roots,  their  branches  and  twigs, 
their  leaves  and  their  flowers — but  besides  the 
irritability  of  the  animal  substance,  which 
however  is  partially  exhibited  by  some  plants ; 
there  is  another  character  which  seems,  as  a 
«trong  line  of  demarcation,  to  be  drawn  between 
them,  and  to  which   I  have  before  adverted;^ 

'  See  above,  p.  139. 


RADI  ARIES.  217 

animals  take  their  food  by  a  mouth  at  one 
extremity  of  the  body,  plants  by  roots  diverg- 
ing from  the  other.  The  reproductive  organs 
in  the  latter  occupy  the  place  and  ornature 
of  the  nutritive  ones  in  the  former.  The  gay 
and  varied  colours  of  the  blossoms,  the  in- 
finite  diversity  of  their  forms,  the  delicious  scent 
so  many  of  them  exhale^  all  are  calculated  to 
draw  the  attention  and  excite  the  admiration  of 
the  beholder,  while  the  organs  of  nutrition  are 
usually  hid  in  the  earth.  Not  so  in  the  animal 
kingdom ;  the  nutritive  organs,  or  rather  those 
that  prepare  the  nutriment,  are  placed  in  the 
ioost  eminent  and  conspicuous  part  of  the  body, 
in  the  vicinity  of  all  the  noblest  avenues  of  the 
senses,  while  those  of  reproduction  are  placed  in 
the  most  ignoble  station,  and  are  usually  found 
closely  united  with  those  passages  by  which  the 
excretions  of  the  body  pass  off.  In  the  Tunica- 
ries indeed  the  mouth  and  the  anal  passage^  arcf 
Usually  very  near  to  each  other,  and  in  the 
polypes  the  same  mouth  that  receives  the  food 
rejects  the  feces,  and  it  even  sometimes  appears 
to  happen  than  an  animal  has  been  swallowed^ 
and  after  performing  the  ordinary  revolution 
in  the  stomach,  has  been  ejected  again  in  a 
living  state. 

'  Plate  IV.  Fig.  1. 


218 


Chapter  VII» 

Functions  and  Instincts.     Tunicaries. 

The  animald  we  haye  hitheFto  bam  considenqg 
were  all  regarded  by  Cuvier  as  belooaging  ta  hi^ 
first  daas,  the  SZayphytes^  and  are  cpotiRued 
tberein  by  Carus ;  the  latter,  however,  ^owa 
that  the  Echinoderms  are  ^Qiuewhat  removed  from 
the  class  by  the  commeDcement  of  a  Qearvous 
system*  Lamarek's  next  Class,  jthe  TWieanW 
which  we  are  now  to  enter  upon,  form  part  of  the 
headless  Molluscans^  of  Cuvier,  and  b^oi^  to 
that  section  of  them  that  have  no  shells*  My 
learned  friaad^  Savigny,  in  his  elabpmte  aifed 
admirable  work  on  The  Invertebrate  Anmah, 
who  also  considers  them  as  a  separate  classt 
denominates  them  A$mdians,^  dividing  them  into 
two  Orders,  Tethydmts  and  Thalidam*^  Many 
alcyons  of  liim4  and  others,  are  now  referiied 
to  the  Class  we  are  treating  o€ 

The  characters  of  the  class  may  be  thus  sl^ated : 
ANi»f  AL,  either  gelatinous  or  leathery,  covered  by 
a  double  tunic^  or  envelope.  The  external  one, 
analogous  to  the  shell  of  MoUuscans,  distinctly 

*   Tunicata,  ^  Mollusca  Acephala, 

3  AsciduB.  *   Tethydes,  Thalides. 


TUNICARIES.  219 

oiganized,  provided  with  two  apertures,  the  one 
a$'al,  for  respiration  and  nutrition,  the  other  anal; 
the  interior  envelope,  analogous  to  their  mantle, 
provided  also  with  two  apertures  adhering  to 
those  of  the  outer  one.  Sody  oblong,  irregular, 
divided  interiorly  into  many  cavities,  without 
a  head ;  gilb  occupying,  entirely  or  in  part,  the 
surface  of  a  cavity  within  the  mantle;  mouth 
pbced  towards  the  bottom  of  the  respiratory 
eavity  between  the  gills ;  alimentary  tubey  op^i 
at  both  ends ;  a  ganglion^  sending  nerves  to  the 
mouth  and  anus* 

These  animals  are  either  simple  or  aggregate ; 
fixed  ex  floating :  the  simple  ones  are  sometimes 
sessile,^  and  sometimes  sit  upon  a  footstalk.^  The 
aggregate  ones  possess  many  ctmracters  in  com-* 
mon  with  the  polypes,  inhabiting,  as  it  were,  a 
eommiOa  body,  somewhat  analogous  to  the  poly» 
pary,  exc^t  that  it  is  mor^  intiniately  connected 
with  the  animal  that  inhabits  it :  the  mmUh  of  all 
is  j^oTounded  with  rays^  or  tentacles,  as  is  also, 
in  many,  the  anal  orifice;  but  in  their  oi^ani- 
salion  they  difier  v^  widely,  exhibiting  traces 
of  a  nervous  system,  and  even,  in  some,  of  one 
of  circulation.  The  fixed  <Mies  are  commonly 
attached  to  rocks  or  oth^  inorganized  substances, 
but  sometimes  they  are  parasitic ;  dius  a  species 
of  botrylle^  cnvelc^s,  like  a  cloak,  certain  asci* 

1  Cynthia,  *  Cl&veUna,  ^  Botryllus  polycyclus. 


220  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

dians,  and  another  of  the  Tunicaries^  envelopes 
the  madrepores,  more  or  less,  with  a  milk-white 
crust. 

The  Creator,  when  he  filled  the  waters  of  the 
great  deep  with  that  infinite  variety  of  animals 
of  which  every  day  brings  genera  and  species, 
before  unknown,  to  light,  willed  that  many  of 
them  should,  as  it  were,  form  a  body  politic,  con- 
sisting of  many  individuals,  separate  and  distinct 
as  inhabiting  difierent  cells,  but  still  possessing 
a  body  in  common,  and  many  of  them  receiv- 
ing benefit  from  the  systole  and  diastole  of  a 
common  organ:  thus,  by  a  material  union,  is 
symbolized,  what  in  terrestrial  animal  commu- 
nities results  from  numerous  wills  uniting  to 
efi*ect  a  common  object.  The  land,  as  far  as  I 
can  recollect,  exhibits  no  instance  of  an  aggregate 
animal :  nor  the  ocean  of  one,  which,  like  the 
beaver,  lemmmg,  bee,  wasp,  ant,  white  ant,  and 
many  others,  forms  associations  to  build  and  in- 
habit a  common  house,  and  rear  a  common  family. 
—Probably  the  nature  of  the  difierent  mediums 
these  several  animals  inhabit  is  the  cause  of  this 
diversity ;  and  Providence,  when  it  willed  ,the 
peopling  of  the  waters,  as  well  as  of  the  earth 
and  air,  into  which  the  effluxes  of  light  and  heat 
from  the  central  orb  could  not  so  penetrate  and 
be  difilised  as  to  act  with  the  same  power  and 

^  Didemnum  candiduniy  Sav. 


TUNICARIES.  221 

• 

energy  as  upon  the  earth's  surface,  and  in  its 
atmosphere,  so  formed  them  as  to  suit .  the  cir* 
cumstances  in  which  they  were  to  be  placed. 
Instead  of  sending  the  social  aquatic  animals 
forth  by  myriads  to  collect  food  and  matierials 
for  their  several  buildings,  he  took  the  vegetable 
creation  for  the  type  of  their*  general  structure, 
in  many  cases  fixed  them  to  the  rock  or  stone, 
united  them  all  into  one  body,  which,  under  a 
common  envelope,  contained  often  innumerable 
cells  from  which  were  sent  forth  by  thje  occupant 
of  each  a  circle  of  organs  to  collect  food,  from 
which^  by  some  chemical  operation,  they  could 
elaborate  materials  for  the  enlargement  of  their 
common  house  ;  and  often  cause  that  influx  and 
reflux,  to  compare  small  things  with  great, 
resembling  the  oceanic  tides,  and  by  which  the 
sea-water  is  alternately  absorbed  and  rejected  by 
these  animietls :  but  this  function,  in  the  case  of 
some  of  the  Tiinicaries,  the  animals  with  which 
we  are  now  concerned,  seems  to  be  afiected  by 
a  central. organ  or  pump  common  to  the  whole 
fraternity. 

But  although  none  of  the  marine  associated 
animals  are  employed,  like  the  terrestrial  ones,  in 
labours  that  require  locomotion  and  the  collec- 
tion, from  diflerent  and  often  distant  parts,  of 
materials  for  the  erection  of  their  several  fabrics, 
and  of  food  to  store  up  for  the  maintenance  of 
the  various  members  of  their  community,  yet 


223  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

there  are  some  that  are  instructed  to  form  asso'* 
ciations,  which  yet  are  not  united  by  any  matariai 
tie  or  common  body,  so  as  to  be  physically  inse« 
parable.  Of  this  description  are  the  Salpes} 
or  biphores,  as  the  French  call  them.  These 
are  phosphoric  animals,  so  transparent  that  all 
their  internal  organs  and  all  their  moyements, 
and  even  all  the  contents  of  their  intestines,  may 
be  distinctly  seen.  They  are  gelatinous  like 
the  medusas  and  heroes,  and  like  them  dissolve 
into  water.  Their  organization,  however,  proves 
th^n  to  be  Tunicaries.  Certain  species  of  these 
animals,  in  this  respect  unlike  every  other  genus 
of  the  animal  kingdom,  have  the  property  of 
uniting  themselves  together,  not  fortuitously  and 
irregularly,  but  from  their  birth  and  in  a  certain 
undeviating  order.  Boec  observed  the  reunion 
of  the  confederate  Salpe^^  which  he  thus  describes: 
''Every  individual  is  attached  by  its  sides  to 
two  others^  the  mouth  of  which  is  turned  to  the 
same  side ;  and  by  the  back  also  to  two  others, 
when  it  is  turned  to  the  opposite  side.''  In  this 
circumstance  it  presents  an  analogy  to  the 
combs  of  the  hive  bee,  in  which  each  comb 
consists  of  a  double  set  of  cells  placed  base  to 
base,  with  the  mouths  of  each  set  looking  oppo- 
site ways,  and  the  cells  so  placed  that  a  third  of 
the  base  of  three  cells  occupies  the  whole  of  one 

*  Salpa.  *  Salpa  confrnderata. 


TUNICARIES.  223 

base  in  the  opposite  set.^  This  reunion,  in  the 
salpes,  is  effected  by  means  of  eight  pedicles,  of 
a  nature  exactly  similar  to  that  of  the  body.  It 
is  perfectly  regular,  that  is  to  say — all  the  indi- 
viduals are  at  the  same  distance  and  height,  all 
the  heads  in  one  row  are  turned  to  the  same 
side,  and  those  of  another  to  the  opposite.  These 
rows  usually  consist  of  from  forty  to  fifty  indivi- 
duals, and  are  carried  by  the  waves  sometimes 
ia  a  straight,  sometimes  in  a  curved,  and  some- 
times in  a  spiral  line.  In  the  sea,  during  the  day, 
they  appear  like  white  ribands,  and  during  the 
night  like  ribands  of  fire^  which  alternately 
roll  up  and  unroll^  wholly  or  partially,  either 
from  the  motion  of  the  water,  or  from  the  will  of 
the  animals  that  compose  them.  They  are  found 
in  the  ocean  only  at  a  great  distance  from  land. 
Professor  Eschscholz  mentions  one,*  interme- 
diate between  the  Salpes  and  Pyrosomes — and  a 
similar  one  is  now  in  the  Hunterian  Museum^ — 
which  by  means  of  a  pedicle  appeared  to  be  at- 
tached to  some  common  body,  all  of  them  ar- 
ranged in  rows  with  the  head  turned  to  the  same 
side ;  Savigny,  whose  eye  nothing  escaped,  and 
the  acumen  of  whose  intellect  equalled  that  of 
his  sight,  alas  now  dark,  further  informs  us,  that 
the  Salpes  adhere  to  each  other  only  by  certain 
gelatinous   protuberances,  or  as  Lamarck  sus- 

'  Plate  XI.  Fig.  3.  2  Anchinia, 

3  Plate  IV.  Fio.  2. 


FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

pectey  certain  lateral  suckers,  disposed  so  as 
not  to  impede  the  motions  of  the  muscles ;  but 
their  union  is  only  temporary.  At  a  certain  age, 
M.  Peron  observes,  these  animals  separate,  all 
the  large  individuals  being  solitary.  The  same 
traveller  is  of  opinion  that  the  concatenation  of 
the  Salpes  is  coeval  with  their  birth. 

The  object  of  Divine  Providence  in  endowing 
these  animals  with  an  instinct  so  singular  can 
only  be  conjectured.  They  are  of  so  very  frail  a 
nature,  that  perhaps  when  first  produced,  the 
fluctuations  of  the  mass  of  waters,  to  the  surface 
of  which  they  appear  to  rise,  might  be  sufficient 
to  destroy  them,  or  to  carry  them  to  the  shore, 
where  they  would  inevitably  perish ;  but  by  being 
united  in  bands,  they  may  be  better  able  to  resist 
their  force,  and  perhaps  the  more  yivid  light 
they  thus  produce,  may  be  designed  for  defence,^ 
or  to  answer  some  other  important  purpose.  When 
they  have  attained  maturity  of  size  and  strength 
they  may  be  better  able  to  direct  their  course 
and  avoid  these  injuries*  The  young  of  terres- 
trial animals  generally  are  associated,  under  the 
guidance  and  protection  indeed  of  the  mother, 
till  they  are  of  age  to  take  care  of  themselves. 
The  object  of  Providence  in  both  cases  is  the 
same,  though  the  modes  of  its  accomplishment 
vary  according  to  the  situation  and  circumstances 

*  See  above,  p   178. 


TUNICARIES.  225 

of  individuals.  When  we  see  such  paternal 
care  manifested  for  the  welfare  and  main- 
tensmce  in  existence,  of  beings  so  frail,  that 
a  mere  touch  would  dissipate  them,  we  cannot 
but  assent  to  the  observation  of  the  Psalmist, 
that  '^  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works j^ 
the  least  and  most  insignificant  as  well  as 
those  that  appear  to  occupy  the  most  elevated 
place  in  the  animal  kingdom :  and  we  may  feel 
a  comfortable  assurance,  built  on  this  ground, 
that  the  eye  which  regards  even  these  seemingly 
insignificant  creatures,  will,  if  we  cast  not  off  our 
confidence,  never  overlook  us^  or  be  indifierent 
to  our  welfare. 

The  last  and  highest  tribe,  belonging  to  the 
present  class,  ar^  those  which  are  never  united 
to  each  other,  but  are  solitary  in  all  stages  of 
thdr  existence.  These,  as  well  as  the  preceding 
ones,  make  a  near  approach  to  the  real  Mollus* 
cans,  at  least  their  external  and  internal  envelope 
bears  considerable  analogy  with  that  of  bivalve 
shells,  as  Lamarck  acknowledges,  though  they 
diifer  in  having  a  distinct  organization,  the  shells 
of  bivalves  having  neither  apparent  vessels  nor 
fluids,  while,  in  these  Tunicaries,  the  covering, 
both  external  and  internal,  in  some  species, 
exhibits  vascular  ramifications  very  conspi- 
cuously. 

Though  several  of  the  animals  belonging  to 

VOL.  I.  Q 


22G  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  class  of  Tunicaries  are  interesting  on  account 
of  their  singularity  and  beauty,  I  shall  only  select 
two,  one  from  the  aggregated,  and  one  from  those 
that  are  simple,  for  description  and  further  re- 
marks, and  then  proceed  to  the  great  class  of 
MoUuscans.  Who  would  think,  asks  Lamarck, 
that  the  Pyrosame^  first  observed  by  Peron  and 
Le  Sueur,  was  an  assemblage  of  little  aggregate 
animals ;  any  one  that  looked,  at  this  animal,  or 
at  Savigny's  figure  of  it,^  would  mistake  it  for 
a  simple  polype,  with  a  number  of  leaf-like  ap* 
pondages  growing  frpih  its  skin :  but  a  clps^ 
examination  would  give  him  a  very  difierent 
idea,  and  he  would  discover,  with  wonder,  that  it 
was  a  mass  filled  with  animals,  united  by  their 
base,  exceeding  the  number  of  the  above  append- 
ages. The  common  body  that  contains  these 
creatures  resembles  a  hollow  cylinder  closed  at 
its  upper  extremity  and  open  at  the  lower ;  this 
body  or  mass  is  gelatinous  and  transparent,  a 
number  of  tubercles  of  a  firmer  substance  thaa 
the  tube,  but  at  the  same  time  transparent,-  p9« 
lished,  and  shining,  differing  in  size,  cover  the  sur- 
face ;  some  being  very  short,  and  others  longer^ 
and  the  longer  ones  terminated  by  a  lance^shaped 
leaflet.  At  the  summit  of  each  tubercle  is  a  cir- 
cular aperture,  without  tentacles,  opposite  to  which 
is  another  circular  orifice  which  is  toothed. 
The  pyrosomes  are  the  largest  of  the  phosphoric 

*   Anim,  sans.  Vert^br,  Pt.  IV.  Fig.  7. 


TUNICARIES.  227 

animals,  the  Atlantic  species^  being  about  five 
inches  long,  and  the  Mediterranean*  sometimes 
attaining  to  the  length  of  fourteen.  Their  poi?rer 
of  emitting  light  is  so  great  that  in  the  night 
they  icause  the  sea  to  appear  on  fire«  Nothing 
can  exceed  the  dazzling  light  and  brilliant 
colours  that  these  floating  bodies  exhibit^co^ 
lours  varying  in  It  way  truly  admirable,  passing 
rapidly  every  instant,  from  a  dazzling  red  to 
saffron,  to  orange,  to  green,  and  azure,  and  thus 
reflecting  e^^ery  ray  into  which  the  prism  divides 
the  light,  or  which  is  exhibited  by  the  heavenly 
bow*  In  the  water  their  position  is  generally 
horizontal,  and  their  locomotion  very  simple: 
they  float,  as  they  are  carried  by  the  waves  or 
the  currents ;  like  the  salpes,  they  can  however 
contract  and  restore  themselves  individually,  and 
have  also  a  very  slight  general  movement  which 
causes  liie  water  to  enter  their  common  cavity, 
visit  their  gills  for  respiration,  and  convey  to 
them  the  substances  which  constitute  their  food. . 
M.  Le  Sueur  observed  that  when  the  central  ca- 
vity of  the  common  tube  was  filled  with  water,  it 
was  immediately  spirted  forth  in  little  jets  frcan  all 
the  extremities  of  the  tubercles  with  which  the 
surface  was  covered,  from  whence  it  appears  that 
the  external  aperture  of  the  individual  animal 
is  really  the  anal  aperture,  and  the  opposite 
or  internal  one  the  mouth,  which  thus  received 

*  P.  atlanticum.  *  P,  giganteum.     Pl.  IV.  Fig,  3. 


228  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  water  and  the  food  it  conveyed  from  the 
common  tube,  and  rejected  it  by  the  orifice  of 
the  tubercles. 

The  internal  organization  of  the  little  tenants 
of  the  common  tube  is  given  with '  considerab^ 
detail  by  Savigny/  the  general  opening  at  the 
summit,  or  truncated  end  of  the  tube,  has  an 
annular  diaphragm,  from  which  it  appears  that 
they  are  arranged  in  circles  round  it,  so  that 
in  this  respect  they  form  rays ;  in  shape  thejf 
somewhat  resemble  a  florence-flask,  and  have 
alternately  a  long  and  short  neck.  The'  cavity 
below  the  neck  is  filled  by  the  gills  and  varimrt 
intestines,  which  it  would  be  difiicult  to  describe 
intelligibly,  in  a  popular  manner.  There '  seenis 
some  analogy  in  these  floating  hives  of  luminous 
animals,  both  as  to  size  and  motion,  with  the 
sea-pens.* 

No  species  of  the  genus  appears  to  have  beeB 
met  with  in  our  seas,  we  may  therefore  conjec- 
ture that  a  warmer  climate  is  essential  to  theiit 
Their  general  functions  beyond  that  of  iUuirii- 
nating  the  great  theatre  in  which  their  Oeator 
has  placed  them,  arid  probably  affording  food  td 
some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  seas  in  which 
they  are  found ,  have  not  yet  been  ascertained. 
Neither  of  the  orifices  of  these  little  animals  ffi 
furnished  with  tentacles,  but  their  branchiri 
orifice  is  toothed,  in  this  they  appear  to  diffisr 

*   Ubi,  supr.  pi,  xxii.  xxiii.  '  See  aboye,  p.  178. 


TUNICARIES.  229 

from  the  great  majority  of  aggregate  animals. 
We  may  conjecture  that  when  the  water  passes 
into  the  tube  the  diaphragm  is  either  dropped 
or  elevated  to  admit  it,,  and  then  resuming  a 
bori^ntal  position  closes  the  orifice  so  that  the 
,water  is  forced  into  the  interior  aperture  of  the 
individual  animals  and  passes  out,  as  above 
4escribedy  by  the  exterior  one.  Food-collecting 
tentacles,  therefore,  would  in  this  case  be  unne- 
cessary, as  their  food  would  enter  their  mouths 
with  the  water.  Providence  thus  taking  care  to 
compensate  by  this  contrivance  for  the  want  of 
tb0  ordinary  instruments. 

Some .  of  the  Tunicaries  are  stated  to  have 
recourse  to  a  singular  mode,  of  defence.  When 
seized  by  the  hand,  contracting  themselves 
forcibly,  they  ejaculate  the  water  contained  in 
their  cavities,  so  as  often  suddenly  to  inundate 
the  face  of  the  fisherman,  who  in  the  astonish- 
m^it  of  the  moment  suffers  the  animal  to  escape. 
If  this  be  a  correct  statement  it  proves  that  these 
sinimals  are  not  altogether  without  some  degree 
of  intdligence,  they  know  when  they  are  assailed 
and  how  to  repel  the  assailant. 

Having  given  some  account  of  the  most  in- 
teresting of  the  aggregate  Tunicaries,  I  am  next 
to  notice  the  simple  ones.r— In  these  the  two 
orifices  by  which  the  sea  .water  is  received  and 
expelled  are  not  at  opposite  extremities,  but 
usually   approximated,  one  being   higher  than 


I-  ,.n»(y!;K 


230  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  otbc^r  and  famtehed  with  tentacular 
The  animals  are  fixed  to  rockB,  shells,  and' some- 
times to  sea-weeds,  and  are  either  sessile^  or 
elevated  on  a  footstalk :  the  sessile  ones  present 
a  ccmsiderable  analogy  with  the  puff-ballsy  aikd 
the  others  with  diffisrent  funguses,  as  Clavmria, 
&C  They  seem,  eqiecially  Balteniaf  which  k 
covered  with  short  stiff  bristles,  to  approach  tlie 
Echinidans'.  Nothing  more  is  known  of  these 
animals,  than  that,  like  the  othm^s,  they  sdte^ 
nately  absorb  and  expel  the  sea  water.  Tke 
CyiUkia  Mamms^  is  remarkable  for  its  changeB 
of  colour,  being  sometimes  white,  sometimes 
orange,  aind  smnetimesi  of  a  flesh-eolour.  As  all 
this  tribe  are  fixed,  their  history  finmishss  » 
other  interesting  traits* 

Nothing  is  more  striking  thim  the  infinkely 
div^isified  forms  into  which  Creative  Power  has 
moulded  the  little  frail  animals,  in  this'  as  wdl 
as  the  preceding  classes,  that  wee  destined  to 
inhabit,  and  numbers  of  them  to  illuminate,  the 
wide  expanse  of  waters  occupying  so  laige  a 
portion  of  the  globe  we  inhabit.  When  we 
survey,  with  curious  and  del^hted  eyes»  the 
varied  tribes  that  cover  the  soils  of  every  aspect 
and  elevation  of  that  part  of  it  that  emei^ges  fton 
the  fluctuating  suriftstee  of  the  great  deep,  and 
which,  instead  of  deriving  their  nutriment  and 
m^ns  of  life  and  breath  from  the  waters,  saliae 

1  Plate  IV.  Fio.  I. 


J 


TUNICARIES.  231 

or  &esli»  Eve,  aad  breathe,  and  are  fed,  by 
prkieiples  and  elements  communicated,  either 
fliediaidy  or  immediately,  from  the  atmospheric 
oraan,  an  expanse  that  envelopes  uninterruptedly 
tlm  whole  of  our  globe,  and  which  itself  is  fed 
and  renovated  by  the  constant  effluxes  of  the 
great  centre  of  irradiation ;  whidi  also  in  its 
tiirn,  as  well  as  all  the  other  orbs  that  bum  and 
ate  radiant,  and  those  that  revolve  around  them 
aad  reflect  their  light,  receive  their  all  from 
SHmy  that  great  and  ineffable  being,  who 
gives  to  all  and  receives  from  none.  But  I  lose 
mys^f,  in  infinite  amaz^nent;  I  shrink  into 
very  nothingness,  when  I  reflect  that  such  a 
laisi&fi^ble  worm  as  I  am,  so  fallen  and  corrupted, 
should  presume  to  lift  its  thought  so  high,  and 
lose  itself  in  the  depths  of  the  unfathomable 
ocean  of  Deity.  He  has,  however,  commanded 
us  to  seek  him,  and  assured  us  we  shall  find 
him  if  we  seek  him  humbly  and  sincerely — 
he  hath  set  befoi^e  us  his  w&rks  and  his  ward^ 
in  both  of  which  he  has  revealed  himself  to 
us :  and  if  our  great  object  be  to  glorify  him 
lather  than  ourselves,  we  shall  collect  the 
TRUTH  from;  each,  and  shall  find  that  they 
deliver,  though  each  in  a  diiSarent  language 
and  style,  the  same  mysteries ;  for  they  are  the 
work  and  tbe  word  of  the  same  Almighty  Author, 
and  must,  therefore,  if  rightly  interpreted,  deliver 
the  same  truths,  since  they  can  no  more  con- 


232  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

tradict  each  other  than  he  can  contradid;  faim** 
self. 

But  let  me  endeayour  to  emerge  from  this 
ocean  in  which  I  seem  to  have  lost  myself^  smd, 
recovering  my  station  upon  terra  firma^  direct 
the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  lovely  tribes 
that  adorn  every  part  and  portion  of  this  our 
destined  but  brief  abode,  I  mean  to  the  v^etable 
kingdom ;  we  see  how  they  cover  earth,  that  not 
a  spot  can  be  found,  of  which  in  time  they  do 
not  possess  themselves,  and  that  the  more  ive 
extend  our  inquiries  the  more  numerous  are  the 
individual  species  with  which  we  become  ac- 
quainted. This  being  the  case  upon  earth, 
reasoning  from  analogy,  we  may  conclude  that 
something  similar  takes  place  in  the  ocean ;  thj|t 
could  our  discoveries  be  extended  under  the  sea 
as  easily  as  they  are  upon  land ;  could  we  traverse 
the  bed  and  waters  of  the  great  deep  with  the 
same  facility  that  we  do  the  surface  of  the  earth« 
we  should  find  the  numbers  of  vegetables  that 
respire,  in  some  sense,  the  air,  fall  short  perhaps 
of  those  plant-like  animals  that  respire  the  witfer. 
And  could  we  examine  the  individual  species  of 
which  this  infinite  host  consists,  and  compaie 
their  organizations,  we  should  find  as  great  a 
difference  in  the  instruments  and  organs  by 
which  their  life  is  supported  and  their  kind  cob- 
tinued,  as  in  the  animals  themselves ;  and  yet 
in  all  this  diversity  should  trace  a  harmony  and 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  233 

eancatraiiation  that  would  evidently  prove  the 
Wisdom  that  contrived,  the  Power  that  formed, 
a^d  the  Goodness  that  gave  a  living  principle 
aad  breath  of  life  to  all  these  creatures,  were 
eaehof  them  the  a^ributesof  an  infinite  being. 


Chapter  VIII. 

Functions  and  Instincts.     Bivalve  Molhiscans. 

Hitherto  in  our  progress  from  the  lowest  ani- 
mals upwards,  the  mind  has  been  perpetually 
submerged;  not  only  every  group,  but  every 
individual  that  we  have  had  occasion  to  consider, 
has  been  an  inhabitant  of  the  waters,  and  to  the 
great  body  of  which  a  fluid  medium  is  as  neces- 
sary to  life  and  action  as  an  aerial  one  is  to  a 
land  animal,  but  now  we  shall  be  permitted  to 
emeige  occasionally,  for  although  the  largest 
proportion  of.  the  animals  forming  the  great  class 
we  are  now  to  advert  to,  the  Molluscansj  Bxe  also 
aquatic,  yet  still  a  very  considerable  number  of 
them  are  terrestrial,  as  a  stroll  abroad  will  soon 
convince  us,  when  after  a  shower  we  find  we  can 
scarcely  set  a  step  without  crushing  a  snail  or  a 
slug. 


334  FUMCXIONft  AKD  INSTINCTrS. 

The  term  MoUueean^  was  c^noiployed  by  livak 
to  demgnate  his  second  cbu9S  of  woims,^  which 
excltided  all  the  shell-fish,  and  amongst  nud 
MoUuscans  included  both  Radiaries,  Timiearies, 
and  Worms  i  it  literally  signifies  a  not  or  walnut, 
and  therefore  seems  more  properly  applied  to 
shell-fishy  than  to  animals  which  are  defij^ied  as 
simple  and  naked.  As  now  understood,  it  still 
comprehends  a  very  wide  range  of  animal  forms, 
and  it  seems  difiicult  to  describe  them  by  any 
character  common  to  them  all.  Their  Almighty 
Author,  in  the  progress  of  his  work  of  creation, 
linked'  ibrm  to  form  in  Tarious  ways ;  he  not  ofily 
made  an  animal  of  a  lower  grade  a  stepping- 
stcme  towards  one  of  a  higher,  and  which  formed 
a  part  of  the  ascent  to  man;  the  highest  of  all^^^bnt 
as  the  mighty  work  proceeded,  he  threw^  oat  on 
each  i^de  eoUateral  forms  that  ascend  by  a 
difierent  route,  or  begin  one  to  a  di£Serent  ord^ 
af  beings.  And  this  circumstance  it  is  that  has 
opened  the  door  for  so  many  sj^^stems:  and  that 
diTersity  of  sentiment  with  respect  to  the 
grouping  of  animals,  which  we  meet  with  in  die 
writings  of  the  most  eminent  natitralists.  Some 
proceed  by  one  path  and^  some  by  attother, 
though  the  object  of  all  is  the  same,  unless  mvkt 
bias  fi?om  a  favourite  hypothesis  interferes  and 
diverts  them  from  a  right  judgment* 

The  organization  of  the  animals  of  the  Class 

'  Mollusca.  2  Vermes. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  235 

weifeive  just  left,  as^  we  have  seen,  appean  of  a 
higfaer  character  than  that  of  any  of  the  preceding 
€mes ;  tracer  of  a  heart  appear ;  a  nervous  ganglion 
]8>  detected  between  the  month  and  anuB,  sending 
nesTMH  to  each ;  a  regular  respiratory  system  by 
means  of  gills  becomes  evident ;  but  still  the 
atumal  is  fiirnished  with  no  head,  no  eyes,  and  in 
numerous  cases  has  no  separate  existence,  but 
fiocms  a  brsmch  of  the  general  body — thus  resem- 
bimg  a  plant*— from^  which  it  cannot  dissociate 
itsdif  and  become  an  independent  individual. 

Indeed  when  we  enter  the  Class  of  Molluscans, 
^e  find  that  the  nearest  affinities  of  the  Tuni- 
caries have  likewise  mo  head,  and  this  circum- 
efeance  appears  to  have  indtteed  Lamarck  not 
mily  to  separate  them  from  the  class  as  arranged 
by  Cuvier,  but  also^his  whde  family  of  headless 
Moiluscans,'  of  which  he  forms'  his  two  Classes  of 
Cirripedes'^  and  Ctmehifers.^  The  absence  of  a 
head  from  the  animals  of  the  bivalve  and 
multivalve  shells,  is  certainly  a  circumstance 
vhich^  at  tl^  first  bhish,  appears  to  justify 
their  s^mration  clamcaUg  fiiom  the  other  Mol- 
luscans, Imt  when  we  compare  other  characters, 
vre  shall  finid  many  that  are  common  to  both, 
particularly  their  nervous  system,  which  is 
the  same  both  in  the  Conchifers  and  Mollus- 
cans of  Lamarck ;  for  neither  of  these  exhibit 

'  Mollusca  acepkala.  ^  Cirripeda. 

^  Conchifera. 


236  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

a  medullary  ganglionic  chord,  but  only  dispersed 
ganglions  which  send  forth  the  requisite 
nerves ;  both  have  a  double  or  bilobed  mantle, 
gills  on  each  side,  and  a  heart  and  circulatioi^* 
The  Cirnpedes  indeed  seem  to  be  of  a  higher 
grade,  at  least  their  nervous  system  is  more 
perfect — since  they  have  a  longitudinal  spinal 
marrow  with  ganglions,  a  mouth  furnished  with 
toothed  jaws  disposed  by  pairs,  and  jointed 
tendril-like  organs  about  the  mouth — and  ap- 
proaches near  to  that  of  the  Annulose  animals,^ 
the  Condylopes  of  Latreille.  These,  therefore, 
may  be  considered  as  properly  entitled  to  the 
denomination  of  a  Class;  but  should  not  be 
placed  at  a  distance  from  the  Crustaceans,  to 
which  Lamarck,  with  reason,  thinks  they  make 
a  near  approach,  as  they  are  by  Cuvier  and 
Carus.  In  fact,  they  seem  to  have  little  to  do 
with  the  bivalve  MoUuscans,  except  in  being 
defended  by  more  than  one  shell,  and  having 
no  head. 

I  shall  now  mention  the  most  prominent  cha- 
racters of  those  shell-fish,  that  I  regard  as  strictly 
entitled  to  the  denomination  of  MoUuscans. 

Animal  soft,  without  articulations*  Mantle 
bilobed,  enveloping  more  or  less  the  aniaial. 
Gills  varying.  A  heart  and  circulation.  No  me- 
dullary chord  with  ganglions^  but  a  few  scattered 
ganglions  from   which  issue  nerves  to  various 

1  Annulosa. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSC AN8.  237 

parts.  Body  commonly  defended  by  a  calcareous 
shdly  to  which  it  adheres  only  by  one  or  two 
points,  but  in  some  instances  it  is  externally 
naked,  and  has  an  internal  bone. 

The  MoUuscans  may  be  divided  into  several 
iamilies,  and  those  of  Cuvier  are  mostly  natural, 
but  as  my  plan  has  been  to  ascend  from  the 
lowest  grade  of  animals  towards  the  highest,  I 
shall  reverse  this  order,  and  begin  my  observa- 
tions with  the  last  of  his  families,  or  more  pro- 
perly speaking  Orders,  excluding  for  the  present 
the  Cirripedes  of  Lamarck,  or  most  of  the  mlulti- 
valves  of  Linn6,  as  leading  off  laterally  towards 
the  Crustaceans. 

His  first  order  he  calls  Acephalesy  or  headless 
MoUuscans,  it  includes  all  the  bivalve  shells  of 
Linn6,  with  the  addition  of  the  Pholads  or 
stone-borers.*  Lamarck  has  divided  it  into  two 
sections,  which,  regarding  it  as  a  Class,  are  with 
him  Orders ;  the  first  is  JBimuscular,^  having  two 
attaching  muscles,  and  two  muscular  impres- 
sions; and  the  second  is  Unimuscular,^  having 
only  one  such  muscle  with  one  impression.  With 
r^ard  to  their  habits  and  economy,  the  bivalve 
MoUuscans  may  also  be  divided  into  two  sec- 
tions, the  Jirst  of  which  may  consist  of  those 
that  inclose  themselves  either  in  a  cell  or  burrow, 
or  live  in  the  mud,  &c. ;  and  the  second  of  those 

1  Pholas,  2  ConchiJ^res  dimyaires, 

3  C  monomy aires. 


238  FUJCCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

that  fix  themselves  to  the  rocks,  stones,  and  other 
substances,  by  means  of  a  Byssw^  which  they 
have  the  faculty  of  spuming  frontL  their  foot  or 
other  part,  or  by  u'tendmous  ligament  which  tfa^ 
protrude  through  an  orifice  in  their  shdL 

The  general  habit  of  the  ^r^*  family,  indudiiig 
a  vast  variety  of  forms,  seems  to  be  tiiiat  of  boring 
and  burrowingf  many  piercing  wood,  and  even 
rock,  and  others  burrowing  in  the  sand,  some* 
times  to  a  great  depth.  Thus  they  are  instructed 
by  their  instinct  to  form  a  convenient  cell  or 
other  habitation,  either  constantly  submerged, 
or  only  when  the  tide  visits  them,  in  vkiik 
they  are  enabled  to  procure  their  destined  food, 
of  what  nature  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
clearly  ascertained,  although  probably  animal'^ 
cules,  introduced  when  they  inspire  the  water  for 
respiration,  may  form  a  principal  portion  cC 
it,  as  the  majority  iiaving  no  teeth  for  masti* 
cation,  require  a  kind  of  nutriment  for  which 
it  is  not  necessary:  comparing  this  tribe  of 
aquatic  animals  with  those  of  the  antecedent 
classes,  we  see  the  same  object  effected  by 
different  means.  The  sheathed  polype^  builds 
a  house. of  matter  elaborated  in  its  own  stomach, 
while  the  ship-^boref*  pierces  wood,  and  the 
stone-borer  the  rocks,  and  the  razor^shell* 
burrows  deep  in  the  sand  with  the  same  view ; 

1  See  above,  p.  166.  n.  2.  «  Teredo.  *  Solen. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  239 

and  thus  each  is  instructed  by  its  Omtiiscient 
Creator,  and  fitted  by  its  structure  and  organi- 
zation, to  accomplish  the  intended  purpose,  but 
by  diffisrent  means  and  instruments. 

While  each  of  these  creatures  has  a  particular 
and  individual  end  in  view,  in  its  several  pro-» 
ceedings,  its  own  accommodation  and  appropriate 
nutriment  and  defence;  the  Creator,  who  has 
gi£ted  them  accordingly,  makes  use  of  th^n  as 
instruments,  which  by  their  combined  agency, 
though  each,  as  it  were,  by  a  different  pro- 
cess, accomplish,  usually  by  slow  degrees.  His 
general  purposes.  This  object,  in  the  present 
instance,  as  well  as  in  numerous  others,  seems 
to  be  to  remove  obstacles  that  stand  in  the  way, 
and  prevent  certain  changes  willed  by  Provi- 
dence, in  the  sea-line  of  any  country,  from 
taJsLing  place.  Rocks  may  be  regarded  as  so 
many  munitions  of  a  coast,  which  prevent  the 
encroachment  of  the  ocean,  but  nothing  can 
more  effectually  prepare  the  way  for  the  removal 
of  this  safeguard,  than  its  being,  as  it  were, 
honey->combed  by  numberless  stone-borers,  that 
make  it  their  habitation,  thus  it  must  be  gra- 
dually rendered  weaker ;  till  it  is  no  longer  able 
to  resist  the  impetus  of  the  waves ;  the  process 
is  very  slow,  but  it  is  sure;  and  it  is  worthy 
of  remark,  by  what  a  seemingly  weak  organ 
most  di  these  animals  are  enabled  to  effect 
this  purpose,  a  fleshy  foot,  strengthened  by  no 


240  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

internal  bone  or  gristle,  but  upon  which  they 
can  turn  as  upon  a  pivoti  and  so  in  due  time 
effect  their  destined  purpose. 

I  shall  now  proceed  to  furnish  some  examples 
of  the  manner  in  which  this  is  effected :  and  giye 
an  account  of  some  of  each  of  these  tribes, 
beginning  with  those,  and  they  are  numerous, 
that  make  the  burrows  in  the  sand  to  a  consider- 
able depth,  so  that  it  presents  a  less  soUd  mass 
to  the  action  of  the  waves. 

I  shall  first  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the 
proceeding  of  one  usually  denominated  the  razor- 
sJielly  from  the  supposed  resemblance  of  some  of 
the  species  to  that  instrument ;  in  substance  and 
colour  they  are  often  like  the  human  nail,  and  as 
they,  as  well  as  the  stone-borers,  are  stated  to 
emit  a  phosphoric  light,  and  also  are  eaten,  it 
seems  to  me  most  probable  that  they  are  the 
animals  and  not  the  pholad  as  is  usually  sup- 
posed, which  the  Romjan  naturalist  describes 
under  the  name  Dactyle^  These  animals  burrow 
in  the  sand,  sometimes  to  the  depth  of  two  <^ 
three  feet,  and  never  quit  the  burrow  unless  by 
force.  Poli  says  the  collectors  of  them  are 
accustomed  to  pour  oil  upon  the, water,  which 
renders  it  quite  transparent  so  that. they  can  dis- 
cern the  razor-fisb  in  its  burrow  by  its  tubes 
which  are  exerted.  So  powerful  ace. its  strug- 
gles, that,  though  they  wind  linen  about  their 

*  See  Appendix,  note  23. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  241 

feet,  tliey  are  often  severely  wounded  by  the 
sharp  edges  of  their  shells.  The  animal  descends 
to  the  bottom  of  its  burrow  when  the  tide  retires, 
and  there  remains  till  its  return  when  it  rises 
again.  In  order  to  take  it,  the  fishermen  are 
accustomed  to  cast  into  its  retreat — which  always 
remains  open  for  respiration,  and  which  is  indi- 
i:;ated  by  a  little  jet  of  water — ^a  very  little  salt, 
this  probably  deceives  the  razor-fish  and  causes 
it  to  ascend,  thinking  the  tide  returned.  They 
bury  themselves  with  wonderful  celerity  by  the 
rapid  action  of  their  foot,  and  mount  again  by 
the  combined  action  of  that  part  and  their  smooth 
valves.  The  former  is  cylindrical  and  ends  in  a 
spherical  summit  of  larger  diameter  than  th(9 
rest  of  the  foot.  ^ 

ThiB  common  cockle^  is  also  al  borer.  Mn 
Osier,  in  a  very  interesting  paper  in  the  Philo-t 
sophical  Transactions  for  1826,  has  described 
the  way  in  which  they  bury  themselves.  The 
foot  of  the  cockle,  he  observes,  is  very  strong 
and  stiff,  and  is  the  instrument  by  which  they 
principally  perform  this  operation ;  but  to  look 
at  it  when  unemployed,  we  cannot  readily  corir 
ceive  how  it  can  make  a  burrow  capacious 
enough  for  so  large  a  shell.  Its  poidt,  indeed, 
is  solid,  and  a  viscid  secretion  from  its  surface 
enables  it  to  fix  itself  more  firmly  in  the  sand, 
but  this,  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  accomplish  this 

*  Plate  V.  Fig.  1.  2  Cardium  edule. 

VOL.  I.  R 


242  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

purpose,  it  is  therefore  further  gifted  with  the 
power  of  distending  it  to  a  size,  nearly  equal- 
ling that  of  its  shell — ^but  how  is  this  effected? 
It  has  a  tube,  opening  just  within  the  mouth, 
which  conveys  to  the  foot  the  water  by  which 
the  animal  is  enabled  to  distend  it — thus  the  size 
of  the  boring  auger  becomes  so  nearly  equal  to 
that  of  the  shells,  that  the  solid  point  or  bit  first 
entering  the  sand,  in  time,  by  rotatory  motions 
often  repeated,  works  a  burrow  that  receives 
the  shell,  and  the  animal  is  buried  with  cmly 
the  extremity  of  its  siphon  emerging.  How  ad- 
mirable is  this  contrivance  of  Divine  Wisdom 
to  enable  it  to  bury  its  shell,  which  it  could 
scarcely  otherwise  accomplish. 

We  easily  comprehend  the  use  of  terrestrial 
burrowing  animals,  by  this  habit  they  not  only 
construct  a  habitation  for  themselves,  but  by  the 
mould  they  throw  out  they  help  to  fertilize  and 
renew  the  soil ;  but  with  regard  to  the  aquatic 
burrowers  on  the  barren  sands,  which  the  tides 
submerge,  we  only  see  one  end  answered,  the 
welfare  of  the  individual  who  forms  them :  but 
they  likewise  doubtless  answer  some  more 
general  purpose  connected  with  a  plan  of  Provi- 
dence which  daily  advances  towards  its  comple- 
tion, though  we  do  not  clearly  comprehend  what 
that  end  is.  I  was  once  conversing  with  a 
fisherman  of  a  village  on  the  N.  E*  coast  of 
Norfolk  on  the    subject    of   his    trade,    when 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  243 

amongst  other  matters  he  observed,  that  from 
some  alteration  in  the  sands  of  that  coast  the 
number  of  small  shell   fish   had   considerably 
diminished  of  late  years,  which  being  the  prin- 
cipal food  of  soles  and  other  flat  fish  had  occa- 
sioned a  great  diminution  of  them  also.    An 
over   abundance    of  burrowing    biv£(Jives    may 
undermine  the  beach  to  that  degree,  that  the 
sea  in  high  tides  and  stormy  weather  may  make 
such  a  breach  upon  it  as  may  carry  away,  or 
bury  too  deep,  a  large  proportion  of  these  shell 
fish,  which  would  cause  the  fishes  to  leave  the 
coast  for  one  better  provided  with  food  for  them. 
No  animal  has  been  more  celebrated  for  the 
mischief  it  has  occasioned  as  a  timber-bore?*  than 
that  of  which  I  shall  next  give  some  account- 
I  am  speaking  of  the  ship-womi}    Though  the 
animal  of  some  of  the  land-shells,  as  the  snails,^  do 
him  some  injury  in  his  garden,  man  seldom  suffers 
very  materially  from  their  ravages,  but  the  ship- 
worm,  where  it  gets  head,  does  him  incalculable 
injury  :  destroying  piles  as  far  as  they  are  under 
the  water  and  every  thing  constructed  of  timber 
that  is  placed  within  their  reach,  to  which  they 
are   as    injurious    as  the  boring  wood-louse;^ 
they  even  attack  the  stoutest  vessels,  and  render 
them  unfit  for  service.     Their  object  however  is 
not  to  devour  the  timber,  but  with  the  same  view 
that  the  pholads  bore  into  the  rock,  to  make 

*  Teredo  navalis,  2  Helix.  '  Limnoria  terebrans. 


244  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

for  themselves  a  cell  in  which  they  inay  be  safe 
from  their  enemies ;  their  food  is  probably  con- 
veyed to  them  in  the  sea  water.  These  animals 
cannot  exist  in  fresh  water,  they  pierce  the  wodd 
by  means  of  what  Cams  calls  boring  shells 
moved  by  a  double-bellied  muscle.  The  valves  of 
the  shells  of  this  animal  are  emarginate  orbilobed, 
both  lobes  are  beautifully  scored  at  the  margin, 
but  in  different  directions,  the  furrows  in  one 
being  much  the  finest  and  receiving  those  of  the 
other.  The  mode  in  which  these  animals  bore 
has  not  been  ascertained,  probably  it  is  by  the 
rotation  of  their  valves.  Sir  E.  Home  describes 
them  as  protruding  a  kind  of  proboscis  which 
has  a  vermicular  motion,  and  which  he  supposes 
to  act  as  a  centre-bit  while  the  creature  is  boring. 
The  shells,  by  means  of  their  ridges,  probably 
act,  like  those  of  the  pholads,  as  rasps.  They 
bore  in  the  direction  of  the  grain  of  the  timber, 
deviating  only  to  avoid  the  track  of  others. 

Various  are  the  animals  whose  function  it  is 
to  attack  substances  from  which  the  vital 
principle  is  departed,  nor  are  those,  we  see  in 
the  foregoing  instance,  which  are  submerged, 
always  exempted  from  this  law.  Fortunatdy 
the  aquatic  animals,  that  prey  upon  timber,  fMl 
very  far  short  of  the  terrestrial  ones  in  their 
number  and  in  the  amount  of  the  damage  they 
occasion,  and  their  aversion  to  fresh  water  is  the 
safeguard  of  our  bridges   and   other  buildings 


BIVALVE  MOLLtJSCANS.  2  15 

that  are  erected  upon  piles — did  an  animal,  with 
the  boring  powers  of  the  ship-worm,  enter  our 
rivers  and  abound  there,  we  should  see  the  mag- 
nificent bridges  that  so  much  adorn  our  metro- 
polis and  are  so  indispensable  to  its  inhabitants, 
gradually  go  to  ruin — the  vast  stones  with  which 
they  are  built  might  become  the  habitation  of 
pholads,  and  other  rock-borers,  and  the  com- 
munication between  the  two  sides  of  the  river 
greatly  interrupted.  But  a  merciful  Providence 
has  so  limited  the  instincts  of  the  different 
animals  it  has  created,  that  they  cannot  overstep 
a  certain  boundary,  nor  extend  their  ravages 
beyond  the  territory  assigned  to  them.  The  law 
laid  down  to  the  ship-worm  is  to  hasten  the 
decay  of  timber,  that  is  out  of  its  place,  and 
may  be  denominated  an  unsightly  encroachment 
upon  the  ocean — this  is  the  law  they  must  obey, 
aod  they  make  no  distinction,  whether  it  is  dis- 
owned by  all,  or  an  important  and  valuable  part 
of  man's  property.  Their  individual  object^  as 
has  been  stated  above,  is  their  own  benefit,  and 
they  neither  know  that  they  obey  a  law  of  God, 
or  injure  man,  but  the  Almighty  by  an  irresistible 
agency  impels  them  to  it,  and  they  fulfil  the 
purposes  of  his  Providence,  at  the  same  time  that 
they  provide  for  their  own  welfare. 

The  history  of  none  of  the  boring  bivalves  is 
more  interesting  than  that  of  the  Pholads y  or 
stone-borers.   These  animals  are  defended  by  two 


246  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

yery  fragile  shells  strengthened  indeed  by  sup- 
plementary pieces,  and  rough  like  a  file,  inhabited 
by  a  very  soft  animal  which  appears  to  be  fur- 
nished with  no  organs  adapted  to  boring  so  hard 
a  substance  as  a  rock.  When  the  young  axe 
disclosed  from  the  ^g,  being  cast  upon  the  rock 
in  which  their  mother  resides,  they  bore  a  hole 
in  it  which  they  enlarge  daily,  and  which  they 
never  leave,  unless  compelled  by  force.  This 
hole  always  communicates  with  the  water,  and  is 
the  orifice  through  which  the  animal  exerts  its 
double  siphons ;  one  of  these  siphons  is  its  imouth 
and  the  other  its  anal  orifice.  Reaumur  made 
some  observations  upon  their  mode  of  boring,  he 
says,  that  it  is  by  the  rotation  of  the  two  valves 
of  their  shell  which  form  a  rasp,  and  continually 
wear  away  the  rock  which  surrounds  them. 
The  surface  of  the  valves  of  the  shell  is  ridged 
longitudinally  and  transversely,  and  rough  with 
asperities  at  the  intersections  of  the  ridges  which 
seems  to  fit  it  for  such  an  ofiice,  but  still  it  is 
usually  so  tender  and  friable,  that  one  would  not 
expect  it  could  act  upon  a  rock,  nor  could  it  be 
by  this  agency  that  they  first  make  an  entry 
when  young,  or  bore  through  shells,  madrepores, 
and  wood  as  they  are  said  to  do.  They  are 
stated  principally  to  select  calcareous  rocks  and 
sometimes  hardened  clay,  which  seem  better 
adapted  to  the  nature  of  their  shells.  Poli  says 
they  use  their  foot  as  an  auger  in  excavating 


BIVALV£  MOLLUSC ANS.  247 

their  crypts,  the  shell  reyolving  upon  it  as  upon 
an  axis. 

Mr.  Osier,  in  the  memoir  before  alluded  to, 
states  that  the  pholads  can  be  observed  to 
burrow  only  in  the  young  state :  and  that  they 
are  found  completely  buried  when  so  minute  as 
to  be  almost  invisible.  The  guiding  hand  of 
Providence  excites  them  from  their  very  birth 
to  fix  themselves  by  their  pointed  foot,  to  erect 
their  shells,  and  giving  them  a  partial  rotatory 
motion  which  employs  the  valves  alternately^ 
thus  to  enlarge  their  habitation,  and  this  almost 
constantly,  since  the  rapidity  of  their  growth,  for 
the  first  few  weeks,  compels  them  to  act  perse- 
veringly  in  eflfecting  that  object,  for  the  raspings 
of  its  crypt  would  clog  the  animal  if  they  were 
left  in  it.  When  the  siphon  is  distended  with 
water,  the  animal,  closing  the  orifices  of  its  tubes, 
suddenly  retracts  them :  thus  a  jet  of  water  is 
produced  which  is  prolonged  by  the  gradual 
shutting  of  the  valves,  and  clears  the  shell  and 
the  crypt. 

There  is  another  family  of  bivalves  which 
bores  the  rocks,  the  species  of  which  are  in- 
structed by  their  Maker,  to  accompliiih  their 
object  by  a  very  difierent  process.  I  allude  to 
Latnarck's  family  of  Stone-eaters}  This  family 
contains  only  two  genera,  removed  from  Venus^ 

*  Les  Lithdphages, 


248  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

which    he  denominates  Saxieave,^  and   Petri- 
cole^  the  habits  of  which  appear  to  be  the  same. 
M.  Fleurian-de-Bellevue  has  described  the  pro- 
ceedings of  a  species  found  in  great  numbers  ia 
submarine  calcareous  rocks  near  Rochelle.    It 
lives  like  the  pholads  in  crypts  within  the  rock, 
but  as  the  crypt  is  not  circular,  it  is  clear 
it  cannot  be  produced  by  a  revolution  of  the 
animal  upon  its  foot ;  M.  de  Bellevue,  therefore, 
concluded  that  it  dissolved  the  stone  by  means 
of  a  phosphoric  acid  transuding  from  its  body. 
Some  have  thought,  that  did  the  animal  secrete 
such  an  acid,  it  must  have  destroyed  its  shell, 
but  since  the  rock  round  the  crypt  is  found  to 
be  differently  coloured  from  the  rest,  for  a  little 
thickness,  and  the  animal  does  not  frequent  the 
argillaceous,  basaltic,   and  other  rocks  in  the 
vicinity,  but  only  the  calcareous  ones,  M.  Bel- 
levue's  opinion  is  rendered  not  improbable.    It 
is  surely  very  possible  that  the  acid  may  be  so 
mixed  and  tempered  as  to  act  upon  the  rock 
and  not  upon  the  shell.      Mr.  Osier,   in  the 
memoir  lately  quoted,  brings  forward  some  very 
powerful  additional  arguments  which  confirm 
this  opinion.    The  species  which  he  observed 
was  the  rugose  saxicave.^    This  animal  fixes 
itself  by  a  byssus  from  the  foot,  and  therefore 
Cannot  perform  a  rotatory  motion,  and  it  a^)eais 

*  Saxicava,  ^  Petricola  ^  Saxicava  rugosa. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCAN8.  349 

to  have  no  mechanical  means  of  excavating  its 
crypt-it  can  act  solely  upon  the  calcareous  part 
of  the  rocks  it  perforates — for  these  and  other 
reasons,  Mr.  Osier  is  of  the  same  opinion  with 
M.  de  Bellevue. 

Poll  has  described  a  stone-boring  bivalve, 
belonging  to  the  muscle  genus,  which  perforates 
marble,  each  inhabiting  a  separate  crypt,  ge- 
nerally as  large  as  the  shell,  and  which  he  thinks 
they  enlarge  by  friction  and  rotatory  motion. 
The  pillars  of  the  temple  of  Serapis  at  Puteoli 
were  perforated  by  these  animals  at  the  height 
of  forty-six  feet  above  the  sea,  whence  it  is  pro- 
bable they  were  so  perforated  before  they  wwe 
carried  there.^ 

When  we  compare  the  proceedings  of  these 
four  kinds  of  boring  or  burrowing  MoUuscans, 
above  described,  with  their  forms,  we  shall  find 
in  them  a  particular  adaptation  of  means  to  an 
end.  In  the  ship-worm,  whose  province  is  to 
penetrate  into  submerged  timber  and  there  to 
take  its  abode,  we  find  the  anterior  part  of  the 
body  armed  with  two  shelly  valves,  moved  by 
strong  muscles,  which  cut  and  rasp  the  sub- 
stance upon  which  they  act,  so  that  it  probably 
begins  its  labour  as  soon  as  it  is  born,  intro- 
ducing its  narrow  body,  defended  at  the  other 
extremity  also  by  shell,  into  the  timber  softened 

'  Poli,  ii.  215. 


250  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

by  the  water,  and  slowly  increasing  its  ciypt 
as  its  dimensions  increase — ^in  this  case  the  most 
powerful  action  seems  to  be  at  the  anterior  end, 
though  as^sted,  it  may  be»  by  some  motion  at 
the  posterior.  This  kind  of  action  appears  best 
suited  to  its  slender  body. 

Let  us  next  examine  the  pholads,  all  the 
genuine  ones  are  rough  like  a  rasp,  strengthened 
near  the  base  with  accessory  valres  and  a  thick 
interior  maigin,  indicating  that  here  is  the  great 
action,  and  here  it  is  that  the  foot  revolves,  thus 
maintaining  a  rotatory  motion,  causing  the  valves 
to  act  as  files  upon  the  walls  of  its  crypt  and  thus 
to  enlarge  it  when  necessary;  perhaps  this 
action  may  also  be  connected  with  its  respiration 
and  nutriment;  it  is  probably  very  slow  and 
gradual,  so  as  not  to  injure  the  frail  apex  of 
its  shells. 

In  another  rock*borer,  of  a  form  not  suited  to 
effect  an  excavation  by  a  rotatory  motion,  the 
deficiency,  we  see,  is  compensated  for,  and  it 
efiects  its  purpose  by  employing  chemical  agency 
when  its  crypt  becomes  too  small  for  it. 

The  sand-boring  razor-shell  above  described, 
would  be  impeded  by  a  rough  shell,  in  excavating 
its  deep  burrow,  its  valves  therefore  are  smooth 
ttnd  polished,  and  its  body  very  narrow,  and 
consequently  meets  with  less  resistance  in  its 
motion  either  upwards  or  downwards — while  the 
cockles  which  do  not  bore  to  a  great  depth  are 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANA.  251 

differently  constructed  and  proceed  in  a  different 
manner. 

We  next  come  to  those  bivalves  which  fix 
themselves  to  the  rocks,  or  in  other  secure 
stations,  by  means  of  a  Byssusy  which  is  usually 
formed  of  brown  silken  threads,  intertwined  like 
wool,  spun  from  the  foot  of  the  animal,  formed 
from  a  slimy  fluid  furnished  by  a  gland  situated 
under  its  base.  Poll  says,  with  respect  to  the 
byssus  of  muscles,  which  have  all  of  them  this 
faculty,  that  it  is  of  the  same  structure  with  hair, 
and  that,  at  the  extremities,  it  is  furnished  with 
little  cups  or  suckers,  by  which  it  adheres  so 
jSrmly,  that  the  muscles  can  only  be  drawn  from 
the  water  in  great  bunches.  Some  species  are 
entirely  enveloped  with  this  substance.  These 
'  provisions  evidently  indicate  design  and  Creative 
Wisdom. 

The  giant  Cla^np-sheUs^  belonging  to  the  bi- 
muscular  section,  sometimes  four  feet  in  length 
and  weighing  more  than  five  hundred  pounds, 
suspend  their  vast  bulk  by  means  of  a  strong 
byssus :  below  the  hinge  is  a  large  opening, 
through  which  the  animal  passes  a  bundle  of 
tendinous  fibres,  by  which  it  is  suspended  to  the 
rocks  however  large  and  weighty  its  shells,  and 
thus  it  is  enabled  to  fix  itself  securely,  wherever 
its  instinct  directs  it. 

*   Tridacne  Gigas. 


252  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

These  animals  are  said  to  be  taken  by  means 
of  a  long  pole,  which  is  introduced  between  the 
yalves  of  their  shells  when  open ;  they  imme* 
diately  close  them,  and  will  not  quit  their  bcdd, 
till  they  are  landed.  They  are  a  principal  arti- 
cle of  food  in  the  Moluccas,  especially  the  young 
ones,  which  may  be  kept  alive  a  long  time. 

The  wing-shell  ^  belonging  to  the  unimuscular 
section,  has  long  been  celebrated,  on  more  than 
one  account,  from  a  very  early  period.  They 
sire  called  wing-shells,  or  fin-shells,  because  they 
are  shaped  somewhat  like  a  wing  or  fin,  their 
Latin  name  {Pinna)  is  supposed  to  have  been 
given  them  because  of  their  resemblance  to  the 
plumes  which  the  Roman  soldiers  wore  in  their 
helmets.  They  are  sometimes  very  large,  some 
are  said  to  measure  three  feet  in  length :  their 
substance  differs  from  that  of  most  shells,  being 
of  a  fibrous  structure,  and  they  appear  to  be 
formed  of  transverse  imbricated  laminae,  th^ 
are  also  semi-transparent  and  very  thin.  Their 
byssus  has  been  long  celebrated,  for  it  is  m^i- 
tioned  by  Aristotle.^  Its  Creator  has  provided 
this  animal,  as  we  learn  from  Poli,  with  a  pair 
of  bifid  muscles  with  which  it  spins  this  sub- 
stance, which  emerges  from  the  shell  opposite 
the  hinge;  like  the  thread  of  the  muscle  it 
terminates  in  a  sucker,  and  with  it  the  animal 

*  Pinna,  ^  See  Appendix,  note  24. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSC ANS.  253 

adheres  to  the  rocks  and  other  bodies  which  it 
meets  with  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  thus 
thty  brave  the  agitation  of  the  waters.  They 
seldom  change  their  station,  but  they  can  unfix 
their  byssus,  if  any  circumstance  renders  such 
change  imperative.  In  Sicily  and  Calabria  this 
byssus,  which  is  very  silky,  is  manufactured  into 
stuffs,  stockings,  and  gloves,  which  are  very  fine 
and  warm,  but  it  will  take  no  dye :  articles  com- 
posed of  it  are  very  dear,  and  the  manufacture 
is  fast  declining.  Aristotle  observed  a  little 
crustaceous  animal  within  the  valves  of  the  wing- 
shell,  which  he  thought  was  necessary  to  its 
existence.  Pliny  says  it  is  always  accompanied 
by  a  companion,  the  Pinnotheres  or  PinnophyUtx^ 
that  when  the  Pinna  opens  its  shell,  a  number 
of  small  fish  boldly  enter,  and  when  it  is  full, 
the  crab  gives  the  blind  animal  notice  by  a 
slight  bite,  who  immediately  closes  his  shell,  and 
assigns  a  portion  of  the  prey  to  his  little  useful 
companion.  Small  Crustaceans  indeed,  both 
crabs  and  shrimps,  certainly  do  find  their  way 
not  only  into  the  shells  of  the*  Pinna,  but  into 
those  of  muscles  and  whilks,^  but  their  object 
is  to  defend  themselves,  especially  when  their 
crust  is  soft,  and  not  to  tell  the  Pinna  when  to 
close  its  doors  upon  its  prey ;  for  its  food  is  the 
sea  water  or  the  animalcules  it  contains, 

*  Buccinum, 


254  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Many  other  biralves,  which  I  need  not  particu- 
larize, spin  a  byssus  with  their  foot.  Singular  it  is 
that  the  same  office  should  be  assigned  to  organs 
so  differently  situated  in  different  animals.  The 
spinnerets  of  the  silk- worm,  and  other  spinning 
moths  are  in  the  mouth,  those  of  the  spider  in  it& 
taiU  and  those  of  various  shell-fish  in  their  foot ; 
in  the  first  case,  if  we  consider  the  various  pur- 
poses to  which  caterpillars  apply  the  faculty  of 
spinning,  we  see  the  importance  of  its  beiag 
under  the  direction  of  the  eye  of  the  animal : 
and  even  in  the  case  of  the  spider,  the  eye 
directs  the  animal  in  it?  course  to  form  its  con- 
centric circles,  and  the  thread  follows  it ;  and  the 
same  is  the  case  when  it  spins  the  rays  that 
traverse  its  web ;  and  when  it  descends  from  a 
height  the  same  takes  place.  But  the  foot  is 
the  only  organ  that  is  so  situated  in  bivalve 
shells,  as  to  throw  forth  a  thread  that  will  go 
out  of  the  shell,  where  it  is  wanted  for  use. 

Of  all  this  tribe  of  shells  none  are  more  beau- 
tiful, both  as  to  their  form,  painting,  and  sculp- 
ture, than  what  are  called  Escallop  shells,  or  Comb 
shells^  from  their  resemblance,  as  to  the  scoring 
of  the  upper  valve,  to  that  instrument.  These 
may  be  regarded  as,  in  some  degree,  analogues 
of  the  butterflies  amongst  insects,  and  their  fly- 
ing as  it  were,  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  as 

^  Pecten. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  255 

we  shall  soon  see,  increases  the  resemblance. 
There  is,  however,  a  diflference  between  the  Con- 
dylopes  or  annulose  animals  and  the  MoUuscans, 
which  must  strike  every  examiner,  the  latter 
cannot  be  called  symmetrical  animals,  while  in 
the  former  the  most  perfect  symmetry,  both  as  to 
number  of  parts,  and  their  structure,  general 
form^  sculpture  and  painting,  prevails;  in  the 
latter  this  general  symmetry  seems  not  to  obtain ; 
in  the  binmscular  bivalves,  indeed,  the  two  shells 
are  generally  symmetrical  both  in  form,  size,  and 
sculpture,  but  this  does  not  invariably  take  place. 
In  many  of  the  unimusculars  the  upper  shell 
differs  from  the  under,  either  in  size  or  other 
particulars;  in  the  escallop  shells  it  is  much 
flatter  and  more  ornamented  as  to  colouring; 
and  in  the  animal  itself  it  is  not  a  general 
principle  that  each  part  shall  have  its  counter- 
part, or,  if  single,  that  the  two  sides  shall 
exactly  correspond.  This  furnishes  some  addi- 
tion to  the  other  proofs  of  the  superiority  of 
Uie  Insect  over  the  MoUuscan  tribes ;  symmetry, 
especially  of  the  external  organs  and  parts, 
distinguishes  all  the  higher  classes  from  man 
downwards ;  but  is  continued  in  the  inverte- 
brate sub-kingdom  no  further  than  the  Condy- 
lopes,  when  it  is  interrupted  or  altogether 
ceases.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that 
in  the  animal  of  the  univalves,  a  beginning  of 
symmetrical    organs  appears  in   the  tentacles. 


256  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

which  are  in  pairs  mutually  corresponding,  a 
circumstance  not  discoverable  in  the  bivalves. 

The  escallop  shells  were  considered  by  Iina6 
as  belonging  to  the  same  genus  with  the  oyster, 
which  he  regarded  as  a  kind  of  rustic  tribe 
belonging  to  it ;  but  they  not  only  differ  widely 
in  their  shells,  but  also  in  the  animal  they  con- 
tain. The  mantle  of  the  former  is  stated  to  be 
composed  of  two  large  membranes  surrounded 
with  long  white  hairs,  and  with  pedunculated 
eyes :  whence  Poli  denominated  the  animal  of 
this  shell  "  Argus ;"  but  these  assuredly  are  not 
real  eyes,  but  probably  eye-like  organs  or  ten- 
tacles, useful  to  the  animal,  perhaps,  as  organs  of 
investigation  and  prehension,  but  npt  of  vision. 
Lamarck,  who  does  not,  in  loco^  mention  this 
formation  of  the  animal  of  the  escallop  shells, 
observes  that  the  SpondyW  have  the  margin  of  the 
mantle  furnished  with  two  rows  of  tentacular 
threads,  a  structure  that  seems  to  indicate  some 
investigating  office  or  prehensory  function  resi- 
dent in  that  part,  perhaps  like  the  tentacles  d 
the  polypes  they  may  seize  animalcules*  The 
animal  of  the  oyster  has  nothing  akin  to  this,  a 
sufficient  proof,  added  to  their  very  differrat 
shells,  that  they  belong  to  different  genera. 

The  French  call  these  shells  pelerines  or 
pilgrims,  they  are  also  in  cathdic  countries, 
especially  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  called  shells  of 

1  Spondylus, 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  267 

St,  James,  beciause  the  pilgrims  to  the  shrine  of 
St.  James  of  Compostella,  in  Galicia,  were 
accustomed  to  ornament  their  cloak  and  hat 
with  them. 

I  shall  next  make  some  observations  upon  the 
bivalve  just  mentioned,  the  oyster,  which  of  all 
shell-fish,  though  it  is  one  of  the  rudest  and  least 
sightly,  has  fix)m  every  age  been  most  in  request, 
as  a  favoiirite  article  of  food.  This  gift  of  Provi- 
dence is  widely  dispersed,  being  found  on  the 
coasts  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa ;  those  that 
frequent  our  own  are  reckoned  the  best  of  all. 
They  are  not  a  roving  animal,  but  when  they 
leave  the  matrix,  they  fix  themselves  to 
rocks  or  any  substance  that  falls  in  their  way, 
which  they  seldom  quit.  Like  other  MoUuscans, 
they  are  hermaphrodites,  and  are  stated  by 
Poli,  the  great  luminary  of  conchology,  to  con- 
i:ain  1,200,000  eggs,  so  that  a  single  oystei*  might 
give  birth  to  12,000  barrels!!  Providence  has 
thus  taken  care  that  the  demands  made  upon 
them  to  gratify  the  appetite  of  his  creature  man, 
shall  not  annihilate  the  race.  These  also  ox^ 
the  only  shell-fish  that  man  has  thought  it  worth 
his  while  to  cultivate,  by  keeping  them  in  cer- 
tain pits  formed  for  the  purpose,  called  amongst 
us  beds^  and  to  which  the  salt  water  is  admitted 
only  at  high  tides :  and  in  these  the  green  oysteris 
are  said  to  be  produced ;  marine  plants  of  that 
colour,  the  growth  of  which  is  favoured  by  the 

VOL.  I.  s 


258  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

tranquillity  of  the  water  in  these  tanks,  generate 
a  vast  number  of  seminiform  germes,  which 
entering  the  shells  of  the  oysters  when  they 
open  them  to  take  their  food — so  it  is  stated- 
stain  them  with  their  own  hue. 

They  have  other  enemies  besides  man :  who- 
ever has  observed  their  sb^ls  will  often  see  them 
quite  covered  with  a  small  kind  of  sea-acorns.^ 
It  is  related  also  that  certain  crabs  get  into  their 
shells,  first  introducing  a  piece  of  stone  to  hinder 
them  from  shutting,  but  this  is  probably  fabu- 
lous; they  may,  however,  when  the  oysters 
open  their  shells  to  receive  the  sea-water,  enter 
them  as  they  do  those  of  the  muscles  and  the 
wing-shell,  either  for  protection  or  for  the  sake 
of  food.  It  is  observed  that  the  oyster  d^euds 
itself  against  intrusive  enemies  by  squirting 
upon  them  with  force  water  kept  in  reserve  in 
their  shells ;  they  keep  out  those  that  attempt  to 
pierce  their  shells  to  get  at  them,  by  thickening 
them  in  the  part  attacked. 

I  shall  next  give  some  account  of  a  bivalve 
that  has  interested  mankind  from  a  very  early 
period  of  history,  on  account  of  the  valuable  gem 
that  it  produces,  and  which  is  frequently  men- 
tioned in  Holy  Scripture.  The  Supreme  Being, 
in  his  goodness  and  attention  to  the  wants  and 
tastes  of  his  principal  creature,  has  not  neglected 
to  furnish  him  with  various  articles  for  wnament 

1  BalanuSf  &c. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS,  259 

as  well  as  for  use :  and  the  most  valuable  of  all 
possessions,  the  kingdom  of  grace  in  the  heart, 
is  symbolized  by  a  pearl  of  great  price;  and 
though  the  apostle  charges  females  not  to  adorn 
themselves  with  gold  or  pearls.,  but  with  good 
tvorksj  the  meaning  of  the  passage  is,  that  the 
httet  should  have  their  Jirst  attention,  not  to 
forbid  absolutely  the  use  of  the  former — they 
are  to  ndonx  themselves  not  do  much  with  gold 
or  pearls  as  with  good  works — which  ought  to 
be  the  object  of  their  most  sedulous  care. 

The  animal  that  produces  pearls  in  the  great- 
est abundance,  of  the  purest  nature,  and  of  th0 
highest  value,  was  by  Linn6  classed  with  the 
muscles,^  but  Lamarck  has  formed  it  into  $i 
distinct  genus  which  he  names,  Melmgri'm. 
In  this  country  it  is  usually  called  the  pearl- 
oyster.  It  inhabits  the  Persian  Gulf,  the 
coasts  of  Ceylon,  the  sea  of  New  Holland,  th^ 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  the  coasts  of  Japan.  It 
attains  perfection  no  whete  but  in  the  equator 
riid  seas,  but  the  pearl  fishery  in  the  island  of 
Ceylon  is  the  most  celebrated  and  productive.; 
it  is  on  the  west  coast,  off  the  bay  of  Condatchy, 
where  the  country  is  very  sandy  and  nearly 
without  inhabitants,  but  on  these  occasious 
a  populous  town,  with  many  streets  a  mile  long, 
appears  to  have  suddenly  started  up.  The 
oyster  beds  or  banks  extend  over  a  space  thirty 

1  Mytilui  nkargaritiferus. 


260  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

miles  long  by  twenty-four  broad.  The  twentieth 
of  February  is  generally  the  day  of  rendezvous 
for  the  fishermen.  The  fishery  is  commonly 
rented  by  a  single  individual,  who  is  allowed  to 
employ  150  boats  for  thirty  days,  there  are 
about  6000  boatmen  and  attendants.  The 
oysters  vary  in  their  qualities  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  ground  to  which  they  are  attached ; 
and  also  in  their  number,  by  the  action  of 
the  tides  and  other  circumstances:  those  at 
the  greatest  depth  produce  the  largest  pearls, 
which  are  situated  in  the  fleshy  part  near  the 
hinge.  Pearls  consist  of  concentric  coats  of  the 
same  substance  as  that  which  forms  the  mother- 
of-pearl  of  the  shell ;  they  are  produced  by  the 
extravasation  of  a  lapidifying  fluid,  secreted  in 
the  organs  of  the  animal  and  filtered  by  its 
glands.  For  one  pearl  that  is  found  perfectly 
round  and  detached  between  the  membranes  of 
the  mantle,  hundreds  of  irregular  ones  occur 
attached  to  the  mother-^of-pearl  like  so  many 
warts  :  they  are  sometimes  so  numerous  that  the 
animal  cannot  shut  its  shell,  and  so  perishes. 
The  pearl  is  a  formation  forced  upon  the  animal 
by  some  annoying  substance  in  its  shell,  which 
it  covers  with  mother-of-pearl,  as  the  bees  do 
intrusive  wasps  with  wax,  to  fix  it  or  hinder  it 
from  affecting  them,  by  putridity,  &c.  Sir  E. 
Home  is  of  opinion  that  the  abortive  eggs  of  the 
animal  are  the  nucleus  upon  which  the  pearl  is 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  261 

£>rmed»  and  he  has  made  it  very  probable  that 
this  is  often  or  generally  the  case,  but  still  the 
process  just  mentioned  may  take  place  when 
accidental  substances  are  introduced,  and  pro- 
duce the  warty  excrescences,  and  sonietimes 
loQse  misshapen  pearls. 

The  diving  tackle  consists  of  a  large  stone 
suspended  by  a  rope  with  a  strong  loop  above 
the  stojne  to  receive  one  foot  of  the  diver,  and 
having  also  a  slip-knot,  and  a  basket  formed  of 
a  hoop  and  network  which  receives  the  other 
foot.  When  he  has  fixed  himself  in  this  tackle 
and  is  duly  prepared,  he  holds  his  nostrils  with 
one  hand,  and  pulling  the  running-knot  with' 
the  other,  instantly  descends — ^when  he  reaches 
the  bottom  he  disengages  his  foot  from  the 
stone,  which  is  immediately  drawn  up  to  be 
ready  for  the  next  diver.  He  at  the  bottom 
throws  himself  on  his  face  and  collects  every 
thing  he  can  lay  hold  of  into  the  basket — ^when 
ready  to  ascend  he  jerks  the  rope  and  is  speedily 
hauled  up,  and  working  himself  up  the  rope  he 
arrives  at  the  surface  sooner  than  the  laden 
basket.  A  minute  and  half  or  two  minutes  are 
the  utniost  any  diver  remains  under  water.  The 
shark-charmers  form  a  necessary  part  of  the 
company,  by  their  incantations  they  are  supposed 
to  possess  the  power  of  preventing  these  voracious 
fishes  from  attacking  the  divCTS,  and  they  will 
not  descend,  without  their  attendance ;  where  the 


262  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

bed  is  rich  the  diver  oft^i  collects  150  oysters 
at  one  dip^  but  sometimes  not  more  than  five.^ 
It  is  said  that  a  single  diyer  will,  in  one  day, 
often  bring  np  from  1000  to  4000  oysters. 

From  the  simple  circumstance  that  Prath 
dence  has  instructed  this  animal,  which  cannot 
eject  from  its  shell  those  substances,  whether 
formed  within  itself,  or  that  have  accidentally 
entered,  to  encase  them  in  the  precious  sub- 
stance which  it  is  empowered  to  secrete,  what 
a  vast  fund  of  ornament  to  deck  the  most  lovdy 
part  of  the  creation,  and  having  no  parallel  ia 
^^y  geni  that  the  earth  produces,  is  provided. 
The  pearls  obtained  from  other  shell-fish  vary 
in  colour — ^those  from  the  wing-shell  are  brown, 
and  those  from  the  fresh«* water  muscles  greenish, 
but  tometimes  they  are  yellow,  pink,  bluish,  and 
some  are  even  black }  theae  last  are  very  rare 
and  dear. 

Other  bivalves  fix  themselves  by  a  tendinous 
ligament  to  the  rocks.  In  one  genus,*  in  the 
upper  valve  near  the  hinge,  is  an  aperture, 
cilosed  by  a  kind  of  operculum  formed  at  the 
dilated  extremity  of  an  internal  muscle,  it  is  by 
this  operculum  that  the  animal  fixes  itself.  Id 
another,  related  to  the  last,^  the  beak  of  the  lower 
valve  turns  up,  overhanging  in  some  d^ree 
the  upper  valve ;  in  this  beak  is  a  notch  w  aper- 

'  Malte-Brun,  Oeogr.  iii.  225.        *  Anomia,  Pl.  V.  Fig.  2, 3. 
«  Terebratuluy  Pl.  V.  Fig.  4. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUi)CANS.  263 

tare  through  which  the  fixing  tendon  passes; 
affording  an  admirable  instance  of  variation 
in  the  means  of  attaining  the  same  end,  when 
circumstances  require  it.  It  was  necessary 
that  the  talves  should  not  be  reversed,  a  tendon 
through  the  lower  valve  secures  this  in  the 
first  of  these  animals ;  but  in  the  second,  where 
the  oveiiianging  beak  would  interfere  with 
this  purpose,  the  tendon  issues  from  the  beak 
itself,  so  as  to  enable  the  animal  still  to  fix 
itsdf  with  the  proper  valve  downwards.  In  the 
Anamia  the  valve  takes  the  form  of  the  sub- 
stance it  is  fixed  tou 

Who  would  think  that  these  headless  animals, 
unprovided  with  organs  that  indicate  any  of 
the  higher  senses,  as  sight,  smell,  and  hearing, 
and  apparently  fitted  with  no  other  means  of 
motion  than  those  of  opening  and  shutting  the 
valves  of  their  shells,  or  travelling  very  slowly 
for  a  few  inches,  should  yet  be  able  not  only  to 
leap  and  use  other  motions,  but  occasionally  to 
sail  gaily  on  the  surface  of  the  ocean ;  but, 
however  improbable  this  may  seem,  it  has  been 
proved  to  be  the  case  by  the  evidence  of  eye- 
witnesses of  the  fact. 

The  common  cockle,^  Poll  says,  can  not  only, 
by  means  of  its  foot  turn  round,  or  to  either 
side,  but  even  take  a  good  leap.    The  Trigons,* 

*  Cardium  edule,  2  Trlgonia^ 


264  FUNCTIONS  AND  LNSTINCTS. 

nearly  related  to  the  cockle,  are  mostly  fessib 
but  there  is  one  recent  species,  found  on  the 
coast  of  New  Holland,  called  originally,  from 
the  pearly  lustre  of  the  inside  of  its  shells,  the 
pearl  trigon,'  a  name  changed,  without  reason, 
by  Lamarck.  This,  which  was  originally  tak^ 
by  Lesueur  and  since  by  Capt.  King,  was  more 
recently  brought  from  thence  by  Mr.  Setchbury, 
who  told  me,  that  they  would  leap  over  the 
gunwhale  of  a  boat  in  which  he  was,  to  the 
height  of  above  four  inches.  The  foot  o£  this 
animal  is  bent  at  an  acute  angle,  so,  as  upon 
pressure,  to  form  a  very  elastic  oi^an,^  and  that 
of  the  cockle  is  nearly  the  same. 

Those  elegant  shells  the  Pectens,  or  comb- 
shells,  have  long  been  celebraited  for  their 
motions.  Pliny  says,  probably  meaning  these 
shells,  that  they  leap  and  flutter  out  of  the 
water,  and  dive.  D'Argenville  relates,  that 
when  they  are  on  shore,  they  regain  the  water 
by  opening  the  valves  of  their  shells  as  wide 
as  they  can  and  then  shutting  them  briskly, 
by  which  they  acquire  sufficient  elasticity,  to 
rise  three  or  four  inches,  and  thus  proceed  till 
they  accomplish  their  object.  Most  probably 
the  foot  assists  in  producing  these  leaps.  Their 
progression  in  the  water  is  described  as  very 
different ;  when  they  rise  to  the  surface — hat  the 

*   T,  margaritacea,  '  Plate  V.  Fig.  5. 


BIVALVE  MOLLUSC ANS.  265 

means  by  which  they  do  this  has  not  been 
clearly  explained — they  support  themselves  half 
tinder  water*  They  next  open  their  shells,  to 
which  they  communicate  such  a  vibration,  that 
they  acquire  a  very  brisk  movement  from  right 
to  left,  which  enables  them,  as  it  were,  to  run 
upon  the  water.     . 

The,  tulip-shell,^  when  it  walks,  if  I  may  so 
speak,  opens  and  shuts  its  valves,  and  at  the 
same  time  lengthens  and  shortens  its  foot, 
which  seems  to  indicate  a  coniiection,  or  action, 
between  the  former  and  the  latter  organs, 
similar  to  what  has  been  observed  to  take  place 
in  insects,  and  perhaps  points  out  some  analogy 
between  the  valves  of  the  shell  and  the  upper 
wings,  or. elytra  of  insects,  and  the  mantle  and 
their  under  wings. 

Bosc  states,  that  the  animals  of  the  genus 
Venus,  in  calm  weather,  may  be  seen  sailing 
on  the  surface  of  the  waters,  using  one  of  their 
valves  as  a  boat  and  the  other  as  a  sail.  As 
these  are  usually  rather  heavy  shells,  they 
must  be  furnished  with  some  means  of  rendering 
themselves  lighter  than  the  water.  Pliny,  of 
old,  mentions  shells  dedicated  to  Venus,  which 
sail  and  oppose  their  concave  part  to  the  wind. 

Thus  we  see  the  Creator  has  given  even  to 
these  apparently  stupid  and  inactive  creatures 
means  of  enjoyment,  that  every  one  is  not  aware 

*   Tellina, 


266  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

of;  and  powers  of  locomotion,  of  which,  at  first 
sight,  they  seem  incapable. 

I  might  enlarge  here  on  the  admirable  con- 
trivance and  variety  observable  in  the  hinge,  as 
it  is  called,  by  means  of  which  the  animals  are 
enabled  to  open  ai\d  shut  the  valves  of  their 
shells;  upon  the  sculpture  and  colours  that 
distinguish  many  of  them,  particularly  amongst 
the  unimusculars,  but  this  chapter  is  already 
too  long,  and  enough  has  been  said  to  prove 
that  they  have  in  no  respect  been  neglected 
or  overlooked  by  the  Almighty  Being  who  willed 
their  existence,  and  who  is  ever  watchful  over 
the  creatures  of  his  hand,  to  provide  them  with 
all  things  necessary  for  their  being,  consistently 
with  the  ends  he  created  them  to  serve. 


Chapter  IX. 
Functions  and  Instincts.     Univalve  MoUuscans. 

The  Univalve  shells  of  the  Swedish  naturalist, 
a  term  adopted  from  Aristotle's  Monothyraj  are 
next  to  be  considered ;  these,  with  the  multivalve 
Chitons,  form  the  GastropodSy  or  shell-fish  using 
their  belly  for  a  leg,  of  Cuvier ;   and  with  the 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  267 

cuttle-fish  and  nautilus  tribe  constitute  Lamarck's 
Class  of  Molluscam.  The  latter  author  divides 
his  Class  into  five  orders,  four  of  which  belong 
to  the  tribe  I  am  considering. 

1.  Pteropods  (wing-footed);  furnished  with 
organs  only  for  swimming  and  sailing.^ 

2.  Gastropods  (belly-footed);  body  straight, 
never  spirally  c(mvolved;  a  muscular  foot  for 
creeping  under  tl^e  belly. 

3.  Trachelipods  (neck-footed) ;  greatest  part  of 
the  body  spirally  convolved;  always  inhabiting 
a  spirivalve  shell;  foot  free,  attached  to  the 
neck,  formed  for  creeping. 

4.  Heteropods  (diverse-footed) ;  no  coronet  of 
arms;  no  subventral,  or  subjugular  foot;  fins, 
one  or  more,  not  disposed  in  pairs  .^ 

As  the  Cephalopods,  forming  Lamarck's  fourth 
Order,  may  be  regarded  rather  as  constituting  a 
larger  division  or  Sub-class  of  the  MoUuscans, 
than  ah  Order,  I  shall  consider  them  in  a  sepa- 
rate chapter. 

1 .  Proceeding  from  one  of  the  above  Orders  to 
another,  I  shall  select  such  individuals,  belong- 
ing to  it,  as  appear  to  exemplify  the  great  attri- 
butes of  their  Creator,  either  in  their  structure, 
forms,  habits,  or  instincts.  The  animals  of  the 
first  Order,  like  the  long  celebrated  Argonaut 
and  Nautilus,  enliven  the  surface  of  the  ocean 

1  Plate  V.  Fig.  6, 7.  «  Fig.  8. 


268  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

in  fine  weather^  where  they  steer  their  little 
barks  through,  between,  and.  over  its  fluctuating 
waves,  and  spread  their  membranous  sails  to  the 
soft  breathing  of  the  zephyrs. 

One  of  the  most  noted  animals  of  the  tribe  is 
known  by  the  appellation  of  the  Boreal  Clio, 
which,  like  the  jelly-fish,  has  a  gelatinous  body, 
is  defended  by  no  shell,  and  afibrds  food  to  the 
whales  and  other  fishes,  as  well  as  to  the'  sea* 
birds.  This  animal  is  abundant  in  places  that 
suit  it,  and  appears  only  during  the  warmest 
hours  of  the  day  on  the  surface. 

Other  genera  of  this  Order  are  covered  by 
a  shell  or  shells.  Of  this  kind  is  the  genus 
Hyalcea^  so  named  from  its  semi-transparent 
shell,  which  wears  the  appearance  of  a  bivalve 
with  soldered  valves,  the  upper  one  being  the 
largest;  this  difierence  of  size  of  the  seeming 
valves  causes  an  aperture  through  which  the 
animal  sends  forth  two  large  yellow  and  violet 
wings,  or  sails,  rounded  and  divided  at  their 
summit  into  three  lobes.  The  head  in  this  genus 
is  almost  evanescent,  so  that  both  shell  and  head 
exhibit  an  easy  transition  from  the  acephalous  or 
bivalve  MoUuscans  to  those  which  have  a  head. 
When  its  wings  or  sails  are  unfolded  it  moves 
with  great  velocity  on  the  surface  of  the  sea. 
The  animals  of  this  Order,  both  from  the  beau- 
tiful cplouring  of  their  filmy  sails  or  wings,  and 
from  their  number  and  symmetry,  are  better 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS,  269 

entitled  to  the  appellation  of  the  butterflies  of  the 
ocean,  than  the  escallop  shells  which  have  some- 
times been  so  called.  The  mantle  of  the  bivalves 
becomes  an  organ  of  very  different  use  in  the 
Pteropods ;  for  they,  having  no  means  of  fixing 
themselves  like  most  of  the  bivalves,  float  con- 
tinually in  the  ocean ;  to  compensate  for  this 
want,  as  in  innumerable  other  instances,  their 
Creator  has  given  them  the  power  of  expanding 
this  organ  as  a  sail,  both  for  motion  and  to  give 
some  direction  to  their  course;  it  is  attached 
to  the  mouth  or  neck,  and  is  connected  in 
some  species  with  their  respiration.  Nothing 
certain  is  known  with  respect  to  their  food : 
probably  they  absorb  the  animalcules  swarming 
in  the  sea-water. 

2.  The  series  of  Gastropods  begins  with  ani- 
mals that  have  no  shell,  amongst  which  the  most 
remarkable  seem  to  be  the  Scyll€Ba  and  the  Te- 
thys,  both  known  to  Linn6,  and  by  him  described. 
The  former  is  an  oblong  gelatinous  animal,  late- 
rally compressed,  elevated  above  in  the  middle, 
where  it  has  two  pair  of  membranous  wings  or 
fins.  Its  inferior  surface  is  hollowed  out  longi- 
tudinally, by  means  of  which,  and  its  tentacles, 
it  can  embrace  the  stems  of  the  fuci  or  sea- 
wrack,  the  flowers  of  which  it  eats.  It  is  des- 
cribed as  moving  very  slowly  in  the  water  by 
bending  its  extremities.  It  swims  on  the  surface 
when  the  weather  is  calm,  but  adheres  to  the 


270  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

floating  fuel  when  the  sea  is  agitated,  so  that  the 
kindness  and  foresight  of  its  Maker — ^by  giving 
it  wings,  for  independent  motion,  and  means  to 
adhere  to  the  fuci,  when  support  is  necessaiy  to 
it,  or  it  takes  its  food — has  thus  provided  amply 
for  its  enjoyment  and  sustenance*  The  great 
peculiarity  of  the  latter,  the  Tethys,  is  a  mantle 
which  extends  above  and  beyond  the  head,  like 
that  of  some  marine  goddess,  concealing  it  en- 
tirely, and  forming  an  ample  veil,  fringed  or 
undulated  at  its  margin.  By  the  help  of  this 
veil  they  elevate  themselves  to  the  surface,  and 
probably  sail  on  the  waters*  This  animal  is 
nearly  related  to  the  Laplysia^  a  kind  of  sea-siug, 
like  which  it  lives  in  muddy  places,  and  ejects 
a  black  fluid ;  it  is  very  fetid,  and  its  flesh  is 
poisonous.  It  only  rises  to  the  surface  in  the 
hot  season. 

I  shall  next  notice  a  tribe  of  Gastropods, 
which  at  first  sight,  considering  the  number  of 
pieces  of  which  their  shelly  covering  is  composed, 
seems  to  belong  to  the  multivalves,  amongst 
which  Linn6  has  placed  it.  It  will  be  readily 
perceived  that  I  am  speaking  of  the  Chiton^  or 
coat-qf-mail  shell,  but  when  the  animal  that  it 
covers  is  examined,  it  will  be  found  that,  not- 
withstanding its  multivalve  shell,  it  really  be- 
longs to  the  Gastropods. 

These  animals  are  generally  found  under  stones, 
sometimes  they  adhere  to  the  surface  of  rocks,  and 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  271 

sometimes  conceal  themselves  in  their  fissures : 
they  often  traverse  vast  tracts  of  ocean  fixed  to  the 
keels  of  ships,  like  some  of  the  limpets  they  fix 
themselves  a  good  way  out  of  the  water,  so  as 
only  to  be  wetted  when  the  tide  is  up,  and  some- 
tunes  above  high  water  mark.  Poli  says  that 
when  they  resist  any  attempt  to  force  them  from 
their  station,  they  expel  the  air  and  water  on  all 
sides  and  produce  a  vacuum,  so  that  it  is  v»y 
difficult  to  overcome  the  pressure  of  the  atmos- 
phere ;  a:nd  Mr.  Frembly ,  who  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  fitudying  their  habits  on  the  coast  of 
Chili,  states  that  when  not  apprehensiive  of  danger 
their  attachment  is  very  slight,  and  by  pushing 
them  gently  they  will  easily  slide  from  the  sur^ 
£ace  to  which  they  are  attached,  but  if  a  direct 
attempt  is  made  to  unfix  them  by  force,  they 
will  part  with  a  portion  of  their  shells  sooner 
than  let  go  their  hold. 

When  we  consider  that  these  animals  are  not 
only  often  exposed  to  the  violent  action  of  the 
waves,  but  also  to  the  attack  of  countless 
enemies,  we  see  abundant  reason  for  the  coat 
of  mail  with  which  their  C!reator  has  covered 
them.  Even  the  fleshy  or  cartilaginous  margin, 
or  zone,  as  my  lamented  friend  the  Rev.  Lans- 
down  Guilding,  in  his  admirable  memoir  on  this 
tribe,  <lenominated  it,  is  defended  sometimes  by 
scales,  spines,  and  bristles,  at  others  rough  with 
numerous  little  bony  tubercles;   it  is  also  de- 


272  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

scribed  as  in  general  fringed,  so  that  when  the 
animal  attaches  itself  to  a  rock  or  stone,  it  is 
altogether  calculated,  by  the  application  of  the 
prone  part  of  its  body,  to  produce  a  vacuum. 
The  wing-shell  and  other  bivalves  that  suspend 
themselves  by  a  byssus,  are  sufficiently  pro* 
tected  by  their  shells  from  the  attack  of  theif 
enemies,  without  so  complete  an  adhesion  of  die 
b6dy  as  is  necessary  for  the  coat-of-mail  shell. 
Mr.  Guilding,  who  had  excellent  opportunities  of 
observation,  informs  us  that  these  animals  are 
night-feeders,   remaining    stationary  as  above, 
during  the  day;    reasoning  from  analogy  he 
suspects  they  feed  on  marine  plants,  the  sea- 
wrack,  &c.    These  creatures  slide  along  very 
slowly,  if  accidentally  reversed,  they  recover  a 
prone  position  by  the  violent  motions  of  the  liga- 
ment or  zone  that  surrounds  them,  and  if  alarmed 
they  sometimes  roll  themselves  up  like  woodlice. 
Lamal'ck  proceeds  immediately  from  the  Chi- 
tonidans  to  the  Patellidans  or  Limpets,^  which 
also  fix  themselves  so  firmly  to  the  rock,  that  it 
requires  considerable  force  to  separate  tbem,  and 
sometimes  in  such  numbers  that  their  surface 
seems  quite  covered  by  them.    The  transitioB 
from  the  former  tribe  to  this,  with  no  intermediate 
links,  seems  at  first  sight  violent,  and  their  right 
to  be  associated  in  the  same  family  rather  pro- 

'  Patella, 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  273 

blematieal :  probably  intermediate  species  will 
come  to  light  which  will  render  this  point 
more  evident  than  the  shell  of  these  animals 
appears  to.  indicate. 

With  regard  to  their  functicms  and  the  part 
BJBMgned  to  them  in  the  great  plan  of  creation, 
little  is  known ;  probably,  from  their  numbers. in 
soiae  parts,  they  may  help  to  soften  the  rocks, 
so  that  they  may,  at  some  destined  hour,  yield 
mote  readily  to  the  force  of  the  winds  and  waves  ;^ 
thiis  they  may  be  enumerated  amongst  the  in- 
struments which  the  Creator  employs  to  effect 
his  purposes,  and  such  changes  in  the  coast  of 
any  country,  as  he  wills  shall  take  place. 

They  afford  a  beautiful  instance  of  the  gradual 
progress  of  Creative  Wisdom  from  form  to  form; 
If  the  student  of  the  tribe  looks  \rith  inquiring 
eye  at  a  collection  of  the  Patellidans,  or  limpets, 
in  the  flattest  and  most; depressed  of  them^  he  will 
find  no  sniall  resemblance  to  one  of  the  valves  of 
a  bivalve  shell,  he  will  soon,  however,  discover  a 
prominence  in  it,  the  first  tendency  towards  the 
s{>iral  convolution,  a  little  removed  from  its  cen-^ 
ti»,  virhich  will  prove  to  him  that  it  belongs  to  a 
very  diflSsrent  tribe ;  looking  again  at  others  that 
are  more  elevated  and  conical,*  he  will  see  the 
same  prominence  or  beak  forming  a  more  strik- 
ing feature;  and  ascertaining  these  shells  to  be 
univalves,  he  will  find,  upon  a  comparison  of 

*   Umbrella  indica.  '  Patella  vulgata. 

VOL.  I.  T 


274  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

« 

them  with  the  nerit^^  the  Buail,^  or  the  p^d- 
winkle,'  that  this  umbo  or  knob  is  anaLogpua  tp 
the  spiral  part  of  those  shdls,  as  be  will  see  w^ 
examining  one  of  the  bonnet-limpets/  in  wbM^ 
he  will  detect  an  incipient  decurved  spire ;  pas- 
sing from  this  by  one  of  the  chambered-limp^W 
it  will  lead  him  to  the  neritidans,  or  top-sheHft 
from  which  the  road  is  direct  to  the  sea-ear;* 
and  by  another^  he  arrives  almost  immedifttel; 
at  the  periwinkles  and  snails.  If  he  chance  to 
examine  further  between  the  lii^ipets  and  the 
whelks,*  he  will  find  another  open  shell,'  wbicb 
forms  the  path  to  the  latter  genus.  If  once 
more  his  eye  happens  to  observe  a  shell  almost 
open^®  but  with  the  sides  a  little  turned  in,  he 
will  see  still  another  road  leading  by  the  dif^^" 
to  the  elegant  tribe  of  cowries.^^  It  is  by  this 
road  that  Iiamarck  travels  to  them.  Again^  he 
may  perhaps  be  shewn,  preserved  in  spirit 
an  animal  who^  respiratory  orifice  is  covered 
by  a  round  shield — ^this  is  the  sea-slug,^^  as 
animal  famous  for  Pliny's  legend  of  its  nccdoM 
qualities,  whose  head  resembles  a  hare,  vhicb 
leads  from  the  Patellidans  towards  the  como^ 
slug  of  our  gardens  .^^    To  the  bivalves  there 

^  Neritay  Neritina^  &c.  *  Helix. 

>  Turbo,  *  PHeop$is  unganca^  &c* 

*  Crepidula.  ^  Haliotis.        7  Calypfraa* 

^  Buccinum.  9  Concholepas  peruviana, 

1^  Bullaa.  "  Bulla.  «  Cypraa. 

1^  Laplysia  depilans,  ^*  Limax. 


VNIVALVE  H0LLUSCAN8.  275 

seems  to  be  also  a  road  from  this  central  group, 
by  a  JVorwegian  shell  described  by  Miiller  as  an 
anomalous  species  of  limpet,  but  which  by 
Lamarck  is  considered  to  be  a  bivalver^  The 
lower  valre  in  this  genus  is  so  thin  that  MUUer 
oraiooked  it;  by  it  the  animal  adheres  to  marine 
bodies — ^the  upper  valve,  like  the  Patella^  is 
sub-conical  with  a  prominent  vertex,  and  the 
two  valves  are  not  connected  by  a  hinge. 

A  due  consideration  of  all  these  circumstances, 
of  this  radiation,  as  it  were,  from  a  typical  form 
as  a  centre,  by  various  roads  towards  different 
tribes,  s6ems  to  prove,  and  the  observation  is  con- 
firmed by  facts  in  other  departments  of  nature, 
that  the  world  of  animals,  as  well  as  that  of 
heavily  bodies,  consists  of  numerous  systems 
each,  so  to  speak,  with  its  central  orb,  and  all 
concatenated,  and  revolving  as  it  were  wheel 
within  wheel,  and  all  tending  towards  or  branch- 
ing from  a  common  centre.  It  seems,  in  the 
present  instance,  taking  the  group  expressed  by 
Patella  of  Linn6  as  the  common  centre,  that 
fix>m  thence,  though  by  different  and  diverging 
routes,  we  may  arrive  at  almost  every  moUuscan 
group  or  tribe. 

The  MoUuscans  that  we  have  hitherto  been 
considering,  with  the  exception  of  the  herbi- 
vorous chitons,  derive  their  nutriment  from  the 

1  Orbicula  Norwegica, 


276  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

sea  water  itself,  either  from  animalcules  or  other 
marine  substances  requiring  only  absorption,  kt 
the  Gastropods  that  we  are  next  to  notice  live 
upon  more  solid  food,  and  such  as  cannot  be 
digested  without  a  more  powerfiil  action  upon  it 
Of  this  description  are  the  dippers*  which  are 
furnished  with  a  singular  organ  or  gizzard  thi 
proves  their  predaceous  or  carnivorous  habits; 
the  remaining  genera  are  herbivorous,  but  as 
they  exhibit  no  very  interesting  traits  I  sliall 
proceed  to  the  next  Order. 

The  TracJielipods^  constituting  Lamarck's  third 
Order  of  MoUuscans,  may  be  divided  into  those 
that  are  herJnvorouSj  and  those  that  are  cor- 
nivorom,  the  first  having  no  respiratory  siphon, 
with  which  the  others  are  furnished. 

The  herbivorous  Trachelipods  may  be  sub- 
divided into  terrestrial  and  aquatic^  and  tie 
latter  into  those  that  inhabit  fresh  water  or  salt. 
It  is  not  known  that  any  of  the  predaceous  ones 
are  terrestrial.  The  terrestrial  ones  not  only 
devour  the  leaves  and  stems  of  plants,  but  some 
also  attack  their  roots^  one  species,  defended  by 
an  operculum  or  mouth-cover,  devours  those  rf 
the  violet.*  Others  of  this  tribe  are  found  on 
trees,  under  moss,  or  feeding  on  the  lichens ; 
the  shells  of  some  of  these  are  what  are  caBrf 
turrited^  or  long  and  slender,  with  spiral  whirls, 

*  Bulla,  «  Cyclostoma  elegans.  '  Clausilui. 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  277 

nes^mbliog)  in  miniature,  a  lofty  tower  with  a 
^iral  staircase  winding  round  it  By  this  atte* 
nuated  structure  their  motions,  in  their  close 
Xi^treats,  are  less  impeded.  As  it  is  in  this  tribe 
of  univalves  that  the  organ  just  mentioned,  the 
QferculwxL,  or  mouth-piece,  first  makes  its  ap- 
pearance, it  will  not  be  improper  here  to  give 
fioiue  account  of  it« 

If  we  survey  the  various  tribes  of  shell-bearing 
animals  we  find  them  defended  from  the  injuries 
or  attacks,  to  which  their  situation  exposes  them 
by  various  expedients^  all  of  them  indicating 
Power  and  Wisdom  in  their  contrivance  and 
formation,  and  Goodi^ess  in  their  end.  These 
animals  themselves  all  have  a  soft  body  fur- 
nished with  organs  of  different  kinds,  suited  to 
their  station  and  purposes.  Those  that  are 
below  them  in  the  scale,  especially  the  naked 
Polypes,  and  gelatinous  Radiaries,  are  still  more 
frail  and  evanescent,  but  their  organization  is  so 
inferior,  that  it  is  probably  less  subject  to  de- 
rangement from  external  accidents,  or  injuries 
are  sooner  remedied,  than  in  that  of  the  shell-fish 
r-^which,  unless  they  were  clad  in  some  kind  of 
mail,  would  probably  soon  perish.  Accordingly 
we  find  some  protected  by  a  multivalve  tubular 
shell,^  the  inhabitant  protruding  its  organs  at  the 
summit,  which  is  defended  by  an  operculum  con- 
sisting of  more  than  a  single  piece — in  others, 

i  Balanus.     Tubicinella^ 


278  FUNCTIONS  AND  IN^STINCTS. 

also,  the  shell  is  mnltivalve,  hnt  thb  animal  pm^ 
trades  itself  at  the  sides,  and  has  no  opercufam, 
as  in  the  common  banmcle*^  Others,  agaio,  sue 
protected  by  a  shell  consisting  of  two  ?alTes, 
open  at  one  or  two  ends,  and  these  seek  iuither 
protection  either  by  burying  themsdves  iu  die 
sand  or  perforating  the  rocks,  or  by  suspradiig 
themselyes  by  a  byssus;  others,  again,  wfaid 
only  open  their  shells  at  certain  times,  as  the 
oyster,  fix  themselves  to  any  conveni^at  sub- 
stance. To  these  succeed  others,  whose  shdl  is 
transversely  divided  into  many  piec^,^  but  yet, 
taken  together,  it  forms  a  single  valve  piotectiBg 
the  back  of  a  gastropod,  or  slug-like  animal, 
which  for  further  protection,  when  it  ia  not  vm- 
ing,  and  to  supply  the  place  of  a  lower  valye, 
fastens  itself  to  a  rock  or  other  substance. 

With  the  Patellidans  begin  the  undivided  ion- 
valve  shells,  which  like  the  preceding  afiimak 

* 

protect  their  lower  side  by  fixing  thems^TCS 
to  the  rocks ;  the  sea-ears,'  which  are  still  moie 
opeuj  have  recourse  to  a  similar  mode  of  pro^ 
tecting  themselves,  they  preserve  a  commimi* 
cation  with  the  atmosphere  or  water  witbmtf 
elevating  their  shells,  by  means  of  a  line  of 
apertures,  under  the  thickest  margin  near  the 
apex;  these  apertures  begin  when  the  animal 
is  young  near  the  spire,  and  as  it  grows  it  stops 

'  PentelasmU.  *  Chiton,  '  HalioHs, 


DNIVAl.V£  M0LLU8CANS.  270 

vp^^  olie  and  opens  another,  as  its  occasions  T(d* 
qnire.  I  have  a  very  large  specimen,  in  which 
there  are  traces  of  eighteen  apertures,  and  ail 
bttt  SIX  are  stopped  up.  If  we  turn  our  eyes 
bom  these  to  the  Buccinidan  or  Whelk  tribe, 
we  are  struck  by  an  open  Peruvian  shell,  which 
at  first  sight  seems  like  a  limpet,^  but  upon  in- 
quiry we  find  that  it  is  d^ended  by  an  opercu- 
lum, the  plan  of  protection  being  here  changed, 
and,  instead  of  an  undear-valve,  or  a  rocky  muni- 
tion, it  is  dosed  by  a  broad  plate,  which  some 
peculiarity  in  its  structure  and  organization 
dcHibdess  required;  from  this  by  Pter/mra  and 
Manoeeras  to  the  true  JBticcinum,  the  mouth 
mitowB  and  the  operculum  with  it. 

If  we  examine  the  common  periwinkle,  we 
fiiid  the  mouth  of  its  shell  closed  by  a  horny 
oij^n  called  the  j9ate^,  which  is  attached  to  the 
fixyt  or  rather  neck,  by  its  convex  or  lower  sur- 
fece,  sitting  on  a  sub-triangular  flat  space  spi- 
rally convoluted;  this  is  the  operculum^  and  if 
^amined  on  either  side  will  be  found  to  be  also 
spirally  convoluted,  proving  that  it  is  formed  by 
the  part  on  which  it  sits.  When  the  animal  ex- 
pands its  foot  for  creeping,  the  operculum  is 
retracted  within  the  shdil,  so  as  to  be  quite  out 
of  the  way.  If  we  examine  the  opercula  of  other 
shells,  we  shall  find  that  the  majority  of  them 

^  dmcholepas* 


S80.  FUNCTIONS  ANDJM8TINCTS. 

haye  the  same  spiral  configuration  traced  bc^on 
the  upper  and  lower  surface.  In  most  that  I.have 
seen  the  interyals  of  the  whirls  increase  in  widthi 
as  the  spires  of  the  shells  do  from  tl^  btse^to 
the  mouth.  In  the  top-shell^  the  whirls. ase 
perfectly  regular  and  nearly  equidistant,  TS^ 
vary  much  in  thickness;  I  have  one  Uiree-fourths 
of  an  inch  thick,  while  those  of  the  top-shell 
and  periwinkle  are  very  thin.  In  some  of  the 
thick  ones,  on  the  under  side  the  convolutions 
are  very  convex,  and  /sometime  devated  into 
concentrical  ridges.  Some  .underneath  have  a 
forest  of  obtuse  elevations,  u^d  jnany  are  toi^ 
with  minute  tubercles.  As  to  substajice  some  are 
horny,  while  .others  resemble  the  shell;  otheis 
are  homy  externally  and  shelly  internally..  If 
these  formations  on  the  under  side,  as  in  tk 
common  periwinkle,  represent  thie  shape  of  the 
part  of  the  neck  to  which  they  are  attaohiri, 
as  they  most  probably  do,  it  m.ust  act  the  part 
of  a  mould,  upon  which  the  operculum  i»  foroied 
from  its  mucus,  and  increased  as  the  aperture 
enlarges. 

Lamarck  is  of  opinion  that  the  shell  of  um- 
valves  is  formed  in  a  similar  way  upon  itkemck 
of  the  animal,  which  in  the  Murices  or  rock- 
shells,  and  other  tribes  distinguished  by  spines 
or  tubercles,  has  certain  fleshy  processes  which 

'   Trochus 


7  UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  381 

{troNittce!  liioafe  sliineSy  &c.  and  is  wit&drawn 
when  they  have,  acquired  consistence  enough 
not  to  bend  when  thus  left  to  themselves.  Other 
c6nchol(^ists,  particularly  one  of  the  most  emi- 
nent €i  our  times,  Poli,  think  that  the  shells  of 
univalves  are  organized  bodies,  and  produce 
their  spines  as  vegetables  do  their  prickly,  he 
says  also  that  their  shells  contain  cellular  mem- 
branes almost  like  a  Rete  mucasum. 

In  the  progress  of  a  shell's  growth,  as  new  spines 
are  formed  old  ones  drop  off,  how  this  is  effected 
seems  not  to  be  accounted  for  by  either  faypo- 
tliefii^^-^it  is  analogous,  however,  in  a  great  de- 
gree, to  what  was  mentioned  above  with  r^ard 
to  the  holes  in  the  shell  of  the  sea-ear,  only  that 
with  them  an  old .  hole  is  stopped  up,  when  a 
new  one  is  formed.  All  that  can  be  said  on  the 
subject  is  that  the  animal,  instructed  by  Provi- 
dence, as  hew  processes  are  formed  and  a  new 
whirl  of  its  shell  completed,  is  enabled  to  throw 
off  by  a  solvent,  nr  some  other  means  unascer- 
tained, those  that  are  no  longer  wanted. 

It  is  observable  that  the  terrestrial  univalves,* 
of  this  Order,  are  never  amied  with  spines,  tuber- 
cles, or  other  elevations,  but  exhibit  generally  a 
levigated  shell.  As  they  move  about  usually 
amongst  bushes,  under  moss,  or  in  grass,  the 
object  of  the  Creator  in  this  structure  was  pro- 

1  HeliXf  &c. 


38S  FUNCTIONS  AND  HUmNCTS. 

bably  that  their  motions  mig^  not  be  impcM 
by  any  roc^hness  of  their  diell. 

Mr«  E.  W.  Brayley,  in  a  Tory  ingauotis  me^ 
m<ttr«  in  the  Zoological  Jonmal,  has  eontended, 
with  considerable  strength  of  argument,  that  the 
moveable  black  points,  in  the  uppGt  tentaoks  of 
snails,  thoagh  he  allows  they  may  be  their  ana- 
logues,  are  not  real  eyes ;  but  the  Rev.  L.  Quili- 
ing,  in  a  subsequent  part  of  the  same  Joomal 
states,  that  the  large  strombs  of  the  Caribbean 
sea  haye  eyes  furnished  with  iris  and  papil^ 
similar  to  those  of  birds  and  reptiles — ^that  Hkof 
have  also  a  vitreous  and  aqueous  humour,  and 
sL  black  pigment,  which  certainly  prove  them 
to  be  real  eyes — ^their  organ  of  hearing,  he 
thought,  was  likewise  distinct.  The  cowries  ako 
are  said  to  have  eyes  exhibiting  both  iris  and 
pupil,  as  have  some  volutes.^ 

Giving  these  facts  their  due  weighty  I  think 
we  may  conclude  that  the,  so  called,  eyes  of 
snails,  are  real  though  imperfect  visual  organfl. 
It  appears  to  be  the  plan  of  the  CreatCMr^ 

to  ascend 

From  small  beginnings  to  a  glorious«ehd. 

An  organ  is,  as  it  were,  sketched  out,  in  the  lowest 
animal,  as  for  instance,  a  nervous  system,  which 
keeps  developing  and  improving  till  it  is  brought 
to  its  acme  in  the  highest :  first  we  find  in  the 

^   Valuta  ethiopicaf  Plate  VI.  Fig.  1,  a. 


U|9IVALV£  MOLLVSCA'irS.  383 

|^3^pc8  no  nervoQB  centre,  bat  molecules  eyery 
where  dispersed;  then  the  next  form  is  a  neryoos 
cdlar  round  the  cesophagus ;  next  dispersed  gan* 
^itHom ;  then  a  ganglionic  chord ;  and  so  on  till 
wearrire  at  a  regular  brain  and  spinal  marrow 
incased  in  a  vertebml  column*  We  may  with  rear 
son  therefore  conclude,  that  the  oi^an  of  vision, 
when  first  planted,  would  be  a  mere  rudiment, 
though  sufficient  for  the  animal's  purposes,  and 
possessing  few  of  the  characters  it  exhibits  when 
arrived  at  its  most  perfect  form ;  these  it  keeps 
aoquiring,  as  it  becomes  more  developed,  or  to 
avoid  misconception  from  nibbling  critics,  the 
Creator  keeps  giving  it  more  and  more  perfect 
sight  till  he  brings  it  forth,  in  all  its  glory,  in 
the  highest  animals. 

The  most  common  in  this  country  of  these  her- 
bivorous Trachelipods,  is  the  garden-snail,^  but 
the  species  whose  history  has  been  most  copiously 
related,  is  that  called  in  France  the  Escargot* 
which,  though  stated  to  have  been  originally 
imported  into  this  country,  now  abounds  in  some 
parts  of  Surry  and  other  southern  counties.  I 
shall  begin  by  giving  some  account  of  their 
economical  and  then  of  their  physical  history. 

On  the  continent,  especially  in  France,  this 
large  snail,  which  is  more  than  double  the  size  of 
our  garden  one,  is  used  as  an  article  of  food,  and 
though  said  not  to  be  easy  of  digestion,  is  very 

^  Helix  hortensii*  ^  H,  Pomatia. 


284  FUNCTIONS  AND.  INSTINCTS. 

palatable.  They  are  thought  to  be  in  best  Kasoa 
in  the  winter,  when  they  are  hybernating»  apCud 
-covered  with  their  temporary  calcareous  .qper* 
culum,  which  falls  off  in  the  spring.    The  Ror 
mans  appear  to  have  fattened  these  snails^  in 
places  appropriated  for   that  purpose^     Pliny 
mentions  several  sorts  that  were  kept  separate, 
and  amongst  others  white  on^  that  were  found  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Rieti.    The  lUyrian  snails 
he  describes   as  the   largest;  the  African  a3 
inost    prolific ;    others    from   Soletum,   in   the 
Neapolitan  territory,  as  the  noblest  and  best.; 
he  speaks  of  some  as  attaining  to  so  ienormoud 
a  size^  that  their  shells  would  contain  eighty 
pieces    of  money   pf  the. common   currency.^ 
Brugui^res,  to  whom  conchology  is  under  very 
great  obligations,  is  of  opinion  that,  by  cultiva- 
tion, the  several    species  of   snails  might  be 
brought  to  a  much  greater  size,  and  furnish  an 
abundant,  wholesome,  and  even  delicate  aliment. 
There  is  no  reason  why  the  species  of  this  genus, 
which  feed  on  vegetable  substances,  should  not 
be  as  palatable  as  the  oyster  or  periwinkle.    . 

Snails,  in  general,  are  hermaphrodites,  or 
unite  both  sexes  in  the  same  individual:  this  is 
the  case  with  the  great  majority  of  MoUuscans ; 
the  object  of  Providence,  in  this  kind  of  orga-r 
nization,  is  evidently  the  greater  multiplication 
of  the  species,  but  though  hermaphrodites,  in 

^  Quadrans^ 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCAN8.    .  285 

^ch  individual  possessing  the  organs  of  both 
seres,  they  are  riot  so  as  to  sexual  union ;  repro- 
duction can  only  take  place  when  different  indi- 
tiduals  impregnate  each  other ;  this  union  takes 
place  at  the  beginning  of  the  spring,  sooner  or 
kter,  according  to  the  heat  of  the  season.  Their 
courtship  is  singular,  and  realises  the  Pagan: 
fable  of  Cupid's  arrows,  for,  previot^s  to  their 
union,  each  snail  throws  a  winged  dart  or  arrow 
at  its  partner.  About  twenty  days  after  coupling 
the  snails  lay,  at  different  times,  a  great  niunber 
of  white  eggs,  varying  at  each  laying  from 
twehty-five  to  eighty,  as  large  as  little  peas,; 
enveloped  in  a  membranous  shell,  which  cracks 
when  dried.  They  lay  these  eggs  in  shady  and 
moist  places,  in  hollows  which  they  excavate 
with  their  foot,  and  afterwards  cover  with  the 
same  organ.  These  eggs  hatch,  sooner  or  later, 
according  to  the  temperature,  producing  little 
snails  exactly  resembling  their  parent,  but  so 
delicate  that  a  sun-stroke  destroys  them,  and 
animals  feed  upon  them ;  so  that  few,  compara- 
tively speaking,  reach  the  end  of  the  first  year, 
when  they  are  sufficiently  defended  by  the. hard- 
ness of  their  shell.  The  animal, ^  at  its  first  ex- 
clusion, lives  solely  on  the  pellicle  of  the  egg 
fi'om  which  it  was  produced.  Providence,  which 
in  oviparous  and  other  animals,  has  provided  for 
the  first  nutriment  of  the  young .  in  different 
ways,  appropriating  the  milk  of  the  mother  to 


286  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  young  of  quadrupeds ;  the  yolk  of  the  ^g  to 
those  of  birds,  tortoises,  and  lizards ;  and  the 
white  of  the  egg  to  irogs  and  toads,  has  made 
this  pellicle  or  coat  the  best  nutriment  ^  the 
young  snaiL  In  fact,  this  pellicle,  consisting  of 
oarbonate  of  lime,  united  to  animal  substance,  m 
necessary  to  produce  the  calcareous  secretion  of 
the  mantle,  and  to  consolidate  the  shell,  as  yet  too 
soft  for  exposure.  When  this  envelope  is  eaten, 
the  little  snail  finds  its  nutrim^it,  more  or  less,, 
in  the  vegetable  soil  around  it,  and  from  which 
it  continues  to  derive  materials  for  the  growth 
9nd  consolidation  of  the  shell.  It  remains  thus 
concealed  for  more  than  a  mouth,  when  it  first 
issues  forth  into  the  world,  and  without  respect 
of  persons,  attacks  the  vegetable  productions 
around,  returning  often  to  an  earthly  aliment, 
probably  still  necessary,  for  the  due. growth  and 
hardening  of  its  portable  house.  These  snails 
cease  feeding  when  the  first  chills  of  autumn  are 
felt,  and  associating,  in  considerable  numbers,  on 
hillocks,  the  banks  of  ditches,  or  in  thickets  and 
hedges,  set  about  their  preparations  for  their 
winter  retreat.  They  first  expel  the  contents  rf 
thdr  intestines,  and  then  concealing  themselves 
under  moss,  grass,  or  dead  leaves,  each  forms, 
by  means  of  its  foot,  and  the  viscid  mucus  which 
it  secretes,  a  cavity  large  enough  to  contain  its 
shell.  The  mode  in  which  it  effects  this  is  re- 
markable.; collecting  a  considerable  quantity  of 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  887 

the  muciiB  on  tbe  sole  of  its  footi  a  porticm  of 
earth  and  dead  leaves  adheres  to  it»  which  it 
shakes  off  on  one  side;  a  second  portioQ  is  again 
dias  selected  and  deposited,  and  so  on  till  it  has 
reared  around  itself  a  kind  of  wall  of  sufficient 
height  to  form  a  cavity  that  will  coptaia  ito  shell ; 
fay  turning  itself  round  it  presses  against  the  sides 
and  renders  them  smooth  and  firm.  The  dome, 
or  covering,  is  formed  in  the  same  way :  eaith 
is  cdlected  on  the  foot,  which  th&i  is  turned 
upwaids,  and  throws  it  off  by  exuding  fresh 
mucus;  and  this  is  repeated  till  a  perfect  roof 
is  formed.  Having  now  completed  its  winter^ 
housei  it  draws  in  its  foot,  covering  it  with  the 
mantle,  and  opens  its  spiracle  to  draw  in  the  air. 
On  closing  this,  it  forms  with  its  slime  a  fine 
membrane,  interposed  between  the  mantle  and 
extraneous  substances.  Soon  afterwards  the 
mantle  secretes  a  large  portion  of  very  white 
fluid  over  its  whole  surface,  which  instantly  sets 
uniformly,  and  forms  a  kind  of  solid  operculum 
like  plaster  of  Paris,  about  half  a  line  in  thick-* 
ness,  which  accurately  closes  the  mouth.  When 
this  is  become  hard  the  animal  separates  the 
mantle  from  it.  After  a  time,  expelling  a  per-* 
tion  of  the  air  it  had  inspired,  and  thus  being 
reduced  in  bulk,  it  retreats  a  little  further  into 
the  shell,  and  forms  another  leaf  of  mucus,  and 
continues  repeating  this  operation  till  there  are 
sometimes  five  or  six  of  these  leaves  forming 


888  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

oelfe  filled  with  air  between  it  and  the  oper*f 

culum.  .'  :  ) 

The  membranous  partitions  are  more  nmnfi^: 
rousiit.the  end  than  at  the  beginning  of  wintei^ 
and,  in  snails  inhabiting  the  mountains,  thank' 
those  on  the  plains.  Theoe  animals  hybemate 
at  the  proper  period,  at  very  difierent  tNxxpeNh 
turei^  yarying  from  37?  to  IT"  Fahrenh.  Bequra"^ 
tion  ceases  during  the  period  of  hybernation. 

The  mode  in.  which  these  animals  escape 
from  their  winter  confinement  is  singular :  tiie 
air  they  had  expured  on  retiring  into  their  sbeM 
further  arid,  further,  remains  between  the  dif< 
ferent  pai^tions  >  of  mucous  membrane  .above 
mimtioned,  which  forms  so  many  cells  henneti^ 
cally  sealed ;  this  they  again .  inspire,  and  tlnus 
acquiring  fresh  vigour,  each  separate  paitkioD, 
as  they  proceed,  is  brokei  by  the  pressure  o( 
the  foot,  projected  in  part  through  the  mantle^ 
when  arrived  at  the  operculum  they  burst  it:by 
a  strong  efibrt,  and  finally  detaching  it,  dien 
emerge,  begin  to  walk  and  to  break  their  long 
fast.*  .     ' 

In  all  these  proceedings  the  superintendiDg 
care  and  wise  provisions  of  a. Father  Being  BXe 
evident.  This  creature  can  neither  foresee  the 
degree  of  cold  to  which  it  may  be  exposed  in  its 
state  of  hybernation,  nor  know  by  what  means  it 
may  secure  itself  from  the  fatal  effects  it  wodd 

*  Gaspard  and  BeM,  Zod.  J&ur,  1.-93. — ii.  174. 


.    UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  289 

produce  upon  it,  if  Hot  provided  against.    But 

at  a  destined  period,  often  when  the  range  of  the 

thermometer  is  high,  not  stimulated  by  a  cold 

atmosphere,  except,  perhaps,  by  the  increasing 

length  of  the  mght,  at  the  bidding  of  some  secret 

fK)wer,  it  sets  about  erecting  its  winter  dwelling, 

and  employing  its  foot  both  as  a  shovd  to  make 

its  mortar,  as  a  hod  to  transport  it,  and  a  trowel 

to  s{»read  it  duly  and  evenly,  at  length  finishes 

and  covers  in  its  snug  and  warm  retreat;  and 

then  still  further,  to  secure  itself  from  the  action 

of  the  atmosphere,  with  the  slimy  secretion  with 

which  its  Maker  has  gifted  it,  fixes  partition 

aftar  partition,  and  fills  each  cell  formed  by  it, 

with  air,  till  it  has  retreated  as  far  as  it  can  from 

every  closed  orifice  of  its  shell — and  thus  barri* 

cades  itself  against  a  frozen  death.   Again,  in  the 

spring,  when  the  word  is  spoken — awake^  thou 

that  steepest — it  begins  immediately  to  act  with 

enei^,  it  r^nspires,  as  above  related,  the  air 

stored    in  its  cells,   bursts    all   its   cerements, 

returns  to  its  summer  haunts,  and  again  lays 

waste  our  gardens. 

We  may  observe  here,  with  respect  to  this  and 
all  hybernating  animals,  a  beautiful  relation  and 
correspondence  between  their  habits  and  their 
fanctionst  Their  official  duty  is  to  remove  su- 
perfluities and  nuisances,  to  prevent  vegetable 
substances  from  encroaching  too  much  upon 
each  other,  to  remove  entirely  those  that  are 

VOL.  I.  u 


290  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

dead  and  putrescent.  At  the  season  ^  the 
year,  therefore,  when  the  former  are  in  full 
vigour,  forth  issue  from  their  yarious  retreats  the 
innumerable  tribes  that  make  them  their  food, 
but  when  they  cease  to  grow  and  flourish  these 
services  are  not  wanted,  and  the  animals  who 
perform  fliem  disappear  from  the  face  of  nature. 
Again,  when  dead  animals,  or  the  excrem^its  of 
living  ones,  or  the  sweets  issuing  from  innume* 
rable  flowers,  would  clog  the  air  that  we  breathe 
with  efiluvia  unfriendly  to  health  and  life — 
countless  armies  are  every  where  upon  the  wing, 
or  on  the  alert,  to  prey  upon  such  substances, 
and  prevent  their  miasmata  from  breeding  a 
pestilence  amongst  us;  but  when  the  cold  season 
returns,  the  flowers  lose  their  leaves  and  blos- 
soms, and  exhale  no  longer  their  sweets,  and  the 
scents  arising  from  putrescent  and  other  foetid 
substances  become  no  longer  annoying.  Then 
the  whole  army  employed  in  this  department 
disappears,  and  the  face  of  nature  seems  to 
lose  the  most  busy  part  of  its  population,  gone 
to  a  long  repose. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  with  respect  to  the 
terrestrial  animals  of  the  tribe  we  are  consider- 
ing, that  they  all  delight  in  shady  and  moist 
places,  and  that  during  hot  and  dry  weather 
they  seldom  make  their  appearance,  but  no 
sooner  comes  a  shower,  than  they  are  all  in  mo- 
tion.   It  is  probable  that  their  power  of  motion 


UNtVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  291 

is  impeded  by  a  dry  soil,  and  that  the  grains  of 
earth  and  small  stones,  when  quite  dry,  adhere 
to  their  slimy  foot. 

As  many  of  the  marine  shells  appear  in  some 
degree  amphibious,  for  instance,  the  Chitons  and 
the  Limpets^  so,  perhaps,  some  of  the  terrestrial 
ones  may  occasionally  enter  fresh  waters ;  indeed 
the  amber  shells,^  at  least  one  species,^  is  stated 
to  swim  occasionally  on  the  surface  of  the  water. 
From  these  circumstances  it  seems  not  im- 
probable that  the  shell-fish,  as  well  as  the  birdsi, 
so  vast  a  proportion  of  them  being  marine  ani- 
mals, were  all  amongst  the  objects  created  on  the 
fifth  day,  and  produced  by  the  waters. 

There  are  very  large  and  beautiful  shells 
found  in  South  America,  belonging  to  the  terres- 
trial herbivorous  section  and  to  different  genera' 
divided  from  Helix  of  Linne,  but  we  know 
nothing  of  their  history  or  habits,  I  shall  there- 
fore now  say  something  upon  the  marine  herbi- 
vorous Trachelipods. 

The  violet  snail,*  which,  siccording  to  the  ac- 
count of  its  manners  given  by  Bosc,  who  paid 
particular  attention  to  them  in  a  voyage  from 
France  to  America,  exhibits  several  very  re- 
markable peculiarities.  When  the  sea  is  calm, 
these  animals  may  be  seen  collected  often  in 

*  Succinea,  *  S,  elongata, 
'  For  instance,  Achatina  Bulimus,  Sfc. 

♦  lantkinaf  Plate  VI,  Fig.  2. 


292  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

large  bands,  swimming  over  the  surface  by 
means  of  a  floating  apparatus  consisting  of  taJeftvA 
vesicles,  produced  by  their  foot;  and  attached 
to  its  posterior  part,  a  little  below  the  point  to 
which  the  operculum  is  fixed  in  other  genera,  aud 
to  which  Cuvier  thinks  it  bears  some  analogy,* 
who  also  observes  that  it  has  a  natatory  mem- 
brane or  fin  on  each  side  of  its  body.  During 
this  action  their  head  is  very  prominent,  and  the 
foot  is  so  extended  that  the  float  or  line  of 
vesicles  forms  an  angle  with  the  middle  of  the 
shell.  When  the  sea  is  rough,  the  animal  ab- 
sorbs the  air  from  its  vesicles,  changes  the  direc- 
tion of  its  foot,  contracts  its  body,  and  lets  itself 
sink.  It  does  the  same  when  in  danger  from 
any  enemy,  and  further,  like  the  cuttle-fish  and 
some  others,  colours  the  water  by  the  emission 
of  a  blue  fluid,  which  serves  to  conceal  it. 
They  are  vividly  phosphoric  in  the  night.  Bir^ 
carry  them  ofi*  with  great  dexterity. 

If  their  floating  apparatus  is  mutilated  the 
foot  can  reproduce  it.  The  latter  is  flat  towards 
the  head,  this  part  of  it  is  furnished  with  a 
transparent  membrane,  which  extends  far  be- 
yond its  extremity,  and  is  composed  of  a  lai^^e 
number  of  vesicles  of  unequal  size,  those  ia  the 
middle  being  the  largest ;  these  vesicles  the 
animals  fill  with  air  at  their  pleasure.     The 

»  Plate  VI.  Fig.  12.  a. 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  293 

Bolet-Ci^oured  shell  of  this  little  animal  is  re- 
markably thin,  which  facilitates  its  excursions 
on  the  surface.  It  is  singular  that  under  this 
fmgile  vesicular  float  a  little  line  of  pearly  fibres 
may  be  perceived,  to  which  are  attached  its 
eggs;  in  some  species  they  are  contained  in 
little  membranous  bags  or  sacs.  It  is  thought 
that  the  young  animals,  when  liberated  from 
these  bags  or  chambers,  ascend  their  mother's 
float,  and  so  are  transported  to  the  surfece. 
Fishes  are  enabled  to  rise  to  the  surface  of  the 
water  by  means  of  their  air-bladders,  and  some 
radiaries  by  a  vesicle  which  surmounts  them,^ 
but  neither  of  them  are  more  singular  than  these 
outriggers  by  which  the  vessel  of  the  violet*snail 
is  kept  both  buoyant  and  steady. 

The  foot  of  the  MoUuscans,  when  we  first 
observe  it,  seems  to  us  merely  an  organ  of  loco- 
motion, nothing  remarkable  in  its  structure,  and 
incapable  of  any  multifarious  action,  but  when 
we  study  the  history  of  this  and  the  preceding 
snail,  we  see  that  it  is  a  most  important  organ, 
and  which  performs  a  greater  variety  of  opera- 
tions than  almost  any  organ  of  any  other  animal. 
We  have  seen  that  it  spins  a  fine  silk  and 
thread ;  that  it  secretes  a  fluid  serviceable  for 
several  purposes;  that  it  can  form  a  float,  as 
in  the  present  instance ;  that  it  can  be  used  as  a 

1  See  above,  p.  195. 


294  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

hand  in  excayatihg  and  building,  and  yarious 
other  manipulations,  so  that  in  giving  them  this 
instrument  and  endowing  it  with  such  variety  of 
functions  in  the  various  tribes,  their  Creator  gave 
them  every  thing  they  wanted. 

Perhaps  the  followers  of  Lamarck  may  say 
that,  in  the  present  instance,  the  anhnal  constructs 
its  own  float  itself,  at  the  implilse  of  its  own 
wants.  But  uninstructed  by  its  Creator,  how  could 
it  learn  that  vesicles  full  of  air  would  serve  to  float 
its  little  boat,  and  if  not  already  organized  to  an- 
swer the  impulse  of  an  exciting  cause,  in  vain 
would  the  will  of  the  animal,  if  so  instructed,  en* 
deavour  to  produce  and  inflate  the  vesicles,  or, 
when  it  willed  to  sink,  to  empty  them  of  air* 

The  shell-fish  6f  the  aquatic  tribe  best  known 
in  this  country  is  the  periwinkle^  vulgarly  called 
the  pin-patch,^  which,  next  to  the  oyster  and  the 
cockle,  seems  most  in  request  as  a  relishing 
article  of  food.  These  animals,  as  I  observed, 
not  very  long  since  at  Cromer,  in  Norfolk,  ap- 
pear to  make  the  bladder-kelp,^  which,  at  low 
water,  may  be  seen  there  in  large  patches,  a 
kind  of  submarine  pasture,  for  I  found  them  in 
abundance  upon  it  at  low  water.  As  the 
Creator  willed  that  the  waters,  whether  salt  or 
fresh,  should  have  their  peculiar  inhabitants,  it 
was  requisite  that  each  should  have  its  appro* 

*  Turbo  litoreus.  ^  Fucus  vesiculosus. 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  295 

priate  food*  Did  all  feed  upon  the  same  sub- 
stance  there  would  be  a  universal  struggle, 
unless  indeed,  the  entire  variety  of  the  sub- 
marine botanical  world  was  done  away,  and 
one  homogeneous  article  provided,  in  such 
quantity  as  to  be  a  sufficient  supply  for  all: 
But  further,  doubtless,  different  organizations 
•and  forms  could  not  be  maintained  upon  the 
same  pabulum,  and  therefore  different  creatures 
required  different  articles  of  food,  or  different 
parts  of  the  same  article.  Here  was  a  mutual 
office — the  numberless  vegetable  productions 
irequire  to  be  kept  within  due  limits,  and  there- 
lore  the  functions  of  the  aquatic  animals  is  to 
maintain  them  in  due  relative  proportions.  Was 
the  ocean  and  all  its  streams  planted  as  now, 
and  there  were  no  animals  of  any  description  to 
keep  in  check  its  vegetable  productions,  they 
would  all  in  time  grow  up  and  choke  the  rivers 
and  gradually  raise  the  bed  of  the  ocean  till 
there  would  be  no  nwre  sea. 

Having  considered  the  plant-devouring  Tra- 
chelipods,  I  shall  say  something  next  upon  the 
carnivorous  or  predaceous  ones,  which  form  the 
great  body  of  large  marine  shells,  and  those 
which  most  ornament  our  cabinets,  for  to  this 
tribe    belong    the    Cowries,^    Cones,*    Mitres,^ 

1  CyprtBa,  *  Contts.  '  Mitra, 


296  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Whelks,*  Tuns,*  Volutes,'  Helmets,*  R^ckr 
shells,^  Strombs,^  and  other  conchs  which  ex* 
ceed  the  general  run  of  shells  in  beauty,  focm^ 
and  magnitude.  But  with  regard  to  their  babit9 
and  instincts  we  know  little  or  nothmg  of  bxtj 
interest. 

They  are  distinguished  from  the  herbiyoroM 
ones  by  breathing  the  sea-water,  for  they  art 
all  submarine,  by  means  of  a  siphon  or  tube, 
instead  of  by  an  aperture  in  the  neck ;  in  the 
place  of  maxillae,  their  mouth  is  furnished 
with  a  retractile  proboscis,  with  which  they 
pierce  and  suck  other  shell-fish.  The  apertnie 
of  the  shell  is  also  very  different,  the  siphon 
being  accompanied  sometimes  by  a  cha&nd, 
and  sometimes  by  a  notch  at  the  base  of  the 
aperture. 

.  The  tribe  most  celebrated  from  ancient  times, 
on  account  of  the  vaunted  purple  die  wbich 
one  species  produced,  is  that  constituted  by  the 
Rock-shells^  or  Linn6's  great  genus,  Murex^ 
and  Lamarck's  canaliferous  Zoophagans,  called 
so  from  the  long  straight  canal  which  terminates 
the  mouth  of  their  sheila.  The  principal  fea- 
ture of  this  tribe,  besides  their  long  channelled 
beak,  is  the  vast  variety  of  spines,  and  oUier 
processes  and  ridges,  with  which  their  Creator 
has    armed    a    great    number    of   them;     the 

*  Buccinum,  *  Dolium.  *   Voluta, 

*  Cassis.  *  Murex,  *  Strombus. 


UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCAN8.  297 

•  « 

bes^L  and  mouth  of  several  give  them  no  small 
resemblance  to  the  heads  of  certain  birds,  thus 
on^  IS  called  the  thorny  woodcock,*  another  the 
mipe,^  &c. 

At  the  first  blush  an  inquirer  into  the  use  of 
these  spines  and  other  arms  of  shell-fish,  would 
hniq^rne  that  their  object  is  defence,  yet  when 
he  16  told  that  those  which  are  most  remark- 
able ~  for  them,  are  themselves  predaceous 
animals;  and  that  the  herbivorous  shell-fish 
Bte  usually  not  distinguished  by  any  thing  of 
the  kind,  he  seems  to  hesitate  as  to  what  con- 
clusion he  shall  draw.  It  may  be  observed^ 
however,  that  the  tribe  most  distinguished  for 
these  arms,  the  rock-shells,  are  not  so  remarkable 
for  their  size  as  many  others  which  live  by 
prey,  as  the  strombs,  the  helmet-shells,  and  the 
tritons,  so  that  their  armour  may  sometimes 
preitent  oue  of  these  from  boring  their  shells, 
and  inserting  its  proboscis  into  thetn. 

The  tribe  we  are  now  considering,  the  rock- 
shells,  w^e  in  high  esteem  from  the  earliest  ages 
on  account  of  the  die  that  some  of  them  af- 
fiM'ded,  and  cloths  died  with  it  bore  a  higher 
price  than  almost  any  other :  more  than  one  spte- 
cies,  however,  yielded  anciently  a  die ;  one,  ac- 
cording to  Bochart,  a  glaucous  or  azure  colour, 
as  he  interprets  it,  and  the  other  purple.     But 

'  M,  Iribulus,  *  M.  Haustellum. 


298  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Tyrian  purple  is  no  longer  in  request.  I  could 
say  much,  observes  the  author  just  named,  upcm 
the  finding,  fishing,  and  method  of  dying  of  the 
purpura,  about  the  price  formerly  enormous, 
nearly  equalling  that  of  pearls,  a  single  shell, 
according  to  Aristotle,  selling  for  a  mina  or.  about 
3/.  concerning  the  time  at  which  it  began  gra- 
dually to  grow  out  of  fashion,  and  at  length  to  be 
wholly  neglected :  so  that  now  it  is  never  used, 
and  no  one  knows  the  method  of  preparing  it. 
In  fact,  the  cochineal  seems  to  have  supplanted 
it,  but  it  would  surely  be  an  object  of  great 
interest  to  re-discover  the  Tyrian  rock-shell,  as 
well  as  that  which  yielded  the  azure  colour,  and 
ascertain  how  far  they  deserved,  especially  the 
former,  the  high  encomiums  bestowed  upon  them, 
and  to  deck  imperial  shoulders.  The  shells  are 
probably  still  in  existence  on  the  coast  of  Pales- 
tine. It  was  the  custom  to  crush  the  shell  as 
soon  as  taken,  for  if  kept  the  animal  was  wont 
to  vomit  its  flower,  as  the  purple  die.  was  called 
by  Aristotle.  This  great  philosophy  thought 
the  purpura  lived  six  years,  as  the  adult  animal 
had  six  whirls  in  its  shell,  and  he  supposed  one 
to  be  formed  annually.  He  gives  a  detailed 
history  of  these  animals,  of  their  congregating 
in  the  spring,  and  of  their  forming  a  kind  of 
comb,  like  bees ;  he  also  mentions  several  kinds 
of  them,  that  the  small  shells  were  bruised, 
and  the  animal  extracted  from  the  large  ones; 


.    UNIVALVE  MOLLUSCANS.  299 

that  the  die  lies  between  the  neck  and  what 
he  denominates  the  poppy.  It  is  found,  by 
Cuvier,  to  be  placed  above  the  neck  by  the 
side  of  the  stomach.  Plumier  relates  that  a 
shell-fish  of  this  genus  squirts  out  its  fluid  in 
a  str^im,  whenever  molested,  which  renders 
it  probable  that  its  object  is  defence. ^ 

Aristotle  mentions  the  operculum  of  the  pur- 
ple, and  also  the  proboscis,  or  tongue  as  he  calls 
it,  which  he  describes  as  longer  than  the  finger, 
and  protruded  from  under  the  operculum,  with 
this  it  feeds,  and  with  it  can  pierce  shells,  and 
will  attack  even  those  of  its  own  kind;  this 
agrees  with  modern  observations,  adding  that 
the  tongue  is  terminated  by  a  sucker  armed 
with  short  tentacles.  Aristotle  also  observes,  an 
observation  confirmed  likewise  by  modern  inves- 
tigators, that  these  animals  bury  themselves  in 
the  sand  like  the  pectens.  This  learned  na^ 
turalist  also  states  that  shell-fish  at  certain 
seasons  hide  themselves,  snails  in  the  winter, 
and  the  purples  and  whelks  for  a  month  during 
the  dog  days. 

The  die  of  the  purple  is  mentioned  in  scrips 
ture  as  well  as  that  of  the  coccus,  and  was  used 
as  such  in  the  time  of  Moses.  It  is  said  also 
to  be  used  at  this  time  in  India  and  America 
to  dye  small  pieces  of  stufi*,  but  in  no  place  is 
it  an  important  object. 

Having  given  so  long  an  account  of  the  rock- 


300  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

shells  or  purples,  I  shall  not  have  occasioii  to 
dilate  upon  any  of  the  remaining  gcaiera,  bat 
shall  merely  notice  a  few  peculiarities  that  some 
of  them  exhibit. 

The  Cowries  are  a  tribe  long  known  and 
admired  for  their  beauty  and  polish,  and  one 
species^  forms  the  current  coin  in  many  parts  of 
Africa,  and  many  Asiatic  Islands.  Some  re- 
markable facts  distinguish  their  history ;  from  the 
form  of  their  shell  and  of  its  aperture,  its  incre* 
ment  could  not  take  place  in  the  usual  way, 
these  animals,  therefore,  are  furnished  by  their 
Creator  with  a  remarkably  ample  mantle,  the 
wings  of  which  cover  half  the  shell,  and  thus  it 
is  gradually  thickened,  and  changes  and  va* 
nations  in  the  colour  take  place  that  hare 
puzzled  conchologists  to  distinguish  a  species 
from  a  variety.  At  certain  times  the  aninml 
is  also  stated  to  quit  its  shell,  and  form  itsdf 
a  new  one  more  appropriate  to  its  size,  a  circum- 
stance related  by  Aristotle  of  the  Buccinum.* 

Volutes  are  another  polished  tribe  of  shells, 
which  are  probably  formed  by  the  mantle  as  in 
the  Cowries — they  are  particularly  distinguished 
by  having  no  operculum.  The  jet  volute  is 
viviparous,  and  its  young  when  excluded  are 
said  to  have  shells  aii  inch  long.  These  pro- 
bably are  more  exposed  to  enemies  than  the 

'  Cypraea  Monetn,  ^  Kt/pvJ,  Arist. 


UNIVALVE  MOLL.U8CANS.  301 

yovmg  af  other  shell-fish.    They  form  an  im* 
portaBt  article  of  food  to  some  African  nations. 

Before  I  close  this  account  of  these  preda* 
ceous  MolluscanSy  I  must  observe,  that  they 
have  two  'distinct  sexes,  and  consequently  male 
and  female  shells.  The  genuine  hermaphrodites 
Hre  confined  to  the  bivalves,  for  in  the  univalve 
hermaphrodites  two  individuals  are  necessary 
for  ie*production,  and  therefore  those  form  a 
distinct  link  between  the  true  hermaphrodites 
that  impregnate  themselves,  and  those  that  have 
distinct  sexes.  So  gradual  are  the  steps  by 
which  the  Creator  passes  from  low  to  high. 
First,  animals  are  re*  produced  without  sexual 
intercourse,  as  in  the  polypes;  then  the  two 
sexes  are  united  in  one  body,  and  suffice  for 
their  own  impregnation — next  follow  two  sexes 
in  the  same  body,  which  cannot  impregnate 
diems^ves,  bringing  us  at  last  to  distinct  sexe«, 
or  unisexual  individuals. 

4.  Lamarck's  fifth  family,  the  Heteropods,  I 
introduce  here  because,  being  univalves,  they 
appear  to  connect  that  tribe  with  the  Cepha- 
lopods  forming  his  fourth  order,  but  which  from 
the  discovery  of  the  animal  of  Nautilus  Pom- 
piliusy  so  admirably  described  by  Mr.  Owen, 
being  further  removed  from  the  other  MoUus- 
cans,  and  the  animal  of  the  Heteropods  having 
a  proboscis  and  only  two  tentacles,  seems  inter- 


302  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

mediate  between  the  Zoophagan  Trachelipods 
and  the  Cephalopoda.  They  have  four  swim* 
ming  organs.  There  seems  a  considerable 
affinity  between  this  tribe  and  the  Pteropods 
in  these  organs,  which  indicates  a  circular  ar- 
rangement in  the  univalve  Molluscans.  The 
Carinaria  vitrea  is  one  of  the  rarest  shells  that 
is  known,  arising  probably  from  its  extremely 
fragile  conch,  which  is  nearly  as  transparent  as 
glass.  A  model  of  it  in  wax  may  be  seen  in 
the  British  Museum.  The  animal  is  a  sailor 
like  the  Argonaut,  to  which  it  comes  near.  It  Is 
found  in  the  South  Seas.  There  are  two  other 
species  known,  one  of  which  frequents  the 
Mediterranean.  Some  genera  without  sheUs 
are  placed  in  this  order  by  Lamarck.  They 
swim  horizontally  like  fishes,  which  circum- 
stance, in  conjunction  with  their  fins  or  swim* 
ming  organs,  induced  him  to  place  them  at  the 
end  of  the  Molluscans  as  near  the  fishes ;  se- 
veral authors  consider  them  as  belonging  to  the 
Pteropods,  to  which  they  are  certainly  related. 


303 


Chapter  X. 
Functions  and  Instincts.     Cephalopods. 

We  have  now  taken  leave  of  what  mayl>e  called 
the  proper  Molluscans,  including  the  Bivalves, 
and  Univalves^  of  Aristotle  and  Linn6,  or  the 
Conchifers  and  M oUuscans  of  Lamarck,  and  are 
arrived  at  a  Class  remarkable,  not  only  for  their 
organization,  form  and  habits,  but  also  for  their 
position  in  the  animal  kingdom;  for  in  their 
composition  they  seem  to  include  elements  from 
both  the  great  divisions  of  that  kingdom :  from 
the  Vertebrates — the  beak,  the  eye,  the  tongue, 
an  organ  for  hearing,  the  crop,  the  gizzard,  and 
an  analogue  of  the  spine,  with  several  other 
parts  enumerated  by  Cuvier ;  and  from  their  own 
sub-kingdom,  many  of  their  remaining  organs. 
We  may  descend  to  the  very  basis  of  the  animal 
kingdom  for  the  first  draught  of  their  nervous 
system,  for  it  is  discoverable  in  the  wheel-animals 
in  which  Ehrenberg  detected  pharyngal  gang- 
lions and  a  nuchal  nervous  collar  f  the  suckeT- 


^  Ai6vpa.  Movodvpa. 

*  Ganglia  nervea  pharyngea,     Annulus  nerveus  nuchalis, 
Ehren. 


304  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

bearing  arms  seem  to  have  their  first  outline  in 
the  fresh  water  polypes;^  indeed  if  the  mouth 
of  the  cuttle-fish  with  its  suckers,  be  separated 
from  the  head,  leaving  behind  the  long  arms, 
we  see  immediately  an  analogue  of  a  radiary, 
particulariy  of  a  star-fish,  with  its  rays  bearing 
suckers  below,  and  its  central  mouth.  The 
lamellated  tentacles  observed  by  Mr.  Owen  in 
his  work,  before  quoted,  on  the  animal  of  the 
Pearly  Nautilus,*  above  and  below  the  eyes, 
seem  to  lead  to  the  antennae  of  Crustaceans  and 
Insects,  and  numerous  MoUuscan  characters  are 
obvious  to  every  one.  From  these  circumstances 
it  seems  evident  that  the  Creator  has  placed  this 
tribe  in  a  station  which  leads  to  very  different 
and  distant  points  in  the  animal  kingdom,  and 
that  there  is  scarcely  any  but  what  may  re- 
cognize in  it  one  or  more  of  its  own  peculiar 
features — ^yet  at  the  same  time  it  exhibits  many 
characters,  both  in  its  most  extraordinary  out- 
ward form  and  in  its  internal  organization,  that 
are  quite  peculiar  and  sui  genei^is^  of  which  no 
animal  at  present  known  exhibits  the  slightest 
traces.  To  mention  only  its  muscular  apparatus 
adapted  to  its  unparalleled  form ;  its  system  of 
circulation,  carried  on  in  the  first  Order  by  three 
distinct  organs  instead  of  one  heart ;  and  the 
wonderfid  complication   of  their   tentacles,   of 

'  Hydra.  *  Nautilus  Pompilius. 


CEPHALOPODS.  305 

the  nerves  that  move  them,  and  the  vascular 
system  that  animates  them. 
-  This  singular  Class,  which  Cuvier  denominated 
Cephalopodsy  or  having  their  feet  attached  to 
their  head,  appears  to  follow  very  naturally  the 
Tfa<ihelipods  and  Heteropods,  lately  described, 
which  have  not  only  eyes  furnished  with  iris 
and  pupil,  but  also  distinct  s^xes,  and  are  of  pre- 
daceous  habits,  all  characters  which  they  possess 
in  common  with  the  Cephalopoda  or  Cuttle-fish. 
There  is,  however,  an  animal  amongst  the  naked 
Gastropods — called  by  the  ancients,  from  its  ten- 
tacles representing  the  ears  of  a  hare,  the  sea- 
hare,*  a  name  it  still  bears  in  Italy,  which 
Linn6  named  Laplysia,  in  which  he  Was  followed 
by  Lamarck,  but  modern  writers  after  Gmelin 
have  called  it  Aplysia^  a  name  used  by  Aristotle 
for  a  very  different  animal,  a  kind  of  sponge,* 
and,  therefore,  improperly  applied — this  animal 
has  many  characters  that  are  found  in  some  of 
the  Cephalopods,  particularly  in  its  circulating 
and  nervous  systems;  in  having  internal  solid 
parts,  and  in  discolouring  the  water  with  an  inky 
fluid,  so  that  there  seems  also  a  connection 
between  this  genus  and  the  Cephalopods  amount- 
ing to  something  more  than  a  mere  analogical 
resemblance. 
Mr.  Owen  has  divided  this  Class  into  two 

^  Lepus  marinuSf  Plin.  ^  Hist.  An.  1.  v.  c.  16. 

VOL.  I.  X 


306  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Orders,  from  the  composition  of  their  respiratory 
organs,  namely,  those  that  have  two  branchis^,^ 
or  gills,  and  those  that  have  four,*  The  first  in- 
cludes those  that  have  no  shell,  and  the  second 
those  that  have  one.  The  last  is  further  divisible 
into  those  who^e  shell  has  many  chambers,  as 
the  Nautilus^  and  those  where  it  has  only  one, 
as  the  Argonaut f  or  paper  nautilus. 

To  the  first  of  these  Orders  belongs  the  cuttk- 
Jishy^  one  of  the  most  wonderful  works  of  the 
Creator.  Its  mouth  is  surrounded  by  eight  long 
fli^hy  arms,  or  rather  legs,  somewhat  conical 
in  shape,  and  acute  at  the  end,  moved  by  innu- 
merable  nerves,  furnished  from  numerous  gang* 
lions:  these  legs  can  bend  in  every  direction 
with  the  utmost  vigour  and  activity,  their  sur- 
face is  furnished  with  many  suckers,  by  which 
they  can  fix  themselves  strongly  to  any  thing 
they  wish  to  lay  hold  of,  and  by  means  of 
which,  like  the  star-fish,*  they  can  move  from 
place  to  place.  When  this  animal  walks,  in 
this  resembling  also  the  star-fish  and  sea-urchin,' 
it  moves  with  its  head  and  mouth  downwards 
and  its  body  elevated.  It  swims  also  and  seizes 
its  prey  by  means  of  these  organs :  besides  these 
arms  or  legs,  for  they  perform  the  functions 
of  both,  there  is  a  pair  of  long  organs,  one  on 

1  Dibranchiata.  *  Tetrabranchiata, 

»  Sepia.  ♦  See  above,  p.  201. 

*  Ibid,  p.  !?12. 


CEPHALOPODS.  307 

each  side,  having  their  origin  between  the  first 
and  second  pair  of  legs,  which  are  incrassated 
at  the  end,  where,  also,  they  are  furnished  with 
many  suckers.  Cuvier  supposes  they  use  these 
as  anchors  to  maintain  them  in  their  station 
during  tempests,  and  as  prehensile  instruments, 
by  which  they  can  seize  their  prey  at  a  dis^- 
tance.  In  the  centre  of  the  legs  is  the  mouth, 
surrounded  by  a  tubular  membranous  lip,  in- 
cluding a  beak,  consisting  of  two  mandibles, 
like  that  of  a  paroquet ;  these  mandibles  or 
jaws  are  crooked,  and  the  upper  one  fits  into 
the  lower  as  a  sliding  lid  into  a  box.  With 
these  redoubtable  jaws  the  cuttle-fish  devours 
fishes,  crustaceans  and  even  shell-fish,  which 
receive  a  further  trituration  in  its  muscular 
crop  and  its  gizzard.  By  means  of  the  suckers 
on  their  legs  and  arms,  they  lay  such  fast  hold 
of  their  prey  as  to  deprive  them  of  all  power 
of  motion ;  thus  they  master  individuals  much 
larger  than  themselves.  The  hard  and  often 
spinose  crust  of  crabs  or  lobsters  cannot  with- 
stand the  action  of  their  trenchant  jaws,  and 
they  do  not  fear  the  gripe  of  their  claws.  Their 
large  eyes,  which  resemble  those  of  vertebrated 
animals,  by  their  look  of  ferocity,  are  enough 
to  create  an  alarm  in  the  animals  they  pursue, 
and  are  said  to  see  in  the  night  as  well  as 
the  day.  So  that  although  they  are  not  like 
Pontoppidans    Kraken — the    notion   of   which 


308  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

i&  thought  to  have  been  taken  from  a  large 
cuttle-fish — half  a  league  in  circumference,  so 
as  to  be  mistaken  for  floating  islands,  yet  they 
are  really  as  tremendous  animals,  their  size 
considered,  as  any  that  Providence  has  com- 
missioned to  keep  within  due  limits  the  popu- 
lace of  the  waters. 

One  of  their  most  remarkable  and  unique 
features,  is  the  manner  in  which  circulation 
takes  place  in  them.  They  have  three  hearts; 
the  principal  one,  seated  in  the  middle,  sends 
the  blood  through  the  arteries:  the  blood  re- 
turns by  a  vena  cava,  which  dividing  into  two 
branches,  carries  it  to  the  two  lateral  hearts, 
each  of  which  sends  it  to  the  gills  for  oxygena- 
tion, whence  it  returns  again  by  the  intermediate 
heart. 

The  Octopus,  called  by  the  French  writers 
the  PoulpCy  probably  a  contraction  of  polype, 
differs  from  the  common  cuttle-fish,  having 
neither  the  arms  nor  long  tentacles  of  that 
animal,  and  instead  of  the  large  heavy  bone 
has  only  two  small  cartilages.  This  dififerent 
structure  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  diflTerence 
in  their  habits.  The  ,body  of  the  octopus  is 
small,  and  it  has  legs  sometimes  a  foot  and 
a  half  in  length,  with  about  two  hundred  and 
forty  suckers  on  each  leg,  arranged,  except  near 
the  mouth,  in  a  double  series ;  so  that  it  walks 
with  ease.     They  are   often   out  of  the  water. 


CEPHALOPODS-  309 

and  frequent  rough  places,  are  excellent  swim- 
mers, and  move  rapidly  in  the  water  with  their 
head  behind.  The  cuttle-fish,  whose  legs  are 
short  and  body  heavy,  prefer  the  bottom,  and 
do  not  attempt  to  swim,  for  which  they  are  not 
well  fitted.  Providence  has,  therefore,  given 
them  their  long  arms  to  compensate  for  the 
shortness  of  their  legs. 

A  remarkable  peculiarity  distinguishes  these 
animals.  They  are  furnished  with  an  organ 
which  secretes  a  black  fluid,  with  which  they 
can  produce  an  obscurity  in  the  water  that 
surrounds  them,  on  any  appearance  of  danger, 
or  to  conceal  themselves  from  their  prey-  Th6 
Chinese  are  said  to  use  it  in  making  the  ink 
that  bears  the  name  of  their  country ;  something 
similar,  but  not  so  black,  is  prepared  from  it  in 
Italy ;  and  Cuvier  used  it  to  colour  the  plates  for 
his  memoir  on  these  animals. 

The  second  order  of  cephalopods,  or  at  least 
the  pearly  nautilus,  differs  in  several  respects 
from  those  which  constitute  the  first,  and  which 
I  have  just  described,  approaching  much  n^rer 
to  the  MoUuscans.  The  most  striking  approxi- 
mation, and  which  first  catches  the  eye  of  the 
examiner  is  its  shell,  which,  though  its  spiral 
convolutions  are  not  externally  visible,  exhibits 
a  general  resemblance  to  a  univalve  shell. 
To  a  person  who  had  the  opportunity  of  wit- 
nessing the  motions  of  the  animal  that  inhabits 


310  FUNCTIONS  AND  INfiTlNCTS. 

it,  the  first  thing  that  would  strike  him,  would 
be  the  means  by  which  it  progressed  upon  tbe 
bed  of  the  sea,  he  would  see  no  motion  produced 
by  the  action  of  tentacular  l^s  fuminhed  with 
suckers,  like  those  of  the  cuttle-fish,  but  instead 
of  it,  by  a  single  expansive  organ,  exhibitii^ 
considerable  resemblance  to  the  foot  of  asnaU. 
This  organ,  Mr.  Owen,  led  by  the  nervous 
system,  regards  as  surmounting  the  head  and 
as  its  principal  instrument  for  locomotion.  The 
oral  organs  of  this  animal  are  much  more  nume- 
rous and  complicated  than  those  of  the  cuttle- 
fish, and  sure  furnished  with  no  suckers.  Its 
tentacles  are  retractile  within  four  processes, 
each  pierced  by  twelve  canals  protruding  an 
equal  number  of  these  organs,  so  that  in  all 
there  are  forty-eight.  In  fact,  the  whole  oral 
apparatus,  for  the  full  description  of  which  I 
must  refer  the  reader  to  Mr.  Owen's  excellent 
tract,  except  the  mandibles  and  the  lip,  is 
formed  upon  a  plan  difierent  from  that  of  the 
cuttle-fish,  as  likewise  from  that  of  the  carni?o- 
rous  trachelipod  MoUuscans,  and  indicates  very 
difierent  modes  of  entrapping  and  catchiog 
their  prey. 

The  eye,  also,  Mr.  Owed  states  to  be  reduced 
to  the  simplest  condition  that  the  organ  of  vision 
can  assume,  without  departing  altogether  from 
the  type  of  the  higher  classes,  so  that  it  seems 
not  far  removed  from  that  of  the  proper  Mol- 


CEPHALOPODS*  311 

fttscans.  In  this  animal  there  i&  only  a  single 
heart,  the  branchial  ones  being  wanting. 

There  is  one  circumstance  which  proves  this 
eephalopod  to  belong  to  this  shell,  and  not  to  be 
a  parasitic  animal  as  that  of  the  argonaut  has 
been  supposed  to  be — it  is  this,  though  the 
whole  body  appears  to  reside  in  the  last  and 
largest  concameration  of  the  shell,  yet  there 
is  a  small  tubular  tail-like  process  which  enters 
the  siphon,  but  which  unfortunately  was  muti- 
lated, only  a  small  piece  being  left,  but  enough 
to  shew  that  the  animal  had  power  over  the 
whole  shell  by  means  of  this  organ,  hence  it 
follows  that  a  Cephalopod  is  the  animal  that 
forms  the  shell  of  the  nautilus,  and  its  natural 
inhabitant,  which  goes  a  great  way  towards 
settling  the  controversy  concerning  the  real 
animal  of  the  argonaut,  and  amounts  almost  to 
a  demonstration  that  the  celebrated  sailor  that 
uses  it  as  a  boat,  and  scuds  gaily  in  it  ovct  the 
ocean,  is  no  pirate  that  has  murdered  its  natural 
owner,  but  sails  in  a  skiflf  of  his  own  building. 

The  only  circumstance  that  now  leaves  any 
doubt  in  the  mind  of  the  inquirer,  is  the  very 
different  nature  of  the  cephalopod  of  the  argo- 
naut and  the  nautilus,  the  former  appearing 
to  be  nearly  related  to  the  octopus  or  poulpe, 
and  belonging  to  the  genus  OcytlMe  of  Rafi- 
nesque.  In  this  genus  the  tentacular  legs  or 
arms  are  similar  to  those  of  the  poulpM,  planted 


312  FUNCTIONS  ANI>  INSTINCTS. 

Oh  the  inAer  side  with  a  double  series  of  sessile 
suckers,,  the  second  pair  having  a  membranous 
dilatation  ^t  their  apex,^  which  the  animal  is 
supposed  to  use  as  a  sail  when  it  moves  on  the 
surface  of  the  sea.  Some  naturalists  deny  that 
this  animal  ever  usies  these  organs  for  sailing  <^ 
rowing,  but  Bosc  expressly  asserts,  and  I  am 
not  aw|u*e  that  (here  is  any  reason  to  doubt  his 
veracity,  that .  he  has  seen  hundreds  of  the 
ai^onauts  rowing  over  the  surface  of  the  sea,  in 
calnfi  days,  at  so  small  a  distance  from  the  vessel 
iu  which  he  was  sailing,  that  though  he  could 
i^ot  catch  one,  he  could  observe  all  their  ma- 
iiceuvres ;  he  further  says,  that  they  employ  their 
dilated  tentacle  sometimes  as  a  sail  and  some- 
times as  an  oar. 

When  we  consider  how  many  instances  are 
upon  record  of  Molluscans  being  fitted  with 
organs  that  enable  them  to  catch  the  wind  and 
sail  on  the  surface  of  the  sea,^  there  is  nothing 
contradictory  either  to  analogy  or  probabiUty 
that  the  argonaut  should  do  the  same,  espe- 
cially when  we  consider  how  universally  this 
idea  has  prevailed,  from  the  time,  at  least, 
of  Pliny  and  Oppian,  both  of  whom  describe 
its  sails  with  sufficient  accuracy.  Aristotle  also 
speaks  of  his  polype,  which  is  evidently  a 
cephalopod,  as    a    sailor   by  nature — he  says, 

*  See  ZooL  Joum.n*  xiii,  t.  iii.  ^  3ee  above,  p.  263. 


CEPHALOPODS.  313 

that  when  it  rises  from  the  deep  it  is  in  a 
subverted  shell,  rendering  that  action  more  easy 
and  keeping  the  shell  empty,  but  that  when 
arrived  at  the  surface  it  reverses  it;  that  it 
3preads  its  sail  to  the  wind,  and  when  that 
blows,  letting  down  its  two  ciiti,  one  on  each 
side,  uses  them  to  steer  with. 

Upon  comparing  the  animal  of  the  nautilus 
with  that  of  the  argonaut,  it  appears  evident, 
though  the  gills  of  the  latter  seem  not  to  have 
been  examined,  that  they  belong  to  different 
Orders,  at  least,  every  probability  rests  on  that 
side ;  yet  every  thing  speaks  the  relationship  of 
the  latter  to  the  octopus,  and  therefore  they 
.would  properly  form  a  section  of  the  dibran- 
ehiata  of  Mr.  Owen.  In  fact,  the  oral  organs  of 
the  former  are  so  widely  different  from  those  of 
the  Order  just  mentioned,  that  one  would 
almost  expect  another  to  connect  them.  This 
probably  lies  dormant  amongst  the  fossil  am*^ 
monites,  the  shells  of  many  of  which,  though 
consisting  of  many  chambers,  are  evidently  in- 
termediate between  the  nautilus  and  argonaut. 

We  must  next  inquire  what  was  the  object 
of  Him,  who  does  nothing  but  with  a  view  to 
some  useful,  though  not  always  evident,  end, 
in  producing  these  miniature  monsters  of  the 
deep,  so  wonderfully  organized  and  so  unlike 
every  other  tribe  of  animals,  in  his  creation,  and 
yet  containing  in  them,  as  we  have  seen,  as  i| 


314  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

were,  the  elements,  whether  we  ascend  or  de- 
scend, of  all  the  rest.  It  appears  from  the 
united  testimony  of  almost  every  writer  that 
has  noticed  them,  that  they  have  it  in  charge 
to  keep  within  due  limits,  a  tribe  of  animals, 
almost  equally  destructive  with  themselves,  dad 
which  are  armed  also  with  weapons  of  oSence, 
apparently  equally  terrific  to  their  prey.  It 
will  be  readily  perceived,  that  I  am  speaking  of 
the  Crustaceans,  and  of  the  formidable  pincers 
with  which  they  seize  their  prey.  It  must 
be  a  curious  spectacle  to  see  one  of  the  larger 
poulpes  attack  a  lobster;  at  first  sight,  we 
should  think  the  latter  most  likely  to  master 
his  assailant,  covered  as  he  is  with  a  hard  crust, 
and  using   adroitly    his    powerful   forceps,  we 

• 

should  feel  sure  that  the  cuttle-fish,  with  his 
soft  body  and  oral  organs  equally  soft,  stood  no 
chance  against  such  an  antagonist.  But  He 
who  gave  him  his  commission,  has  fitted  him  (at 
the  execution  of  it,  his  soft  tentacular  organs 
will  bend  in  every  direction,  and  the  numerous 
suckers  wherewith  they  are  planted,  by  pumping 
out  the  medium  that  forms  the  atmosphere  of 
marine  animals,  produce  such  a  pressure  where- 
ever  they  are  fixed,  that,  struggle  as  it  may, 
it  cannot  disengage  itself  from  the  grasp  of  its 
assailant ;  and,  by  their  flexibility,  these  organs 
can  imitate  the  fishermen,  and  tie  together  the 
two  pieces  of  the  forceps,  so  that  it  cannot  bite ; 


CEPHALOPODS.  315 

thus,  at  last,  it  is  brought  within  the  action  of 
the  powerful  beak  of  the  cuttle*fish,  which  soon 
makes  its  way  through  its  crust,  and  devours  it 
shell  and  all.  Even  when  at  a  distance,  by 
means  of  its  long  arms,  the  cuttle-fish  can  lay 
hold  of  it  and  drag  it  towards  it ;  and  the 
poulpe,  which  has  not  these  arms,  makes  up  for 
tt  by  having  longer  legs. 

The  argonaut  probably  uses  similar  means  to 
master  its  prey,  and  finds  some  defence  in  its 
shell,  but  the  nautilus  has  a  still  stronger  castle, 
which  it  may  be  supposed  defies  the  bite  of  the 
Crustacean;  its  oral  organs  are  calculated  for 
closer  combat,  but  the  tentacles  appear  less 
adapted  for  holding  fast  their  prey,  not  being 
visibly  furnished  with  suckers,  but  what  they 
want  in  power  is  made  up  in  numbers,  since  in 
lieu  of  eight  or  ten  tentacular  organs,  they  have 
nearly  a  hundred.  So  diversified  are  the  ways 
and  instruments  by  which  infinite  wisdom, 
POWER,  and  goodness  enables  its  creatures  to 
fulfil  the  ends  for  which  he  created  them :  and 
so  an  equilibrium  is  maintained  in  every  part  of 
creation. 

The  fossil  species  are  mostly  called  by  one 
name.  Ammonites^  as  if  they  were  the  horns  of 
the  Egyptian  Jupiter,  and  which,  if  any  of  them 
are  now  in  existence,  probably  frequent  the 
depths  of  ocean,  and  do  not,  like  the  argonaut 
or  nautilus,  visit  its  surface,  to  tell  an  admiring 


310  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

world,  that  God  has  created  such  wonderful 
beings.  Specimens  have  been  found  of  the 
enormous  diameter  of  six  feet.  Though  the 
sculpture  of  many  of  these  great  cephalopods 
gives  reason  to  think  that  they  may  be  int^- 
mediate  between  the  argonaut  and  nautilus, 
yet  the  convolutions  and  external  form  of  their 
conchs  gives  them  no  small  resemblance  to  a 
genus  of  snails/  the  species  of  which  are  often 
found  in  fresh  waters,  except  that  in  this  the 
shell  is  more  concave  on  one  side  than  the  other. 
The  genus  Spirulaj  the  animal  of  which  appears 
also  to  be  a  Cephalopod,^  seems  to  exhibit  the 
first  tendency  to  this  form. 

Amidst  all  this  variety  of  Molluscous  animals, 
exhibiting  such  diversity  in  their  structure  and 
organization,  in  their  habits,  food,  modes  of  life, 
and  stations,  one  great  object  seems  attained 
by  their  creation  especially,  the  production  of 
calcareous  matter.  Even  the  shells  of  terres- 
trial testaceans,  if  we  consider  the  vast  numbers 
that  every  year  perish,  must  add  in  no  trifling 
degree  to  the  quantity  of  that  matter  on  the 
earth,  and  probably  make  up  for  the  continual 
waste  or  employment  of  it,  so  as  to  maintain 
the  necessary  equilibrium ;  but  in  the  ocean,  the 
quantity  added  to  that  produced  by  corallines, 

•  Planorbis.  2  Plate  VIL  Fig.  2. 


CBPHALOPODS.  317 

must  be  exceedingly  great,  even  in  lakes  beds 
are   formed    of   the  deposits   of   the   shell-fish 
inhabiting  them,  how  much  more  gigantic  must 
they  be  in  the  ocean,  this  will  be  evident  from 
the  superior  number   and  size  of  the  oceanic 
shells  compared  with   the  minute  species,  the 
Limnea,   Planorhis,  &c.  that  inhabit  our  lakes 
and  pools.   Thus,  as  reefs  and  islands  are  formed 
by  the  coral  animals,  the  bed  of  the  ocean  may 
be  elevated  by  the  shells  of  dead  testaceous 
ones.     That  eye   which   is  never  closed,  that 
thought  which  is  never  intermitted,  that  power 
which    never  rests,  but,  engaged  in  incessant 
action,  and  employing  infinite  hosts  of  under- 
agents  to  eflfect  his  purposes,  sees  and  provides 
for  the  wants  of  the  whole  creation :  the  plant 
absorbs  from  the  soil,  the  animal  after  devouring 
the  plant,  or  the  plant-fed  creature,  returns  to 
the  earth  what  the  plant  had  absorbed,  and  so 
maintains  the  proper  equilibrium ;  He  who  num- 
bers the  hairs  of  our  head,  numbers  the  work- 
men that  he  employs,  employing  them  only  in 
such  proportions  so  distributed,  as  may  best  ac- 
complish His  purposes. 


318 


Chapter  XI. 

Functiofis  and  Instincts.     Worms. 

We  are  now  at  length,  after  long  wanderings, 
arriyed,  if  I  may  so  speak,  at  the  limits  of  the 
MoUnscan  territory,  and,  having  visited  the 
capital,  seem  now  to  be  upon  the  confines  of  the 
higher  hemisphere  of  the  animal  kingdom,  the 
inhabitants  of  which  are  distinguished  by  having 
their  whole  frame  built  upon  a  vertebral  column, 
inclosing  a  medullary  chord,  and  terminating,  at 
its  upper  extremity,  in  a  skull  c6ntaining  a  de- 
veloped brain. 

But  though  we  seem  arrived  at  the  confines  of 
this  higher  order  of  animals,  there  are  still  many, 

•  •  • 

and  some  superior  to  the  most  perfect  of  the 
MoUuscans,  in  the  entirety  of  their  nervous 
system,  and  the  habits  and  instincts  which  they 
manifest,  to  which  we  have  not  yet  paid  the 
attention  that  they  merit.  These  animab  are 
particularly  distinguished  from  the  preceding 
Classes,  by  the  appearance^  or  acttial  existence  of 
segments  or  joints  in  their  bodies,  especially  in 
their  legs,  of  what  may  be  called  an  annular 
structure.  They  are  divided  into  two  great 
tribes,  which,  from  this  circumstance,  have  been 


WORMS.  319 

called  Annelidansj  and  Annulosans^  and  the  last, 
with  more  propriety,  Condylopes. 

There  is  one  tribe,  however,  amongst  the  Ra- 
diaries,  as  we  have  seen,  that  shews  some  slight 
traces  of  insection,  I  allude  to  the  star-fish  and 
sea-urchins,  forming  the  main  body  of  Lamarck's 
Order  of  Echinoderms.  If  we  examine  the  for- 
mer, we  find  them  marked  out  into  areas,  and  in 
the  latter,  as  I  have  before  stated  at  large,  the 
whole  shell  consists  of  numerous  pieces  united 
by  different  kinds  of  sutures. 

Before  I  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  two 
tribes  lately  mentioned,  exhibiting  the  appear- 
ance or  reality  of  insection,  I  must  notice  an 
anomalous  tribe  of  animals,  1?rhose  real  station 
has  not  been  satisfactorily  made  out.  I  am 
speaking  of  the  Entozoa  or  Intestinal  Worms. 
This  Class,  as  Mr,  W.  S.  Mac  Leay  has  re- 
marked, consists  of  animals  differing  widely  in 
their  organization,  some  having  a  regular  ner- 
vous system  formed  by  a  medullary  collar  send- 
ing forth  two  threads,  while  others  have  no 
distinct  organs  of  sense. 

Lamarck  places  this  Class  between  the  Tuni- 
caries  and  Insects,  and  Cuvier,  amongst  his 
Zoophytes,  hetYfeen  the  Gelatines  and  JEchino- 
derms.  Mr.  Mac  Leay  has  divided  it  into  two 
classes,  placing  one,  consisting  of  the  Parenchy- 
matous intestinal  worms  of  Cuvier,  between  the 
Infusories  and  Polypes,  and  the  Cavitaries  of  that 


320  FUNCTIONS  AND  IjiSTINCTS. 

author,  amongst  the  Annulosans  or  Cojidyhpes, 
Dr.  Von  Baer  is  of  opinion  that  these  Entozoa, 
or  worms,  reducible  to  no  common  type  of  orga- 
nization, inhabiting  various  animals  in  various 
parts  of  their  body,  together  with  the  Infu- 
sories — and  others  might  be  added — should  be 
banished  from  a  natural  arrangement  of  animals. 
He  seems  also  to  think,  in  which  I  feel  disposed 
to  agree  with  him,  that  the  leading  types  of  animal 
organization  are  to  be  found  in  its  lowest  grades.^ 
As  I  formerly  observed  with  respect  to  the  In- 
fusories* — these  appear  to  be  the  basis  on  which 
God  has  built  the  animal  kingdom.  As  some  of 
the  species  appear  connected  with  the  Anneli- 
dans,  I  have  introduced  the  Class  here,  but  not 
as  having  formed  any  settled  opinion  as  to  its 
proper  division  and  legitimate  station. 

The  majority  of  this  Class  are,  what  their 
name  imparts,  intestinal  worms,  or  parasites, 
that  have  their  station  within  the  body  of 
other  animals.  Some  of  them,  however,  do 
not  answer  this  description,  as  they  are  found 
only  amongst  aquatic  vegetables ;  of  this  kind 
IS  a  little  tribe,  which  Linne  arranged  with 
the  leeches,^  to  which  they  approach  by  the 
flukes.*  The  Planaria,  in  some  respects,  par- 
takes more  of  the  nature  of  a  polype  than  of  any 

•  •  •  ♦ 

1  See  ZooL  Journ.  July— October,  1828,  260. 

2  See  above,  p.  148.  ^  Hirudo. 
*  Fasdola,  Distoma, 


WORMS,  32 1 

©Uier  animaL    Draparnaud,  ^ho  paid  particu- 
lar attentioa  to  them,   says  that  when  young 
they  have   only  two  eyes,    and    acquire    two 
more  when  adult;    The  head  has  no  mouth; 
beyond  the  middle  of  the  body,  and  on  its  under 
side,  is  a  single  orifice  which  serves  for  mouth, 
anus,  and  nostrils.    This  orifice  answers  to  a 
long  sac,  which,  is  the  intestinal  tube;  from  it 
sometimes  issues  a  white  tubular  organ,  which  he 
regards  as  respiratory ;   this  organ  is  doubtless 
the  same  with  the  retractile  trumpet-shaped  pro^ 
boscis,  issuing  from  a  circular  aperture  in  the 
middle  of  the  abdomen,  mentioned  by  Dr.  Johnson 
in  his  interesting  paper  on  these  animals  in  the 
Philosophical  Transactions,  which  he  supposes 
to  be  a  kind  of  mouth,  when  extended,  equalling 
in  length  the  animal  itself*^    This  remarkable 
organ   was   also   noticed   by  Miiller  and  Mr« 
DalyelL     The  circumstance  of  its  receiving  and 
extruding  its  aliment  and  respiring  at  the  same 
orifice,  is  a  clear  approximation  to  the  polype, 
.  A  further  confirmation  of  this  is  the  power  this 
animal  possesses  of  spontaneously  dividing  itself 
for  the  purpose  of  reproduction.     M.  Drapar^. 
naud — after  remarking  that  the  species  he  de- 
scribed, which  he  calls  P.  tentaculata^  and  which 
is  probably  synonymous  with  that  particularly 
noticed   by  Dr.  Johnson  under  the  name  of 

/     1  Philos.  Trans.  1825.  i.  254.  t.  xvi./.  10. 
VOL.  I.  Y 


322  FUNCTIONS  AMi>  INSTINCTS. 

P.  comuta^  18  oviparoui^  iu  the  spring  and  geoi'^ 
miparous  in  the  autumn-r-ohserves,  that,  in  the 
latter  season,  it  divides  itself  spcmtaneoualy  and 
transTCTsely  into  two  parts  above  the  abdominal 
orifice,  and  at  the  end  of  tea  days  each  of  these 
parts  has  acquired  the  head  or-  the  tail  that 
it  wanted.  He  has  divided  individuals  into 
many  transverse  pieces  and  two  longitudinal 
ones,  and  every  piece,  in  due  time,  completed 
itself.  It  formed  eyes,  an  iiitestmal  tube,  and 
other  necessary  cNcgans. 

Mr.  Dalyell  and  Dsw  Johnson  siibsequfiady 
made  similar  observations,  and  bty  dividing  the 
head  had  succeeded  in  produ/ciiig  an  aaimal 
with  two  heads ;  th^  latter,  from  the  resuk  of 
several  oliservations,  found  that  each  individual, 
upon  an  average,  might,  by  spontaneous^  sdf**^ 
division,  produce  ten,  and  this  when  ufldec 
constraint;  if  at  liberty,  and  in  their  natanl 
situation^  we  may  conJ6ctw*e  that  their  reproduce 
tive  powars  might  be  carried  much  higher.  Dr^ 
Johnson  ^vided  erne  into  three,  equal  iposA^ 
when  the  head  speedily  acquired  a  new  bo^ 
and  tail ;  the  tafl,  a  new  body  and  head ;  and 
the  middle  piece  a  new  head  and  tail. 

From  this  whole  statement  it  isi  evident  that 
these  pseudo-leeches,  to  say  the  least,  their  sab* 
stance  considered,  tend  towards  the  polypes,  and 
possess  the  same  reviviscent  powers.  In  several 
characters,  which  I  shall  notice  hereafter,  they 


WORMS.  823 

kh6  agree  with  the  Annelidans.    Draparnaud^ 
frbra  the  apptoxiniation  of  the  points  on  the 
head  of  P.  cofmuta^  to  the  tentacles  of  Lymnea^ 
thinks  that  they  form  a  link  between  the  Mol- 
luscans  and  the  Wornois.     Reprodnctiv^  powers 
haye  certainly  been  observed  in  the  former,  bnt 
only  in  the  reproduction  of  mutilated  organs, 
for  a  snail  or  sliig  cut  in  pieces,  would  not  fornr 
so  many  individual  animals.    Bonnet  has  given 
an    account    of    reproductive    powers    in    one 
of  the  Hispid  Worms  ^  of  Lamarck,  supposed 
by  (imielinf  to  be  the  Nais  harbata  of  Miiller, 
and  in  a  species  df  frfeh  water  worm  belong- 
ing fo  the  Annelidans,    which,  if  1  may  so 
speak,  grows  from  cuttings,  and  Uke  the  Pfaw«n>, 
can  produce  two  heads.    These  last  ^re  probably 
not  fgrt*  removed  from  the  flukes,*  though  their 
statten  is  so  diiferent.     Whether  they  five  on 
atiimdl  or  vegetable  matter    is    not    certainly 
asctertained;  to  look  at  their  probosciis  it  seems 

■  *  *  * 

rather  calcufeted  to  fix  them  as  a  sucker,  to 
some  animal,  and  so  to  dierive  their  nutriment 

•  •  •  > 

from  it,  like  their  analogue,  the  l^ch,  especially 
as  the  marine  sjiecites  are  supposied  to  be  car- 
nivorous. 

Their  wonderful  rejiroductiTe  powers  appear 
to  be  given  them  by  a  kind  Providence  to  pre- 
vent their  total  annihilation ;  at  least,  it  is  stated, 
that  at  certain  periods  of  the  year,  their  numbers 

'   Vers  hispides^  *  Fasciold,   ' 


324  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

are  so  reduced,  that  where  thousands  were  seen 
in  summer,  in  spring  scarcely  one  has  sumved. 
Their  substance  is  so  soft  and  gelatinous,  that 
they  are  easily  destroyed ;  to  compense^  tbii, 
they  are  gifted  with  the  extraordinary  powers 
of  reproduction  above  described^  God  hadi  ao 
tempered  his  sentient  works,  that  seemiog 
defects,  in  one  respect,  are  compensated  by 
redundance  in  another. 

Having  made  these  observations  upon  animals 
of  this  class,  that  do  not  infest  man  or  beast 
internally,  I  next  turn  to  those  whose  offiee  k, 
in  spite  of  all  his  care,  to  make  the  Lord  of  the 
Creation,  as  well  as  the  whole  animal  kingdoia, 
not  only  their  constant  abode,  but  also  their 
food.  More  than  twenty  of  these  pestiferoos 
creatures,  that  attack  man,  have  been  enu- 
merated ;  some  penetrate  into  the  very  seat  of 
thought ;  ^  others  disturb  his  bile ;  ^  otJiers  cir* 
culate  with  the  blood  in  his  veins ;  ^  others,  again, 
are  seated  in  his  kidneys  ;^  others  in  his  museka;^ 
the  guinea  worm^  in  his  cellular  tissue:  the 
ovaries  of  females  are  infested  by  another ;  ^  the 
tape-worms  extend  themselves,  joints  by  joint, 
to  an  enormous  length  in  his  intestines ;°  some 

^  Echinooocous  Hominis,  ^  Fasciola  hq^aUca,  ' 

^  Zififfuatula  Venarum,  *  Strongylus  gigas, 

*  Hydatigerd  cellulosa.  ^  Filaria  medinefists. 

7  Linguatula  pinguicula, 
^  Tania  BoliuTn^  and  Botryocepkalns  Hominis, 


WORMS.  ^25 

select  the  large  intestine  ;^  and  others  the  small 
ones ;  ^  some  even  attack  infants,  and  them 
only/  Such  are  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to 
from  these  our  internal  assailants  and  devourers. 
•^Th0  recital  is  really  enough  to  cause  our  hair 
to  stsmd  on  end.  No  one  can  believe  that  all 
these  instruments  of  punishment  were  at  work 
in  the  first  pair  when  they  came  from  the  hands 
of  their  Maker,  and  nothing,  exeept  deaths  can 
prove  with  a  greater  strength  of  evidence,  that 
he  is  fallen  from  his  originsd  state  of  integrity 
and  fevour  with  Ood,  than  such  an  army  of 
scourges  set  in  anray  against  him.  I  shall 
enlarge  a  little  upon  a  few  of  them,  and  then 
tnd  adieu  to  the  disgusting  subject* 

There  are  few  people,  that  have  not  heard  of 
the^A;€,  or  animal  resembling  a  fiat  fish,  and 
which  really  has  been  mistaken  for  one,  often 
found  in  the  liver  of  diseased  sheep,  and  some* 
times  also  in  tiie  human  gall-bladder  and  bile- 
vessels*  The  eyes  of  these  aniinals  are  very 
parominent,  and  set  in  a  cartilaginous  ring,  seem- 
ii%  to  exhibit  both  iris  and  pupil ;  they  are  both 
planted  in  the  upper  side  of  the  head,  like  those 
of  the  fish^  they  resemble.  Like  the  leech,  the 
fluke  has  two  orifices — the  first  in  a  tubular  pro- 
longation of  the  head,  and  the  other  underneath 

*  TrtchocephalusHomirds.  *  Ascaris  lumbricoides, 
'  Oxyurus  Vermicularis, 

*  Leeuwen :  Arcan.  Nat.  E.  Tr.  t,  /.  H  K.  i.  K. 


326  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

in  the  abdomeD,  but  distant  fipm  the  Uil.  % 
these  they  fix  themselves,  living  by  sucUoq; 
they  sometimes  produce  fatal  effects  upon  s{ieep. 
When  only  in  small  numbers,  they,  dxHibUess, 
as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  Class,  answer  tm^ 
good  end;  it  is  solely  when  they  become 
too  num^ous  that  they  occasion  fetal  dis^ 
eases.  Leeuwenhoek  found  870  in  one  liver, 
and  in  others  only  ten  or  twelve^  He  sayg 
they  occur  in  many  kinds  of  quadnkpeds,  as 
stags,  wild  boars,  and  calves.  He  seems  quite 
at  a  loss  to  account  fhr  their  introduction  into 
the  livers  of  these  animals,  but  concludes  that, 
lik^  the  leech,  Iheir  natiye  element  is  water, 
and  their  eggs,  swallowed  by  cattle  wl^n  they 
drink,  so  find  their  way  into  the  liver.  TW» 
of  cpurse  is  all  conjecture.  Providence,  who 
assigij^ed  to  them  their  ofiice,  has  also  directed 
them  to  their  station,  but  from  when^  or  by 
what  route  we  do  not  know  certainly  at  preset 
A  friend  of  mine  who  has.  kept  a  flock  for  many 
years,  has  observed  that  whenever  they  weie 
turned  into  mpist  meadows  in  wet  seasons,  jl^y 
suffered  greatly  firom  these  animals ;  but  that  in 
the  same  situatio&»  in  a  dry  one,  they  were  not 
afiected. 

The  most  celebrated  of  all  the  intestinal  anir 
mals,  are  the  Tape- worms,  of  which  ^ve  species 
have  been  ascertained  to  inhabit  man,  besides 
whom  quadrupeds,  birds,  reptiles  and.  fishes  are 
equally  their  victims.     These  are  now  divided 


WORMS.  027 

into  two  geniera,  the  cdmiDOii^  and  the  ^ape^ 
headed  tapew^vms.^  The  ftnUer  is  the  most 
edadmon  in  Englatid,^  bat  the  latter^  neeaxs  the 
most  ^gigantto  of  ao^.  Sir  A.  Cadiale>  who  has 
a  moBt  exdeUfeirt  paper  upoa  the  fonneTf  ia  the 
flRMtmd  velume  of  the  Linnean  Transductions, 
says  that  he  has  met  with  them  from  less 
than  six  rfeist  iong  and  consisting  only  of  fifty 
joizits,  lo  thirty  feet  long  with  four  hundred 
jointSi  BiQt'  these  are  nothing  compared  with 
others  df  the  latter  obeerred  by  contin^tal 
writers.  Bonii<^  mentions  them  as  sometime 
estending  to.  the  length  of  thirty  elb,  ptobably 
meaning  French  dls,  or  one  hundred  and 
twelity Hfite  feet,  and  Boearhaare^  one  that  greatly 
exceeded  that  length. 

'  These  animals  diifer  little  firom  each  either^  btit 
hi  the  compion  tape-worm^  the  head  which  had 
a  circular  orifice  or  mooth  at  its  extremity  rar- 
loimded  by  a  nmihber  of  raj^s  of  a  fibrous  t^- 
twe^  and  prohably  senring  to  fix  the  inbuth,  has 
on  each  side  two  sm^I  suckers  which  doubtless 
attach  the  head  more  strongly^  The  mouth, 
before  spoken  of^  is  continued  by  a  short  duct 
lAto  two  canals^  which  pass  round  every  }oint 
of  the  animal's  body  conveying  its  aliment,  and 
sending  a  transverse  canal  along  its  bottom 
which  connects  the  two  lateral  ones.  Sir  An^ 
thoay  in^cted  upwards  of  three  feet  of  these 

*  Tcenia,  *  Botryocephalus,  Plate  I.  b.  Fig.  3. 

'  TcRuia  solium.  *  Botryocephalus  latus. 


328  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

canals  by  a  single  push  with  a  small  «yriiige, 
but  he  could  not  make  it  pass  upwards  beyond 
two  joints  which  seemed  to  indicate  the  exists 
ence  of  valTes  opening  only  in  one  direciioiu 
He  says  there  is  no  anal  orifice,  but  othor  au** 
thors  expressly  mention  one,  and  it  is  not  eugr 
to  ccmceiye,  if  the  last  has  no  orifice,  how.tbe 
joints  can  increase  in  number  and  remain  cm* 
catenated.  The  body  is  composed  of  a  yztt 
number  of  joints,  each  having  an  organ  where* 
by  it  aittaches  itself:  those  nearest  the  head  are 
always  small  and  they  enlarge  gradually  as  tbey 
recede  from  it.  The  extremity  of  the  body  ter* 
minates  in  a  small  semi-circular  piece. 

Sir  Anthony  suspects  that  the  several  joints  of 
the  tape-worm  are  separate,  animals*  This  is  an 
old  opinion  and  has  been  adopted  by  several  zoo* 
legists,  but  Bonnet  seems  to  have  proved,  timt 
however  extended,  the  tape- worm  is  only  a  six^ 
animal.  Whilst  a  living  head  remains  attached 
to  some  joints,  this  creature  maintains  its  station 
and  keeps  augmenting  their  number,  but  wli^ 
any  are  broken  ofi*,  they  appear  not  to  form  new 
heads,  as  Sir  Anthony  supposes,  but  die  and  an 
expelled  firom  the  body.  Their  nutriment,  it 
probably  derived  from  the  gastric,  pancrcatiC) 
and  other  juices  which  perpetually  flow  into 
the  stomach  and  intestines  of  the  animals  they 
infest ;  and  they  employ  the  tentacular  ra]pB  as 
a  mean  of  irritation  to  determine  a  greater  se- 
cretion of  these  fluids. 


WORMS.  320 

It  would  he  an  endless  labour  to  expatiate 
in  this  vast 'field  where  the  rest  of  the  animal 
kingdom  is  concerned,  amidst  therefore  the 
various  and  strange  forms  that  are  destined  to 
this  i^ce,  I  shall  select  only  a  few,  beginning 
wkh  one  that  affects  one  of  the  most  valuable 
of  onr  animal  possessions,  I  mean  the  Hyddtids^^ 
which  particularly  and  often  fatally  affect  our 
flocks  of  sheep,  not  indeed  that  they  are  con* 
fined  to  them,  for  they  are  found  also  ia  swine, 
deer,  and  oxen,  and  even  in  man  himself. 

These  animals  resemble  the  tape-worm  in 
their  oral  organs,  but  their  body,  especially 
posteriorly,  is  vesicular.  The  lymphatic  vesicles 
are  what  medical  men  call  hydatids ;  they  are 
fmimi  usually  in  the  brain  and  in  the  liver 
of  these  animals.  Their  size  varies  according 
to  the  species,  some  are  as  big  as  the  fist, 
and  one  was  shewn  to  the  School  of  Medicine 
in  Paris  as  big  as  a  man's  head.  Their  shape 
varies,  but  generally  is  somewhat  spheroidal, 
thdbr  ^ibstance  is  composed  of  membranes  one 
on  another  more  or  less  thick,  and  formed  of 
circular  fibres  visible  only  under  a  lens ;  they 
are  half-'fiUed  with  transparent  lymph.  They 
exhibit  a  peristaltic  motion  which  is  often  very 
lively. 

Three  species  more  particularly  annoy  our 
sheep.     The  cerebral  hydatid,*  which  finds  its 

1  Hydatis,  *  H,  cerehralis. 


330  FUNCTIONS  AMD  INSTINCTS. 

Mmy  into  the  hnia  of  tlieae  poor  animals  and 
occafions  the  rertigo ;  and  the  rervedne^  and 
ovine  hydatids,'  which  penetrate  into  thdr  loa^ 
and  liver  and  occasion  the  rot^  It  is  nsi^y 
discovered  when  a  riieqi  is  infested  hy  ^ 
fiMrmor  of  these  pests  by  its  taming  often  and 
briskly  its  head  on  one  side ;  when  it  nms  very 
qoick^  and  suddenly  stops  without  any  apparent 
cause;  in  a  word,  when  it  s^pears  almost  de- 
ranged. Though  the  pr<^esa<tfthe  disease  they 
produce  is  slow,  it  is  g^ierally  fiitaL  five  hnn^ 
dred  have  been  counted  in  the  head  of  a  smgle 
sheep.  The  ravages,  however^  procUiced  by  diis 
hydatid  are  nothing  to  those  occasioned  by  ibe 
other  two,  which  attack  the  lungs  and  liver  and 
caoBe  the  rot,  by  which^  in  some  years,  thousands 
perish. 

Some  worms  are  remarkaUe  for  their  very 
singular  forms  or  station.  One  that  attaches 
itself  to  the  gills  of  the  bream,  looks  like  a  don* 
ble  animal,^  and  a  kind  of  fluke,^  in  great  nam- 
bers  infests  the  ball  of  the  eyes  of  the  perch/ 

Though  at  first  view  the  animals  of  which  I 
have  in  the  present  chapter  given  some  aceoimt 
seem  to  be  altogether  punitive,  and  intended  as 
scourges  of  sinful  man  both  in  bis  own  persim  and 

»  H,  vervecina,  «  H,  oMla. 

^  Diplozoon  paradoxum,  Plate  I.  b.  Fig.  4. 

*  Diplostomum  volvens.  Ibid,  Fig.  5. 

«  Ibid,  Fig.  6. 


WORMl^»  331 

ill  iiis  pwperty,  wd  their  great  object  is  hasten- 
ing  the.  execution  of  the  sublapsarian  sentence 
of  death,  yet  this  evil  is  not  unmixed  with  good. 
Though  fearful,  and  hurtfiil  to  individuals,  yet 
h  promotes  the  general  welfare  by  helping  to 
liednoe  within  due  limits  the  numbers  of  man 
and  beast*  Brides*  with  regard  to  the  Lord 
of  the  Creation,  these  things  are  trials  th^ 
exercise  his  patience  and  other  virtues^  or  tend 
to  produce  his  reformation,  and  finally  to  secure 
to  him  an  entrance  into  an  immutable  and  eter- 
nal state  of  felicity,  when  that  of  probation  is 
at  an  ^id,  so  that  the  gates  of  Death  may  be  to 
him  the  gates  of  peace  and  rest^ 


Chapter  XII* 

Functiofis  and  Instincts.     Annelidans. 

The.  animals  we  haye  just  been  considering 
&rm  an  almost  insulated  group,  so  that  it  seems 
not  easy  to  say  to  what  tribe  they  are  most 
nearly  related,  but  the  aoft  Pseudo-leeches,  as 
was  obs^ved  above,  especially  those  that  have 
rudimental  tentacles,  seem  to  tend  somewhat 
towards  the  moUuscan  tribes ;  they  exhibit  con- 
siderable resemblance  to  the  blood-suckers  or 
true  leeches,  and  like  them  have  an  instrument 


332  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

of  suction,  though  employed,  perhaps,  iu  esinA- 
ing  the  sap  or  the  blood  of  plants,  and  at  the 
same  time,  in  many  respects,  as  we  have  ktdy 
seen,  they  approach  the  polypes. 

The  Flukes,  likewise,  appear  to  have  some 
characters  in  common  with  the  leech,^  so  that 
a  passage  is  open  from  the  intestinal  wormB 
towards  the  AnneHdans^  some  of  which,  as  the 
earth'^worm,  occasionally  become  intestinal,  and 
seyeral  are  possessed  of  reproductive  powers 
almost  as  great  as  those  of  the  pseudo**kech, 
car  the  polype*  I  shall  therefore  next,  in  takii^ 
my  departure  from  the  worms,  bend  my  steps  to 
the  animals  just  mentioned,  which  formerly  boie 
the  same  general  denomination. 

They  are  called  Annelidans,  I  suf^osCr 
because  they  appear  to  be  divided  into  little 
rings,  or  else  to  have  annular  folds,  and  are 
soft  vermiform  animals,  some  naked,  others  in- 
habiting tubes,  in  some  simply  membranous, 
in  others  covered  with  agglutinated  particles  of 
sand,  and  in  others  formed,  like  tho»e  tdi  the 
MoUuscans,  of  shelly  matter*  Some  Jiave  nei- 
ther head,  eyes,  nor  antennae,  while  othen 
are  gifted  with  all  these  oi^ns;  instead  of 
jointed  legs,  their  locomotions  are  accompUsbed 
by  means  of  fleshy  biistle-bearing  retractile 
protuberances    or    spurious    legs    disposed  in 

^  See  above,  p.  325. 


ANNELIDANS,  333 

hrterai  ronrs.  Their  mouth  is  terminal  but 
not  formed  on  one  type ;  in  some  it  is  simple, 
orbicular  or  labiated ;  in  others  it  consists  of  a 
proboscis  often  having  maxillae*  They  have 
a  knotty  spinal  marrow,  in  this  being  superior 
to  the  MoUuscans  and  approaching  the  Con-» 
dylopesw  They  have  red  blood,  and  their 
drctilation  is  by  arteries  and  yeins,  but  they 
have  no  special  organ  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  systole  and  diastole,  their  Creator  not 
having  given  them  a  heart,  but  where  the  veins 
and  the  arteries  meet,  there  is  an  enlargement, 
and  the  systole  and  diastole  is  inore  visible, 
as  Cuvier  remarks,  than  in  the  rest  of  the 
system,  these  enlargements  therefore  seem  to 
represent  a  heart. 

Savigny,  in  the  third  .part  of  his  Systime  des 
Animanx  sans  Verthbres  divides  them  into  five 
Orders,  of  which  he  gives  only  the  characters  of 
the  four  first,  intending  to  publish,  in  a  supple^ 
ment,  his  account  of.  the  fifth ;  these  Orders  he 
arranges  in  two  Divisions — the  first  including 
those,  that  have  bristles  for  locomotion,  and  the 
second  those  that  have  them  not. 

1 .  li.m  first  Order  he  denominates  Nereideans^^ 
and  characterizes  them  as  having  legs  provided 
with  retractile  subulate  bristles,  without  claws ; 
a  distinct  head  with  eyes  and  antennae ;  a  pro- 

^  Nereide4g, 


334  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

boscis  that  cian  be  protruded,  generally  armed 
with  maxilke. 

2.  The  9&)ond  he  names  Smy^deans^  these  add 
to  the  lega  of  the  former  retractile  bristles^  wUh 
claw&;  they  have  no  head  famished  with  eyes 
and  antennae,  and  no  proboscis.^ 

3.  The  third  he  names  Lumbricinans ;  these 
have  no  projecting  legs  ;  but  are  famished  with 
bristles  seldom  retractile ;  they  have  no  head 
with  eyes  and  antennae,  and  no  maxillae* 

4*  His  fourth  Order  he  names  Hirudmeam* 
They  have  a  prehensile  cavity ,c  or  suck^r^  at 
each  extremity,  and  eyes.* 

5.  In  his  Jifih  Order  he  intends  to  Gompn^ 
hend  those  Annelidans  that  have  i^either  Indirtles 
nor  prehensile  cavities,  but  his  acdoaiit  of  this 
has  not  been  puUished. 

He  begins  with  the  niost  perfect  of  the  Anne- 
lidans,  but  viewing  tiliem  in  coniiection  with  the 
worms  I  must  reverse  the  order,  and  instead 
of  descending  ascend,  which  will  bring  me 
ultimately  into  connection  with  the  more  dis- 
tinctly jointed  animals  the  Condy lopes* 

1 .  The  Order  of  Hirudimeans  includes  animals 
that  are  of  the  first  importance,  as  well  as  some 
that  are  fearfully  annoying,  to  mankind.  The 
common  leech^  has  long  been  so  much  in  request 


*  SerpulecB.  *  Lumhridrue  and  Hirndinea. 

^  Hirudo  medicinaliSy  L.  {Sariguisuga,  Sav.) 


ANNCLIDAN8.  335 

witb  medical  men,,  on  account  of  the  facility 
with  which  it  can  be  af^lied  to  any  part  of  the 
body  where  bleeding  is  required,  that  they  aie 
now  become  scarce  in  our  own  waters^  and 
consequently  dear,  so  that  lai^e  numbers  are 
imported  from  the  Continent. 

Ptoyidence  has  gifted  these  animals  with  a 
si^er  on  the  underside  at  each  extrenuty  of 
their  body,  by  which  their  locomotions  are  per^ 
formed,  and  by  means  of  the  anterior  one  they 
fix  themselves  to  any  smimal  that  ooines  in 
their  way.  We  see  therefore  i!n  them,  though 
on  a  larger  scale,  some  approximation  to  the 
locomotive  and  prehensile  organs  of  sonie  of  the 
Cephalopods,  and  prior  to  them,  of  the  Stella^ 
ridans  and  Echinidans,^  which  likewise  move 
and  fix  themselves  by  suckers.  The  ivouth  is 
situated  in  the  cavity  of  the  oral  sucker,  it 
is  triangular  and  armed  with  three .  slmrp  teeth 
disposed  longitudinally  in  a  triangle;  two  being 
lateral  and  one  intermediate,  and  higher  up. 
These  teeth  are  sharp  enough  tO)  pierce  not 
only  the  human  skin,  but  even  the  hide  of  an 
ox,  and'  have  theii*  edge  armed  with  two  rows  of 
very  minute  teeth;  at  the  bottom  of  the  mouth 
is^  the  organ  of  suction  which,  imbibes  the  blood 
flowing^  from  the  wound  made  by  the  teeth. 
These  animals  inhabit  fresh  waters,  in  which 

»  See  above,  p.  306,  201,  205. 


336  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

they  swim  like  eels  with  a  vermicular  motioti* 
In  moving  on  a  solid  body,  they  first  fix  th^em.* 
selves  by  their  a^ial  sucker,  whicb  is  laig^  thw 
the  oralj  and  then  by  means  of  their  wmIw 
structure,  extend  themselves  forwards,  when  t^ey 
fix  their  mouth,  detach  their  anal  sucH^i, 
and  thus  fixing  themsdves  alternately  by  each 
proceed  with  ccmsiderable  rapidity.  They  are 
herms^hrodites,  and  bring  forth  their  young 
ajive.  When  in  their  native  waters  they  sack 
any  animal  that  comies  in  their  way,  even  thcee 
with  white  blood,  as  the  larvae  of  insects^  wotm^ 
and  the  like. 

Herodotus  relates  that  the  crocodile,  in  coii-> 
sequence  of  its  frequenting  the  water  so  much, 
has  the  inside  of  its  mouth  infested  by  leeche^^ 
which  a  little  bird,  named  the  trochilusj  entem 
and  devours,  without  receiving  any  injury  £t)m 
the  monster.  Geoffrey  St.  Hilaire  asserts  tbat 
no  leeches  are  foiind  in  the  Nile,  and  therefore 
supposes  the  BdelUe  of  the  father  of  histoiy 
were  not  leeches  but  mosquitoes.  But  Sa^igny 
has  described  a  leech  under  the  name  of  B4^ 
nilotica^  which  he  regards  as  synonymous. with, 
the  leech  of  Herodotus.  Bosc  mentioM  ^9» 
which  was  found  in  the  stagnant  waters 
in  Egypt,  when  not  inflated  as  small  as  a 
horse    hair,    which    very    much   annoyed    the 

»  Plate  VIII.  Fig.  3. 


ANNELIDANS.  337 

Fraieh  seidiere,  attacking  them  in  nearly  the 
.  i^me  way ;  when  they  drank,  fastening  itself  to 
Ih^t  tkr&atj  aiid  occasioning  hemoirhages  and 
crther  Prions  accidents. 

Mr.  Macbx,  in  his  Excierswns  in  the  Holy 
Ldndy  Egypt  J  &c.,  states  that  he  had  frequently 
seen,  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  a  bird  about  the 
size  of  a  dove,  or  rather  larger,  of  handsome 
plumage,  and  making  a  twittering  noise  when 
en  the  wing.  It  had  a  peculiar  motion  of  the 
head,  as  if  nodding  to  some  one  near  it,  at  the 
ssokie  time  turning  itself  to  the  right' aod  left, 
and  making  its  cong6  twice  or  thrice  befi)r6 
its  ideparture.  This  bird,  he  was  told,  was  called 
Sitksaqu€y  and  that  tradition  had  assigned  to 
it  the  habit  of  entering  the  mouth  of  the  croco- 
dile, when  basking  in  the  sun,  on  a  sand  bank, 
fer  the  purpose  of  picking  what  might  be  ad- 
hering to  *  its  teeth :  which  being  done,  upon 
a  hint  from  the  bird,  the  reptile  opens  his  mouth 
and  permits  it  to  fly  away.* 
.  This  seems  evidently  the  Trochilus  of  Hero- 
dotus, above  alluded  to,  as  clearing  the  mouth' 
of  the  crocodile  from  the  leeches.  Aristotle,  in 
more  than  one  place  of  his  History  of  Animals^ 
mentions^  such  a  bird,  and  a  similar  tradition' 
concerning  it,  with  that  of  Mr.  Madox.  *fThe 
Trochilus  flying  into  the  yawning  mouth  of  the 

*  Excursions,  &c.  i.  408. 
VOL.  I.  Z 


3S8  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

crocodile  cleanses  his  teeth,  and  thus  ift  piindded 
with  food.  The  latter,  sensible  of  the  b»efil;. 
suffers  it  to  depart  nhinjinred."^  In  anodMT 
place,^  he  seems  to  speak  of  it  as  an  aq«a(b 
bird,  yet  afterwards  he  describes  it  as  firequclDt* 
ing  shrubberies  and  subterranean  places.?  Whe^ 
ther  this  animal  really  att^ids  thus  up<ffi  tbe 
crocodile  has  not  been  ascertained,  but  it  would 
be  singular  that  siich  a  tradition  should  have 
maintained  ite  ground  so  long  without  any  foun- 
dation. 

As  a  further  proof  that  the  BdeUa  of  the 
father  of  history  is  a  true  leech^  and  not;  a  moB^ 
quito, — as  M.  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire,  from  tfae 
meaning  of  its  primitive,^  would  interiH*et  ^ 
word, — ^it  may  be  observed  that  Aristode  coin^ 
pares  the  Bdella  to  an  earth-worm,^  and  de* 
scribes  its  peculiar  motion ;  and  in  Hesycfaiiffl  it  is 
said  to  be  a  kind  of  Scolex  oi  worm ;  Theocritm 
also  alludes  to  its  blood- sucking  propensities.^ 

That  leeches  infest  the  aquatic  Saurians  is 
further  evident  from  a  letter  received  by  Mr.  R. 
Taylor,  and  very  kindly  communicated  by  fami 
to  me,  from  a  firiend  at  Calcutta,  Mr.  W.  C. 
Hurry,  who  having  observed  that  the  fauces  (if 
the  gigantic  crane'^  were  generally  very  ftill  of 

1  Hist.  An,  1.  ix.  c.  6.  «  Ihid.  1.  ▼iii.  c.  3. 

^  Ilid.  1.  ix.  c.  11.  «  Them.  BlcXX«#^  to  saok. 

'  De  incessu  animal,  c.  9. 

^  Idyll,  ii.  line  55,  be  calls  it  AifiyariQ  BSeXXa. 

7  Ciconia  Argala  t 


A.NKELIDANS,  3^9 

leecbes,  cbteimiaed.  to  €s:amine  the  crocodile ; 
arid  Qpon  a  large  alligator  he  found  a  soiall  red 
6{iaoie»,  of  whkh  he  ttent  specimens.  A  friend 
of'miiift,  .Mr.  Martin,  of  Islington,  observed  also 
that  tke  alligabDrs  of  Pulo  Penan^g  were  infested, 
as. he  thon^t,  b^  an  animal  of  this  kind,  called 
hy  the  natives  its  loufie. 

The  Trocbilus  of  ibristotie,  Mr.  Stanlie^y  statef 
to  Mr.  Taylor,  is  the  Egyptian  Plover  ;*  who 
further  observes  that  the  Green  Tody^  is  also 
related  to  cleanse  the  mouths  of  the  alligators 
in  the  West  Indies,  from  the  gnats  and  flies 
that  stick,  in  great  abundance,  in  the  glutipous 
laatter  thiey  oonfiaiai. 

Mnt  there  is  a  terrestrial  kind  of  leech  found 
in  the  island  of  Ceylon,  which  appears  to  be  a 
greater:  pest  than  aiiy  other  species  of  th^  genu's, 
and  one  of  the  greatest  scourges  of  that  fine 
islanid.^  They  infest,  in  imiAense  numbers,  the 
mountains,  woods,  and  swataipy  grounds,  par- 
iiecdairly  hi  the  rainy  season.  Th6y  aj*e  oftener 
seen  on  leaves  ahd  stones  than  in  the  waters. 
The  lajigest  areiabout  half  an  inch  long  when  at 
rest.  Their  colour  varies  from  brown,  to  light 
brown,  with  threef  longitudinal  yellow  lines. 
They  are  semi-transparent,  and  \i^hen  fully  ex*- 
tended  are  like  a  fine  chord,  sharp  at  the  ex- 
trraiity,'and  easily  thread  any  aperture,  so  that 

*  Chdradrius  Mgyptius,  *   Todus  uiridis. 


340  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

fhey  can  penetrate,  througb  the  light  etething 
worn  in  that  climate,  rendering  it  impoflsib^ 
at  that  seaaon,  to  pass  through  tfa^  woods  with- 
out being  covered  with  blood.  Dr.  Davy  cohtttad 
fifty  on  the  same  person ;  no  sooner  does  toy 
individual  stop,  than,  as  if  they  saw  or  scented 
him,  they  crowd  towards  him 'from  all  qaartem. 
Fr<nn  their  immense '  numbers,  activity,  and 
thirst  of  blood,  they  are  the  great  pest  of  tm- 
vellers  in  the  interior.  Percival  says  that  the 
Dutch,  in  their  march  into  the  interiw,  at  ^- 
ferent  times,  lost  several  of  their  men  £com  their 
attack.  Other  animals  besides  man  suffer  dreadr 
fully  from  them,iifcnd  horses  in  particulai^  are 
rendered  so  restive,  when  they  fasten  upon  them, 
as  to  be  quite  unmanageable  and  unsafe  to  ride. 
The  only  way  to  prevent  their  attack,  is  to  coirer 
the  skin  completely. 

The  office  devolved  upon  the  present  tribe, 
is  one  which,  within  certain  limits,  \^  benefidal 
to  the  animals  who  are  the  objects  of  it — though 
those  last  mentioned  would  be  inserted  in  a 
list  of  the  destroyers  of  the  animal  kingdcwH- 
which  contribute  to  maintain  a  just  balance 
between  the  different  members  of  it.  The  fly 
that  bites  the  horse  prevents  it  from  over- 
feeding, and  so  the  leeches  may  be  of  use  to 
the  larger  aquatic  animals,  at  the  same  time 
that  the  smaller  ones,  such  as  the  grubs  of 
insects,  must  generally  perish  from  the  inser- 


ANNfiLIDANS.  341 

(toll  of  their  Bhwtp  jaws,  and  the  suction  of  their 
probMeiil. 

Yet^  as  we  see,  this  is  one  of  the  animals 
liiat  'inan  has  taken  into  alliance  with  him, 
and  -  this  no  doubt  Providence  intended  he 
should,  and  probably  directed  him  to  it,  I  mean 
by  combing  certain  circumstances  to  take  place 
that  attracted  his  attention  and  indicated  its 
probable  use.  So  that  what  at  first  put  him  to 
pain,  and  caused  him  alarm,  he  found,  upon 
trial,  might  be  rendered  a  very  valuable  addition 
to  his  means  of  cure  when  attacked  by  disease, 
or  when  he  was  suffering  from  a  local  injury. 

The  leech  tribe,  besides  its  utility  in  the 
exercise  of  its  own  function,  may  be  useful  as 
afibrdiag  nutriment  to  some  other  animals,  as 
fisbes  and  birds. 

9 

Th6  eaftk-wdnns  *  form  a  principal  feature 
of  the  next  Order,  and  afford  a  delicious  morsel 
to  birds  of  every  wing.  The  fisherman  also 
baits  his  hook  with  them,  and  the  ground- 
b^les*  often  make  a  meal  of  them,  so  that 
had  they  no  other  u^e,  still  they  would  be  a 
very  important  part  of  the  creation.  But  their 
great  fiinction  appears  to  be  that,  of  boring 
the  earth  in  all  directions,  whereby  they  are 
useful  to  the  farmer  and  grazier,  giving  a  kin4 

'  Lumbricus  (Enterion  Sav.)  terrestris.  L.  &c. 
^  Carabus.  L. 


342  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

of  under-taiage  to  pasture  and  otber  lands,  find 
by  the  casts  which  they  every  where  throw  tip, 
they  help  to  manure  the  soiU  and  do  the  same 
for  pastures,  that  the  spade  does  for  the  garden 
and  the  plough  for  arable  land,  place  the  soil 
that  laid  below  above.  Their  food  being  vege- 
table detritus,  what  passes  from  them  must  be 
very  good  manure. 

The  anatomy  of  these  well-known  animab 
18  very  singular  and  well  worthy  the  attention 
of  the  physiologist  and  zootomist,  the  only 
circumstance  relating  to  it  that  I  shall  here 
mention  is  that  their  long  body  is  not  only 
divided  externally  into  rings,  but  internally  into 
an  equal  number  of  cells  separated  fix>m  each 
other,  if  I  may  so  speak,  by  a  kind  of  dis- 
sepiment or  diaphragm — ^there  are  more  than 
a  hundred  of  these  cells  in  the  common  species, 
as  appears  by  Mr.  Bauer's  admirable  figures 
in  the  Philosophical  TransMtions  for  1893,  to 
which  I  must  refer  the  reader  for  further  infor- 
mation on  this  subject,  first  observing  that  there 
seems  some  analogy  between  the  cells  of  the 
earth-worm  and  the  joints  of  the  tape- worm. 

The  motion  c£  these  animals,  and  of  many 
other  Annelidans,  is  accomplished  by  means  of 
the  rings  of  their  body  and  their  lateral  Iw^istles; 
the  latter  the  Creator  has  given  to  them,  in  the 
place  of  legs :  pushing  with  the  anterior  portion 
of  these  against  the  plane  of  position,  by  con- 


ANNEUDAJtfS^  343 

U9ciins  the  rings,  they  bring  up  the  posterior 
portion  of  their  body,  and  then  fixing  that  part, 
^t^id  the  anterior  rings,  and  so  {Nroceed  sucr 
^eaaiyely  with  a  k^nd  of  undulating  motion. 

*  t 

3.  We  are  next  to  notice  a  tribe  of  Annelidana, 
many  of  which,  in  one  respect,  make  some  ap 
proach  to  the  Testaceous  Molluscans.  Though 
truly  luinulated  and  furnished  with  a  kind  of  false 
legs,  they  are  defended  by  a  shell  resembling 
in  itSr  substance,  that  of  the  class  just  alluded 
to^  but  oiten  by  its  irregular  convolutions  prov- 
ing that  it  bd^ongs  to  an  Annelidan  and  not  to 
n  MoUuscan ;  some  indeed  approach  to  the  spiral 
ooQvvljations  of  a  Trachelipod  shell ;  others  form 
a  membranous  sac,  and  cover  it  with  agglutinated 
particles  of  sand,  as  the  common  Sabella ;  others 
again,  likewise  inhabit  a  tube,  but  they  fix  it  i^ 
the  rocks.  The  testaceous  animals  of  this  class, 
particularly  the  worm-shells,^  inhabit  a  tortuous 
tube  which  they  form,  probably  with  more  ease 
and  celerity  than  the  MoUuscahs  foritx  their 
d;id]s — for  they  appear  almost  to  do  this  as  they 
move,  since  the  shape  of  the  shell  imitates  the 
sinuous  windings  of  a  worm,  and  that  of  the 
-yeijwfo  adheres  to  the  substances  on  which  it 
is  formed.  We  see  it  often  upon  the  shells  of 
bivalves,  to  which  it  adheres  by  the  lower  sur- 

^  Serpuliddf, 


344  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

iace,  iookiiig  )ike  a  little  WQnn  oreepiiig  ^ii^ 
thep;^  and  forming  oonYolutioiis ;  JL  Jbayeia 
gpecimen  on  a  valve  cOf  the  JCocii'a<MSt  oyst^^^ 
which  is  bound  down  by  a  piocess  issuia^ja^ 
patently  from  the  disk  of  the  oyster-sh^  ks^ 
how  produced  and  thrown  over  the  Serpula  ik 
seems  not  easy  to  conjecture.  Different  ^NQcie& 
of  these  worm-shells  are  often  fimiid,  embraciiig 
each  other  with  their  convolutions,  on  the  same. 
<shell;  wherever  the  sea  is  or  has  been,  tfa^ 
abound  eithw  in  a  recent  or  fossil  state ;  they 
are  found  on  rocks,  and  sea- weed  as  well  as  jm 
marine  s^Us,  and  those  of  lobsters.  The  Sei^u* 
lidans,  in  general,  imitate  the  spii»l  structvie 
of  the  Trachelipod  and  other  Mdiluscans,  as  is 
particularly  evident  in  Siliquaria^aid  Vermetu»fiS 
indeed  the  last  geni^  is  not  itself  a  Molhiscaii, 
as  Lamarck  makes  it. 

Other  species  of  this  Order  are  taught  to  estab- 
lish themselves  ifi  fissures  of  rocks,  which  senre 
them  instead  of  a  shell  to  protect  the  membranaua 
tubes  into  which  they  retract  their  petali£im 
tentacles,  which  together  reipresent  a  beautiiiil 
radiated  blossom,  or  the  nectarium  of  a  pasinon:^ 


*  S,  Triguetra. 

<  Ostrea  CrUtc^-^alli.    Since  the  above  was  wrkteo,  in  tlw 

collection  of  the  late  Peter  CoUinson^  I  have  seen  two  specimeof 
of  this  oyster,  which  had  produced  from  the  back  of  their  shell 
a  double  series  of  processes,  with  which,  as  with  so  many  fingers, 
they  had  taken  firm  hold  of  a  piece  of  stick. 


AI9NEL1DANS.  345 

diMier.^  Of  this  kind  is  the  Magnifiemt  Amphi- 
HHte^  iigured  in  the  Linnean  Transactions}  It  is 
found  iti  the  rOcks  of  various  parts  of  the  coast 
of  ^  J^Maica.  When  alarmed,  it  retracts  ite  ten- 
tedeid  withiia  its  tube,  and  the  tubis  itself  into 
dio  Mck;  How  it  excavates  its  rocky  burrow 
feiliSDN^t  been  ascertained. 

Tke  iSabelke,  which  pass  under  various  names 
in  diffferent  authors,  inhabit  the  sandy  parts  of 
tile  sh<»re,  and  like  certain  case-worms  form  a 
covering  for  their  tube  of  selected  grains  of  sand, 
mhdng  sometimes  other  substances  that  ^uit 
tiiiBir  ptirpose,  which,  by  some  secretion  at  their 
4il»posal,  they  glue  pretty  firmly  together  so  as 
to  form  a  neat  case  -  tapering  towards  the  tail. 
The  animal  buries  itself  and  case  in  the  sand, 
wiA  its  heftd  towards  the  surface,  so,  probably, 
as  to  enable  it  to  protrude  it  and  expand  its 
telltales  to  collect  its  food  when .  covered  by 
the  water.  The  bristles  of  the  legs  in  some 
species  resemble  burnished  gold. 

The  ftiHttions  of  a  large  -proportion  of  the  aiii- 
mals  of  this  order  seem  to  correspond  with  those  of 
the: bivalve  shell-fish ;  they  undermine  the  sands 
and  the  rocks,  bore  into  sponges  and  corallines, 
and  other  submarine  substances,  and  some  pro- 
baWy,  into  submerged  wood:. like  them,  also, 
they  seem  to  feed  on  animalcules  brought  within 
their  reach  by  the  tide.    The  Serpulidans,  whose 

1  Tubularia  magnifica.  Shaw. 


346  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

food  is.  similar,  are  directed  by  this  wiU  df  ikm 
Creator  to  affix  themselves  externstlly  to  fmy  iriIk 
melted  boiMes  that  come  m  tbeii?  way,  wtiadMr 
mineral  or  animal.  All  tbeyjceqnire  se^ooM^tobf 
something  to  attach  themselves  to,  cin  wbick 
they  can  protrude  thek  tenta<^idar  gMlsr  9b4 
seize  their  prey.  They  m«st  contribtite  kiCgdy, 
as  well  aB  the  mining  An^elidans  of  this  oriar, 
to  the  production  of  calcareous  matter.  Mr. 
Sowerly  suspects  that  their  proboscis  may  be 
in^rumental  in  fonning  the  shell,  but  it  seem 
not  properly  a  proboscis,  but  merely  an  op^rdst- 
lum  on  a  long  footi^;alk,  which  was  requtsitie  lliat 
it  might  be  protruded  so  far  as  not  to  ja^k^A^ 
with  the  acticm  of  the  gills. 

The  anin^ds  included  in  Mr.  S4yigny'$  ^ 
Order,  the  Nereideans  bring  us  very  near  to  tk^ 
Condylopes.  They  have  a  distinet  head,  jointed 
organs  like  antenna,  eyes,  a  proboscis  ^trmed 
with  maxillae,  and  spurious  leg^,  Tlmy  have 
also  certain  dorsai  scales,  which  M.  Simgny 
calls  elytra,  and  deems  anal(^ous  to  the  xH^aw 
of  flight  in  insects.  These  animak  pqem  to 
afford  the  first  example  of  the  conversion  of 
organs  of  locomotion  into  others,  employed  for 
a  different  purpose.  I  do  not  mean  by  this^ 
that,  in  the  progress  of  the  animal's  growth,  one 
organ  is  really  converted  into  another,  but  that 
analogous  organs,  in  different  tribes  or  genera,  are 
employed  for  different  purposes*    Thus,  what  ia 


ANNELIDANS.  347 

Hiost  AnneHdaos  are  locomotive  organs^  in  Jjy- 
eorisj  Phyllodoce,  and.  some  other  Nereidean^^ 
become  a  kind  of  tentacle*  The  marine  Sad^* 
pendra  of  Aristotle .  most  probably  belonged  to 
this  Order^  andl  many  species .  make  a  near  ap? 
proack  to  the  .terrestrial,  ones.^  like  them  they 
are  long  and  ofitea  flat^  consisting  of  a  great  mim- 
\mt  of  segments,,  some  haying .  between  two  and 
three  hundred,  furnished  according  to  the  spe- 
cies»  with  one,  two,  or  three  pairs  of  legs  in  each ; 
like  them  also*  they,  twist  about  in  all  directions 
when  handled,  they  conceal  themselves  in  close 
places  where  they  lie  in  wait  for  their  prey.  In 
one  respect  some  of  them  add  the  instinct  of 
the  spider  to  that  of  the  centipede,^  for  th^  line 
and  sometimes  cover  the  cavities  of  the  rocks 
wMch  they  inhabit  with  a  slight  silken  web,  and 
thus  concealed  they,  watch  the  approach, of  some 
animal,  and,  suddenly  thrusting  out  the  anteriw 
part  of  their  body,  seize  and  devour  it. 

My  late  ind^atigable  and  talented  friend, 
the  Rev.  L.  Guilding  once  found  a  land  species, 
in  an  ancient  wood  in  the  Island  of  St.  Y incent's, 
which  from  its  soft  body  be  regarded  as.  a  Mol- 
luscan,  but  from  its  figure,  and  annulose  struct* 
tare,  its  jointed  antennae,  and  seemingly  jointed 
legs  crowned  with  bristles,  it*  certainly  beloi^, 
as  Mr.  Gray  has  remarked,  to  the  present  class. 

^  Savigny,  Syst,  des  AnneL  9,  12,  13. 

«  Plate  VIIL.  Fig.  4.  .     * 

*  Plate  VIIL  Fig.  1.     Mr.  G.  calls  it  Peripatusjuliformis, 


348  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Though  it  has  scarcdy  a  distmet  head,  its  re* 
semblance  to  the  cylindrical  myriapods^  is 
very  striking.  Other  species  of  this  Order  re- 
semble the  Isopod  Crustaceans,  and  some  even 
roll  themselves  up  like  one  tribe  of  them.^ 

These  animals  have  their  haunts  sometimes  in 
deep  burrows  and  passages  under  the  sea-weed 
or  in  the  sea*sand.  They  are  so  fierce  in  their 
habits  that  some  have  been  styled  the  tigers  of 
the  worms.  Some  fishes  in  their  turn  make 
lliem  their  prey.  Many  of  them,  as  the  sea- 
mouse,'  are  remarkable  for  the  brilliancy  of  their 
metallic  hues.  Perhaps  these  dazzling  splen- 
dours, as  in  the  case  of  some  insects,^  maybe 
of  use  to  them  in  preventing  the  escape  of  their 
prey.  Their  forms  and  instruments  of  locomo- 
tion seem  particularly  adapted  to  the  situation 
and  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed; 
their  legs,  which  approach  the  jointed  legs  ^i 
crustaceans  and  insects,  fit  them  for  moving 
on  the  surface  of  the  bed  of  the  sea,  their  oars 
for  swimming  in  the  water,  and  the  long  form  of 
many  for  threading  the  sinuous  paths  aiid 
burrows  in  which  they  have  their  habitation  and 
place  of  refuge.  So  exactly  are  they  fitted  by 
the  skilful  hand  of  the  almighty  and  benevolimt 
Architect  of  all  animial  forms  to  live  and  move  in 
the  place  he  has  assigned  to  them. 

1  Julus,  L.  <  Nereis  ArmadUlo, 

^  Aphrodita  aculeata.  ^  Introd,  to  Ent,  iii  221. 


A 


APPENDIX.  " 


SiKCE  the  pk'eceding  part  of  this  treatise  had 
mostly  passed  through  the  press,  I  have  had  an 
opportunity  of  consulting  some  recently  "pubt 
Usbed  wwks,.  which  contain  accounts,  illustrated 
by  figures,  of  many  very  interesting  animals 
belonging  to  several  of  the  Classes  of  which  I 
have  there  treated ;  and  all  of  which  more  or 
less  demonstrate  a  presiding  Intelligence  im*- 
mediately  connected  with  the  globe  that  we 
inhabit,  and  who,  viewed  under  every  aspect, 
evidently  careth  for  us,  and  all  the  creatures  h^ 
has  made.  I  shall  select  a  few  of  these  for  the 
consid^ra^n  of  the  reader. 

I  formerly  observed^  that  types  representing 
some  of  the  higher  forms  of  the  animal  kingdom 
w&e  often  to  be  detected  amongst  those  belonging 
to  its  lowest  grade :  a  remarkable  instance  of  tlus 
may  .be  seen  in  one  of  Ehrenberg's  late  works,* 
in  which  is  described  and  figured  a  singular 
Polygastric  Infiisory,  which  seems  to  exhibit 
the  first  outline  of  an  Arachnidan^  form ;  it  has 

^  See  above  p.  320.  *  Symbola  PhysiaB. 

^  Discocephalfu  Rotator. 


350  APPENDIX* 

eight  locomotive  organs  or  bristles,  represeatiag 
the  eight  legs  of  those  animals.^  By  means  of 
these  organs,  this  animal,  which  was  found  by 
Dr.  Ehrenberg  in  the  Red  Sea,  performs  a  double 
rotatory  movement,  one  by  the  rotation  of  the 
anterior  pair,  and  the  other  by  the  three  posterior 
pairs.  The  motion  of  these  filamentous  legs  is 
so  rapid  that  they  appear  as  if,  instead  of  eight, 
a  hundred  were  revolving,  and  so  form  a  kind 
of  natural  Phantasmascope.  Another  infusory 
genuSy  Bacillariaj  seems  to  ptefigure  the  Scopes} 
the  species  at  first  being  concateitated  in  chaii» 
or  ribands,  and  stftetwards  separating.^  The 
animalcules  forming  this  genus  hove  sontietimes 
been  mistaken  for  plants,  and  the  qtrndrangolar 
form  of  the  associated  individuals  give&  'fiiem  the 
appearance  of  the  jointed  stem  of  a  plant,  rather 
than  of  an  animal  chain.  On  a  former  oecasicm, 
I  alluded  to  other  imitations  df  the  vegetable 
world  exhibited  by  the  polypes^  partioilaily  to 
some  of  them  produdng  iseeming  blossoms,  con- 
sisting, as  it  were,  of  maf^  petals."^  I  shall  now 
notice  some  that  represent  mariopdahms  flowers. 
A  genus  long  known  to  natisralidts,  wiiicth  seentf 
intermediate  betwe^i  the  Infusbries  and  the 
Polypes,  named  originally  by  Linni^  Vorticdbij 
e^abtly  simulates  k  bell  .flower  with  a  spiral 
footstalk.    They  ard  often  found  in  fresh  water, 

.1  Plate  L  A.  fia.  6.  «  See  nbove,  p.  222-. 

^  Plate  I.  A.  Fig.  4,  5.  ^  Seeabore,  p.  169. 


APPENDIX.  35t 

aod  present  no  unapt  representation  of  a  busicb 
of  the  flowers  of  the  Lily  of  the  valley,  whence 
one  species  has  been  named  VorticeUa  Conval" 
Utria*  Some  of  these  have  branching,  and  otherd 
simple  sterns,^  but  they  are  all  spiral,  and  capable 
of  beiiig  lengthened  or  shortened  at  the  will  of 
the  animal,  which  is  thus  enabled  to  elevate  of 
depress  its  little  blossoms,  the  mouths  of  which 
are  furnished  with  a  double  circlet  of  filamentary 
tentacles,  by  the  rotation  of  which,  like  the  rest, 
of  its  tribe,  it  can  produce  a  food-conveying 
current  to  its  mouth.  Still  nearer  to  the  Polypes, 
with  whicb  indeed  it  is  arranged,  is  another 
geaus  representing  monopetaloud  flowers,  named 
by  Ehrenberg,  who  found  it  in  the  Red  sea, 
Z6ohotry€my  or  Anifnahgrape.  This  singular 
animal  production  will  scarcely  arrange  undet 
any  of  the  Orders  mentioned  on  a  former  occasion, 
Imt  it  may  be  regarded  as  intermediate  between 
the  Rotatories  and  the  Polypes.  Like  the  latter 
it  is  a  compound  animal,  confiisting  of  a  naked 
branching  stem ;  its  lower  extremity,  as  may  be 
seen  in  the  figure,^  appears  as  if  sending  forth 
num^oiis  little  radicles,  and  the  branches  termi* 
nate  in  ovate  germs,  from  which  issue  a  multi- 
tttde  of  aniihalcules  resembling  mono][>etalous 
bell^shaped  flowers,  with  the  mouth  surrouilded 
by  a  filamentous  coronet,  each  sitting  upon  a 

1  See  aboiw,  p.  166.  2  Plate  I.  B.  Fig,  2.  a. 


353  APPENDIX^ 

spiral  elastic  footstalk,  by  means  of  which  the 
animalcule  can  either  draw  itself  close  to  the 
stem,  or,  shooting  out,  dart  on  either  side  after 
its  prey.  When  the  mouth  of  every  individual 
is  open,  each  germ  looks  like  what  botanists  call 
a  raceme  of  bell-shaped  flowers ;  and,  when  they 
are  closed,  they  resemble  a  bunch  of  grapes.^ 

To  the  class  of  Worms^  especially  those  that 
have  been  denominated  Entozoa^  or  internal 
worms,  I  have  a  few  interesting  additions  to 
make,  taken  from  a  work  of  Dr.  NordmannV 
some  of  which  are  so  extraordinary  and  wonder- 
ful, both  as  to  their  functions  and  structure,  that 
the  great  object  of  the  present  treatise,  Gloria 
Dei  ex  opere  natura^  will  receive  .r^nsiderable 
illustration  from  some  account  of  them. 

Dr.  Nordmann's  first  treatise  is  upon  a  tribe  of 
these  creatures  that  are  interesting  from  their 
very  singular  situation,  in  the  Eyes,  namely,  of 
the  higher  animals. 

Amongst  the  personal  pests  of  our  own  species, 
enumerated  in  the  chapter  above  alluded  to,^  I 
mentioned  none  that  attacked  the  organs  juat 
named ;  but  this  learned  investigator  of  parasitic 
worms  has  noticed  two  which  have  been  detected 
in  them ;  one  related  to  the  Gutnea-toomiy^  which 
was  extracted  from  the  eye  of  a  person  affected 

1  Plate  I.  B.  Fig.  2.  b.      •  Micrographische  Beitrdgif  Sic, 
^  See  above,  p.  324.  *  Filaria  medinensis. 


APPENDIX;  353, 

by.  a  cataract;^  and  another,  a  Hydatid^  from  the 
eye  of  a  young  woman. 

Besides  those  that  infest  our  own  visual  organs,: 
quadrupeds,  birds,  reptiles,  and  fishes,  have  each 
their  eye-worms.    Amongst  those  to  which  .the: 
will  of  Providence  has  assigned  their  station  in^ 
the  eyes  of  the  latter  class  of  animals,  is  a  re- 
markable one,^  which  Dr.  Nordmann  discovered 
in  those  of  several  different  species   of  perch^ 
soiiiietimes,  in  such  numbers^  as  must  have  in- 
terfered with  that  distinct  sight  of  passing  objects, 
which  appears  necessary  to  enable  predaceous 
animals  to,  discover  their  prey  in  time  to  dart 
upon  it  land  secure  it ;  in  a  single  eye  the  Doctor 
detected,  in  diflFerent  parts,  360 1  of  these  ani- 
malciiles :  Allien  much  increased  they  often  pro- 
duce cataracts  in  the  eye  of  the  fishes  they 
infest.      This  little  animal   appears  something 
related  to  the  P/awaWa,  or  pseudo-leach,  and,  to. 
judge  from  Dr.  Nordmann's  figures,  seems  able^ 
like  it,  to  change  its  form.*  Underneath  the  body, 
at  the  anterior  extremity,  is  the  mouth ;  aiid  in 
the  middle  are  what  he  denominates  two  suck- 
ing-cups ;^    these  are  prominent,    and  viewed 
laterally  form  a  truncated  cone  ;   the  anterior 
one  is  the  smallest  and  least  prominent,  and 

*  F.  Oculi  humanL  *  Cysticercus  celluloses, 
•    '  DiplostomiimvolvenSf^'LAT'E.l.  B.  Fig.  5. 

*  Ibid.  Fig,  6.     . 

*  See  Nordmann's  Micrograph,  i.  t,  \\,f,  1 — 9. 
^  Saugnapfe. 

VOL.  I.  A  A 


364  APPENDIX. 

mote  properly  a  sucker ;  the  other  probably  \m 
other  functions,  since  he  couM  never  ascertain 
that  It  was  used  for  prehension. 

A  kind  of  metamorphosis  seems  to  take  place 
in  these  animals,  for  our  author  observed  thtt 
they  appeared  under  three  different  forms. 

These  little  pests,  small  as  they  are,  have  a 
parasite  of  their  own  to  avenge  the  cause  of  the 
perch,  for  Dr.  Nordmann  observed  some  very 
minute  brown  dots  or  capsules  attached  to  the 
intestinal  canal^  which  when  extracted,  by  means 
of  a  scalpel  formed  of  the  thorns  of  the  creeping 
eereus,^  and  laid  upon  a  piece  of  talc,  the  mem- 
hrane  that  inclosed  them  burst,  and  forth  issued 
living  animalcules,  belonging  to  the  genus  Monai, 
and  smaller  than  M,  Atomus^  which  immediately 
turned  round  upon  their  own  axis  with  great 
velocity,  and  then  jumped  a  certain  distance  in 
a  straight  line,  when  they  again  revolved,  and 
again  took  a  second  leap. 

Looking  over  our  author^s  list  of  eye-wonnd 
that  infest  fishes,  we  find  that  five  out  of  seven 
are  attached  to  different  species  of  perch,  and 
one  cannot  help  feeling  some  commiseration  f<^ 
these  poor  animals ;  but  when  we  recollect  that 
they  form  the  most  numerous  body  of  preda- 
ceous  fishes  in  our  rivers,  we  may  conjecture  that 
thus  their  organs  of  vision  are  rendered  less 
acute,  and  that  thus  thousands  of  roach,  dace, 

*  Cactus  flagelliformx&. 


APPENDIX.  356 

carp,  and  tench  may  escape  destFuctioii«  The 
erer  watchful  eye  of  a  Father  Providence  is  over 
all  his  works,  and  he  has  provided  meatis,  in 
every  department  of  the  animal  kingdom,  so  to 
limit  the  inroads  of  the  predaceous  species,  that 
a  due  proportion  and  harmonious  mixture  may 
every  where  be  maintained^  and  that  with  respect 
to  every  individual  species.  The  means  are  va- 
rious, but  the  end  is  one;  and  the  partial  evil 
terminates  in  the  general  good  and  welfare  of  the 
whole. 

Next  to  the  eyesy  the  gills  of  fishes  are  subject 
to  annoyance  from  internal  worms ;  and  amongst 
these  there  is  none  more  remarkable  or  wonder- 
&1  than  one  first  discovered  by  Br.  Nordmann, 
up(m  those  of  the  hreamy^  and  to  which,  on  ac- 
count of  its  remarkable  structure  and  conforma- 
tion, he  has  given  the  name  of  JDiphzoan^  or 
Double  animal.  In  the  Classes  of  Polypes  and 
Tunicaries  we  have  been  introduced  to  many 
animals  that  appear  to  be  compound;  which, 
from  a  common  stem  or  body  send  forth  nume- 
rous oscula  or  mouths,  in  this  emulating  the 
members  of  the  vegetable  kingdom :  but  amongst 
all  these  plant-animals,^  there  is  none  can 
compete  with  this  of  Dr.  Nordmann,  which,  like 
the  Siamese  youths,  appears  to  be  formed  of  two 
distinct  bodies,  united  in  the  middle  so  as  to  pre- 

1   Cyprinus  Brama.  *  Phytozoa, 


3o6  APPENDIX. 

sent  the  appearance  of  a  St.  Andrew's  cross, 
each  half  of  the  animal  containing  precisely  the 
same  organs;  namely,  an  alimentary  canal,  a 
system  for  circulation  and  generation,  and  also  a 
nervous  system.  Miiller  calls  the  innumerable 
and  varying  cohorts  of  the  animal  creation 
preachers  of  the  infinite  wisdom  and  power  of  the 
Sovereign  of  the  world  ;*  and  this  is  one  of  the 
most  wonderful  of  them  all,  which  singularly 
exemplifies  those  attributes. 

At  first  it  might  be  imagined,  that,  like  the 
youths  just  alluded  to,  this  was  a  monstrous  pro- 
duction of  nature;  but  Dr.  Nordmann  relates 
that  he  has  found  thirtjf  specimens,  precisely 
agreeing  with  each  other,  all  in  a  similar  situa- 
tion^, attached  namely,  to  the  gills  of  the  fish 
mentioned  above,  and  he  never  found  it  single, 
or  in  any  other  situation :  there  can,  therefore,  re- 
main no  doubt  on  the  subject.  In  order  to  find 
these  animals,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  all  the 
leaves  of  the  gills  separately  under  water,  or  to 
separate  the  lei^er  whitish  ones  with  a  pointed 
instrument,  when  the  anipial  may  be  detected  by 
its  movements:  itS  station  is  between  the  leaves 
or  folds  of  the  inner  gills. 

This  singular  creature  consists  of  two  lobes,  or 
arms,  above  the  point  of  union,  and  two  below  it. 
The  upper  pair  ai-e  the  longest  and  most  diver- 

'  Entomostraca,     27. 


APPENDIX.  357 

gent :  they  are  somewhat  lance^shaped,  and  at 
the  extremity  of  each,  on.  the  under  Bide,  is  a 
mouth,  with  a  sucker,  divided  by  a  fleshy  ttans- 
yerse  septum ;  by  means  of  these  suckers,  the 
mouths  of  this  two-bodied  monster  are  kept 
steady,  so  as  to  suck  without  intermission.  The 
orifice  of  the  mouth  is  large,  and,  when  fully 
open,  triangular:  there  is  also  an  organ  within 
the  gullet  which  seems  analogous  to  a  tongue, 
resembling  the  sucking  organ  of  the  pseudo- 
leech.  The  alimentary  canal  branches  out  on 
both  sides  into  numerous  blind  vessels.  The 
whole  of  this  canal,  like  the  creature  itself,  is 
cruciform.  The  circulation  -of  the  blood  is  very 
visible:  each  half  of  the  animal  has  on  both 
sides  two  principal  blood  vessels,  which  are 
every  where  of  almost  equal  diameter,  without 
any  enlargement ;  in  the  two  exterior  ones  the 
blood  runs  upwards,  and  in  the  two  interior  ones 
downwards,  and  its  motion  is  extremely  rapid. 
The  generative  organs  and  ovaries  are  also 
double.  The  feces,  as  in  the  polypes  and  other 
lower  animals,  pass  out  at  the  mouth.  The  two 
lowest  lobes  are  somewhat  club-shaped,  or  thick- 
est at  the  extremity,  towards  which,  in  each,  are 
two  oval  plates,  or  disks,  containing  four  oblong 
acetabula,  or  suckers :  the  bodies  below  the 
plates  terminate  in  a  triangular  piece,  or  flapper. 
In  some  of  their  movements  it  seems  as  if  the 
two  upper  lobes  had  different  wills,  since  some- 


358  APPENDIX. 

times  one  appears  inclined  to  move  to  the  right, 
and  the  other  to  the  left,  or  one  to  move  and  the 
other  to  rejniain  at  rest;  but  the  lower  lobes 
always  move  simultaneously,  either  inwardly  or 
outwardly. 

The  animals  that  are  found  attached  to  the  gills 
of  other  fishes  are  usually  at  their  lower  extremity 
furnished  with  several  suckers ;  thus  one  genus^ 
infesting  the  gills  of  the  sun'  and  sword  fishes^ 
has  three ;  and  another/  found  in  those  of  the 
tunny,*  has  «a?,  whence  Cuvier  would  rather 
call  it  Hexastama.  But  these  are  nothing  to 
those  of  our  Diphzoon^  which,  on  the  four  disks 
just  named,  has  no  less  than  sixteen  suckers,  four 
on  each  disk.^  Under  a  strong  magnifier,  these 
suckers  when  opened,  for  they  can  open  and 
shut,  exhibit  a  complex  machinery  of  hooks  and 
other  parts,  by  which  their  Creator  has  enabled 
them  to  take  firm  hold  of  the  gills,  so  as  not  to 
be  unfixed  by  their  constant  motion  in  respira- 
tion, especially  when  we  consider  their  structure 
and  substance.  A  further  proof  of  this  design  is 
furnished  by  the  form  of  the  animal  itself,  for 
the  body  being  divided  upwards  and  downwards 
into  two  diverging  lobes,  it  can  fix  itself  at  each 

1  Tristoma.  *  Mola.  '  Xiphias. 

*  Polystoma.  *  Scomber  Thynnus, 

^  Even  this  is  nothing  to  those  of  a  genus  infesting  some 
Cephalopcxisy  Hectocotyle^  the  different  species  of  which  have  from 
sixty  to  more  than  one  hundred  suckers,  whence  their  name. 


APPENDIX.  359 

extremity  more  firmly  than  if  it  was  single,  not 
only  by  having  more  points  of  attachment,  but 
also  by  the  divergement  of  its  lobes,  especially 
the  lower  ones.  When  a  man  wishes  to  stand 
as  firmly  and  steadily  as  possible,  he  separates 
his  legs  so  as  to  form  a  certain  angle :  and  this  is 
what  its  Creator  has  fitted  our  animal  to  do ;  and 
so  by  all  these  means  it  maintains  its  station  on 
the  lubricous,  multifid,  and  constantly  moving 
organs,  from  which  it  is  commissioned  to  suck 
the  blood.  Probably  these  Diplozoons  may  be 
of  the  same  use  to  the  fishes  they  infest,  as  the 
horse-flies  are  to  the  animal  from  which  they 
take  their  name. 

Dr.  Nordmann  found  this  creature  could  exist 
submerged  for  three  days,  during  which  period  its 
movements  became  gradually  more  feeble.  One 
specimen,  which  he  fed  twice  a  day  with  fresh 
fishes'  blood,  lived  nine  days  in  water,  and  apr 
peared  to  die  at  last  from  being  too  much 
handled. 

What  can  more  evidently  illustrate  both  the 
power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  the  Deity  than 
this  most  extraordinary  animal  ?  How  nicely  is 
it  formed,  in  every  reject,  to  fulfil  the  functimis 
given  in  charge  to  it!  How  admirably  is  it 
secured  against  the  mischances  to  which  its  sin- 
gular situation  exposes  it!  When  we  see  so 
much  art  and  skill  put  in  action  to  adapt  such 
seemingly  insignificant  creatures,  and  so  low  in 


360  APPENDIX. 

the  scale  of  creation,  to  the.  circumstances  in 
which  they  are  placed ;  so  many  contrivances, 
exhibiting  the  deepest  intellect,  taking  the  most 
comprehensive  surveys  of  every  possible  contin- 
gency, and  rearing  a  structure  calculated  to  stand 
against  every  pressure  upon  it, — we  must  feel 
convinced  that  the  attentioa  of  the  Creator  is 
directed  to  every  itidividual  in  existence,  whether 
great  or  small,  high  or  low,  spiritual  or  material. 
To  every  thing  that  he  created  he  gave  a  law, 
the  law  of  its  nature ;  a  law  emanating  from 
Him,  enforced  by  the  physical  powers  acting 
upon  certain  structures,  and  producing  certain 
necessary  effects  under  His  constant  superinten- 
dence, direction,  and  action,  on.  and  by  those 
powers. 

The  intestinal  worms,  as  well  as  some  other 
parasitic  animals,  are.many  of  them.so  remark- 
able for  the  situation  in  which  we  discover*  them, 
that  their  transport  to  the  spot  where  they  are  to 
exercise  their  function  seems  almost  miraculous. 
How  a  mite  should  find  its  way  into  the  human 
brain  seems  past  our  conjecture.  We  cannot 
clearly  ascertain  by  what  means  the  eye- worms 
are  conducted  to  their  assigned  station,  nor.  how 
the  various  species  of  tape-worm  invariably 
select  each  its  proper  pabulum.:  the  same  holds 
good  with  regard  to  the  cyst-worms,^  or  hyda- 

*  Cy^ticercus. 


APPENDIX.  3Gr 

tids.  Do  they,  like  the  Infernal  Fury^^2i^  fabled 
by  Linn6,  fall  from  heaven  upon  the  earth  and 
waters,  and  instantly  bury  themselves  in  their 
allotted  animals  ?  But  to  speak  soberly,  all  we 
can  safely  affirm  is,  that  He  who  decreed  the  end 
decrees  the  nieans^  and  these  probably  are  phy- 
sical ones  under  his  direction.  He  it  is  who 
guides  the  punitive  animals  that  he  employs  to 
their  several  stations!  Is  there  not  an  omnipre- 
sent Deity,  whose  action  is  incessant,  and  co- 
extensive with  his  presence  ?  He  it  is  that,  as 
the  Prophet  speaks,  causeth  it  to  rain  upon  one 
city,  and  not  to  rain  iipon  another  city;  that 
employs  his  instruments,  both  of  benediction 
and  punishment,  according  to  his  will.  It  is 
He,  who  by  secret  paths,  and  by  means  that 
mock  our  researches,  conducts  to  their  assigned 
station  the  animals  in  question.  Every  power 
of  nature,  every  physical  agent,  is  at  His  dis- 
posal. His  is  the  earthquake  and  the  volcano ; 
the  lightning  of  the  thunder;  the  fire-damp  of 
the  mine ;  the  overwhelming  violence  of  the 
water  flood ;  the  windy  storm  and  tempest :  His 
is  the  wide-wasting  sword,  that  diestroys  my- 
riads, and  the  pestilence  that  ivalketh  in  dark- 
nessy  and  carries  off  millions ;  and  He  gives  his 
commission  to  all  his  scourges  against  indivi- 
duals as  well  as  against  nations,  which  they  un- 

1  Furia  infernalis. — L. 


302  APPENDIX. 

consciously  execute  and  cannot  exceed,  for 
saith  to  them,  as  to  the  raging  sea.  Hitherto  shall 
ye  come  and  no  further,  and  here  shall  the  work 
of  destruction  cease. 

We  have  a  remarkable  instance  of  this  special 
guidance  and  employment  of  natural  objects  in 
the  case  of  the  prophet  Jonah,  when  he  diso- 
beyed the  word  of  the  Lord.  In  the  first  place 
God  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea ;  in  the 
next  he  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow  bim 
alive  when  he  should  be  cast  overboard,  and  at 
the  Lord's  command  the  same  animal  cast  him 
upon  the  dry  land.  Next  Grod  prepared  a  gourd 
for  a  shadow  against  the  heat;  after  that  he 
prepared  a  worm  which  destroyed  the  gourd; 
and  in  the  last  place  he  prepared  a  silent  east 
wind^^  or  a  heat,  like  the  sirocco,  without  sound. 
In  all  these  cases  the  object  employed  was  a 
physical  object,  under  the  immediate  direction 
of  the  Deity.  The  wind,  the  fish,  the  gourd,  the 
worm,  the  heat,  were  not  new  creations,  but 
well  known  objects,  acted  upon  to  take  a  parti- 
cular direction  so  as  to  produce  particular  events. 

By  what  is  here  said,  I  by  no  means  assert 
the  doctrine  of  inevitable  fate,  for  then  there 
would  be  no  use  in  the  employment  of  means 
of  prevention.  Sir  H.  Davy's  safety-lamp  would 
not  preserve  the  life  of  the  miner,  nor  Dr.  Frank- 

*  n»tt^in  onp  nn. 


APPENDIX.  363 

lin's  conductor  disarm  the  thunder  cloud;  and 
all  the  other  means  that,  non  sine  DeOy  have  been 
invented  to  render  harmless  the  action  of  the 
physical  powers  under  certain  circumstances; 
but  I  would  merely  assert  that  constant  super- 
intendence of  the  Deity^over  the  world  that  he 
has  created,  and  Who  upholdeth  all  things  by  the 
word  of  his  power  J  which  we  call  Providence,  by 
which,  in  general  as  well  as  individually,  his  will 
has  full  accomplishment;  and  every  substance 
or  being,  whether  animate  or  inanimate,  takes 
the  station  which  he  has  assigned  to  it.  This  is 
no  miraculous  interference  out  of  the  general 
course  of  nature,  but  the  adaptation  of  that 
course  to  answer  the  wise  purposes  of  Provi- 
dence, which  selects  individuals,  and  distin- 
guishes them  from  other  individuals  by  events, 
iis  to  this  world,  seemingly  prosperous  or  adverse, 
but  which  have  their  ultimate  reference  to  the 
spiritual  world,  and  to  their  final  destiny.  As 
God  willeth  not  that  any  should  perish,  so  he 
withholdeth  not  from  any  the  means,  that,  if 
duly  used  and  improved,  will  be  sufficient  for 
his  salvation ;  and  in  all  his  dealings  with  man- 
kind he  hath  this  great  and  merciful  object  in 
view. 


VOL.  1.  B  B 


APPENDIX.    NOTES. 


Note  1,  p.  2. — 2%e  life  and  motion.  The  word  life  may 
perhaps  here  be  used,  in  some  sense,  improperly ;  but  the 
original  motion  caused  by  the  agency  of  the  Spirit,  and 
followed  by  Light  and  Expansion,  may  be  called  the  birth, 
or  beginning,  of  the  life  of  the  world,  which  followed, 
under  the  Divine  Guidance,  as  a  consequence  of  it.  I 
speak  only  of  animal  life,  not  of  spiritual,  which  resulted 
from  the  immediate  insufflation,  if  I  may 'so  use  the  teim, 
of  the  Deity  himself.^ 

I  may  here  be  permitted  to  observe  that  the  Mosaic 
account  of  the  beginning  of  creation,  especially  of  the 
incubation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  its  consequences,  has 
been  transplanted,  by  many  oriental  and  occidental 
nations,  into  their  cosmogonies.  The  circumstances  and 
consequences  of  it  have,  in  most  cases,  been  altered  from 
their  original  simplicity;  and,  in  some,  it  has  been  assumed 
as  a  foundation,  on  which  an  Atheistic  Philosophy  has 
been  erected  amongst  the  Greeks.  But  when  we  consider 
attentively  the  terms  in  which  these  dogmata  are  deli- 
vered, and  recollect  that  the  Gods  of  the  Greeks  and 
Romans,  especially  him  who  was  invocated  as  the  father 
of  gods  and  men,  were  really  the  great  elementary  powers 
which  under  God  govern  the  universe — whence  Homer 

1  Genes,  ii.  7,  comp.  Johny  xx.  22. 


366  APPENDIX.       NOTES. 

describes  him  as  aiOe^a  vaiaVf  and  calls  him  Zev$  vBfsXvrY^peTn^f 
and  Ennius  appeals  to  him  in  these  terms, 

Aspice  hoc  sublime  candens  quem  invocant  omnes 
Jovem. 

And  to  live  abroad  is  to  live  sub  Jove,  sub  Dio.  It  is 
evident  that  these  Gods  were  subsequent  to  Chaos,  and 
sprung  from  that  motion  of  the  Spirit  which  first  gave 
birth  to  this  world  as  we  behold  it;  besides  these,  the  sun, 
moon,  planets,  earth,  ocean,  &c.  made  part  of  the  cata- 
logue of  false  Oods  whom  the  Heathens  worshipped  and 
served  instead  of  the  Creator.  These  powers,  which  were 
originally  reverenced  as  symbols  and  representatives  of  the 
Godhead,  and,  as  it  were,  his  vicegerents  in  Nature,  in 
process  of  time  were  thus  regarded  and  adored  as  the 
supreme  and  only  God — the  sign  instead  of  the  thing  sig- 
nified— the  instrament  instead  of  the  hand  that  guided 
it — ^the  work  instead  of  the  workman.  They  deemed,  as 
the  author  of  the  Book  of  Wisdom  observes,*  Either  J^re, 
or  windy  or  the  swift  air^  or  the  circle  of  the  stars,  or  the 
violent  water,  or  the  lights  of  heaven,  to  be  the  Gods  which 
govern  the  world. 

Veneration  and  love  to  those  from  whose  actions  or 
studies  we  derive  great  benefit,  and  respect  for  our  an- 
cestors, amiable  motives  when  they  do  not  lead  us  away 
from  God,  often  induce  mankind  to  throw  a  kind  of 
Divinity,  a  ray  of  glory,  around  such  persons;  first, 
perhaps,  they  are  complimented  with  the  title  of  suns  of 
their  people  or  race,  and  their  wives  as  moons,  and  next 
we  transform  them  into  what  we  regarded  as  their  symbol. 
So  the  Egyptians,  in  process  of  time,  added  the  adjunct 
On,  or  the  Sun,  to  the  name  of  their  great  ancestor, 

^   Wisdom,  xiii.  2, 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  367 

Ham;  whence  be  was  afterwards  designated  as  Hamon, 
or  Ham  the  sun,  and  became  the  Jupiter  Ammon  of  the 
Greeks.* 

The  idea  of  the  incubation  of  the  Spirit,  of  its  being  the 
principle  of  love  that  was  in  action,  and  that  it  produced 
the  first  motion^  prevails,  more  or  less,  in  all  the  cos- 
mogonies. 

Aristophanes,  in  his  Aves,  gives  an  account  of  the 
Grecian  cosmogony^  which  proves  that  the  heathen  gods 
of  the  Greeks  were  all  subsequent  to  tbe  original  creation 
of  matter,  in  a  passage,  of  which  the  following  lines  are 
nearly  a  literal  translation : 

Once  Chaos  was  and  Night,  dark  Erebus 
And  ample  Tartarus ;  but  Earth,  and  Air, 
And  Heaven  were  not.     First  blackwing^d  night 
In  th'  mfinite  gulfs  of  Erebus  brought  forth 
The  wind.Durs*d  egg,  from  which  in  circling  hours, 
Love  the  desir'd,  his  shoulders  golden-wing'd, 
Sprung  like  a  Wind-swift  vortex,  he  who  mix'd 
With  Chaos  wing*d  and  dark,  and  Tartarus  wide 
Nested  our  race,  and  them  brought  first  to  light. 
Ere  love  commingled  all,  immortal  Gods 
Were  none,  but  from  that  commixture  rose 
Heaven,  Sea,  and  Earth,  and  Gods  incorruptible, 

Windmurs*d  egg.  Gr.  Inmvsfjuov  aw.  Literally,  the  egg 
under  the  wind,  alluding  to  the  incubation  of  the  Spirit. 

Love.  This  is  the  motion  infused  by  the  Spirit  into  the 
chaos  which  was  followed  by  light  and  expansion,  and 
the. whole  harmonious  circle  of  creation,  in  which  there 
was  no  discord,  but  all  was  very  good. 

His  shoulders  golden-vnng'd.  Gr.  Xrt7s,€m  varov  Wltpvyo^v 
xpu^atv.      Literally,  his  back   shining  with   two   golden 

1  Cudwortk,  I.  ii.  338. 


368  APPENDIX.       NOTES. 

wings ;  these  two  golden  wings  were^  perhi^s,  light  and 
the  expansion,  which  carried  love  through  his  whole 
work. 

Sprung.    Gr.  ESxairev,  germinated. 

Windrsmft  vortex,  Gr.  emmi;  aenfjumsci  hfcu^.  laterally, 
like  whirlwinds  or  whirlpools^  swift  as  the  wind. 

He  who  mixed  with  Chaos  wing'd  and  dark.  Gr.  Oi/hi 
h  x^^  i^povrti  fuyeii  wx^*  I'his  describes  love  or  motion 
entering  into  chaos  and  beginning  to  produce  order. 

Nested  our  race.  Gr.  Evsorleua-g  ysvo^  vtM^epov.  The  birds 
here  claim  an  early  origin.  The  allusion  probably  is  to 
the  mundane  egg  and  the  birth  of  winged  love. 

But  from  that  commixture  rose  heaven,  sea,  and  earth,  i^c. 
Gr.  ^vfjifjuyvofAJEvtAV  Y  Irepav  erepoig,  eyever  apavog,  oxeavog  re,  mm 
yri,-  itcenwf  re  0c«v  /juxxap6}v  yev®"  a^9noy.  Literally,  **  one 
thing  being  mingled  with  another,  heaven,  ocean,  and 
earth,  and  the  incorruptible  race  of  all  the  immortal  Grods 
were  produced." 

It  is  evident  from  this  passage  that  those  whom  the 
Greeks  accounted  their  Gods  were  the  elements,  the  hea- 
venly bodies,  and  other  works  of  creation.  Thus  they 
changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and  worshipped  and 
served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator,  who  is  bUssed 
for  ever. 

Note  2,  p.  6. — Kindred  Monsters.  I  allude  here  to  the 
gigantic  Reptiles,  those  especially  which  are  now  seen  only 
in  a  fossil  state,  many  of  which  instead  of  legs  are  fur- 
nished with  paddles ;  as  the  Ichthyosauri  and  Plesiosauri. 
These  animals  seem  intermediate  between  the  amphibious 
Saurians  and  the  Chelonians.  Some  of  them  also  exhibit 
several  characters  in  common  with  some  qf  the  Cetaceans, 
Amphibians,  &c. 


APPENDIX.       NOTES,  369 

:  Note  3,  p.  8.-^Intermediate,  as  it  were,  between  matter 
and  spirit.  I  find  a  similar  idea  in  the  Nouveau  Diction- 
naire  lyHistoire  Naturelle,^  "  Le  mot  de  mati^re  porte 
avec  soi  Tidee  d'un  corps  lourd  et  grossier :  cependant  il 
est  des  substances  auxquelles  on  donne  le  nom  de  mati^re, 
telle  que  la  mati^re  etheree,  et  qui  sont  d'une  si  inconceiv- 
able tenuite,  qu'on  diroit  qu'elles  tiennent  le  milieu  entre 
Vesprit  et  la  matiere"  Sir  Humphry  Davy  seems  to  have 
adopted  a  similar  opinion,  which  I  have  given  in  another 
part  of  this  work ;  ^  alid  Dr.  Wollaston  also,  in  his  Religion 
of  Nature  delineated,  asks — ''  Might  it  not  be  more  reason- 
able to  say,  it  (the  soul)  is  a  thinking  substance  intimately 
united  to  some  fine  material  vehicle  which  has  its  residence 
in  the  brain  ?"  *  And  again — "  If  we  should  suppose  the 
soul  to  be  a  being  by  nature  made  to  inform  some  body, 
and  that  it  cannot  exist  and  act  in  a  state  of  total 
separation  from  all  body ;  it  would  not  follow  from  thence, 
that  what  we  call  death,  must  therefore  reduce  it  to  a 
state  of  absolute  insensibility,  and  inactivity,  which  to  it 
would  be  equal  to  non-existence.  For  that  body,  which 
is  so  necessary  to  it,  may  be  some  fine  vehicle  that  dwells 
with  it  in  the  brain,  and  goes  off  with  it  at  death.^  This 
vehicle,  which  is  so  necessary  to  the  soul,  dwells  with  it 
in  the  brain,  and  goes  off  with  it  at  death,  he  further 
supposes,  is  that  by  which  it  acts  and  is  acted  upon,  by 
means  of  the  nerves.*  This  vehicle  seems  not  very  diffe- 
rent from  the  vital  powers  of  modern  physiologists,  who 
regard  the  nervous  power  as  their  agent.^ 
The  Doctrine  of  a  vehicle  for  the  soul  which  accom- 


1  xix.  449.  article  Mati^res.    Patrin. 

»  See  Vol.  II.  p.  253.  »  P.  192. 

*  Ibid.  196.  «  Ibid.  197. 

6  Dr.  Wilson  Philip,  in  Philos.  Tr.  1829,  271,  278. 


370  APPENDIX,      MOTES. 

panies  her  when  separated  from  the  body  is  not  a  modem 
hypothesis,  but  was  held  by  the  Platonists  and  many  of 
the  fathers.^ 

Our  Lord  says  to  his  discipleS'«--'TAe  hairs  of  your  head 
are  all  numbered;  upon  which  we  may  observe  that  the 
head  of  man  is  clothed  with  hair  to  answer  a  certain  end, 
an  end  which  has  not  yet  been  duly  investigated,  bat 
which  in  Scripture  has  been  intimated  by  making  it  the 
symbol  of  strength  or  power-^hy  which  latter  tenn  it  is 
designated  by  St.  PauP — as  in  the  case  of  Samsoiii 
whose  superhuman  strength  seems  to  have  departed  from 
him,  when  his  seven  looks  were  shorn  off;  symbolizing 
might  from  the  seven  spirits  of  God,^  or  in  other  words, 
the  sevenfold  might  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  well  known  that 
the  hair  is  affected  by  the  electric  fluid,  and  it  may 
<x>nduct  it  to  the  brain  or  other  oi^ns.  Whatever  be  its 
function,  however,  its  force  willidepend  upon  the  quantity^ 
and  the  quantity  upon  the  number  of.  conductors,  and  this 
God  regulates  in  the  case/of  individuals,  according  to 
circumstances,  so  that,  .though  some  receive  more  and 
some  less^  He  that  receives  much  has  nothing  over,  and  he 
that  receives  little  has  no  lackJ' 

Note  4,  p.  9.— Fo^  if  the  instinct  of  the  predaceous 
ones  was  not  retrained,  they  would  soon  have  annihilated 
the  herbivorotts  ones,  even  if,  as  Lightfoot  supposes,  they 
were  at  Jirst  created  by  sevens.  If  the  £ill  of  man,  as  is 
generally  supposed,  happened  soon  after  his  creation,  the 
first  sacrifice,  which  as  the  Lord  God  clothed  the  first 
pair  with  skins    before  their  expulsion  from    paradise, 

'  See  Dr.  H.  More,  On  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  B.  iii. 
Axiome  xxvii.  and  Cudworth's  Intellectual  Syst,  799. 

*  1  Cor.  xi.  10.  3  Revel,  i.  4,  5. 

♦  2  Cor.  viii.  15. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  371 

must  have  been  offered  immediately  after  the  former  sad 
event,  would  have  caused  the  annihilation  of  a  species; 
which,  in  conjunction  with  the  circumstance  of  Noah 
being  directed  to  admit  clean  animals  into  the  ark  by 
sevens  the  male  and  his  fetnak,  afforded  no  slight  ground 
for  Lightfoot's  supposition  alluded  to  in  the  text.  He 
thus  expresses  his  opinion.  ^'  Bestia  mundis'  creatte  sunt 
septena,  tria  paria  ad  prolem,  et  reliqute  singula  Adamo 
in  saerificium  post  lapsum:  at  immunda  tantwnmodo 
bine^  ad  generis  propagationem"^  Lightfoot  here  speaks 
of  three  pairs  and  a  half,  and  some  writers  quoted  by 
Poole,  seem  to  think,  that  the  same  number  were  received 
into  the  ark,  and  that  the  seventh,  a  male,  was  intended 
for  sacrifice  after  the  deluge;  others  think  there  were 
seven  pairs* 

Note  6,  p.  11.— /«  the  fiercest  enmity  and  opposition 
to  each  other.  There  was  a  show-man,  who  in  the  year 
1831,  exhibited  on  one  of  the  London  bridges,  as  I  was 
informed  by  a  friend  upon  whose  accuracy  I  could  rely, 
the  animals  here  spoken  of  in  a  state  of  reconciliation. 
In  one  cage  were  cats,  rats,  and  mice,  and  in  another 
hawks  and  small  birds  living  together  in  the  utmost 
harmony,  and  without  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  the 
predaceous  ones  to  injure  their  natural  prey. 

Note  6,  p.  Id.-^Conceming  the  kind  of  which  inter- 
preters  differ.  The  Septuagint  renders  the  Hebrew  word 
Di3,' which  our  translation  renders  lice,  by  anvifeg,  which 
is  supposed  to  mean  the  mosquito  or  gnat,  but  I  cannot 
help  thinking  with  Bochart,^  that  it  rather  means  the 

*  Lightfooti  Opera,  Ed.  Leusden.  i.  154.  conf.  2. 

*  Hierozoic,  574. 


372  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

louse.  Dot  only  on  account  of  its  derivation  from  a  root, 
p,  which  signifies  to  fix  firmly,  which  agrees  better  with 
the  animal  just  named  than  with  the  mosquito,  but  also 
because  it  was  produced  from  the  dust  of  the  earth  like 
other  apterous  animals,  and  not  from  the  waters,  like  the 
winged  ones.^  The  African  negroes,  as  was  before  ob- 
served, have  a  peculiar  louse.^ 

Note  7,  p.  17. — Geologists  have  observed,  from  the 
remains  of  plants  and  animals  embedded  in  the  strata  of 
this  and  other  northern  countries,  that  the  climate  must 
formerly  have  been  warmer  than  it  now  is.  That  the 
inclination  of  the  earth's  axis  was  once  different  from  what 
it  now  is  was  a  very  ancient  opinion ;  but  whatever  might 
be  the  cause,  the  fact  seems  to  have  been  certain,  from 
the  existence  in  very  high  latitudes  of  the  plants  and 
animals  here  alluded  to,  such  as  various  species  of  palms; 
of  elephants,  hippopotami,  turtles,  and  similar  tropical 
forms.  Cuvier  indeed  has  conjectured,  that  the  carcase 
of  a  mammoth  found  in  Siberia  belonged  to  a  cold  climate 
because  it  was  clothed  with  wool  as  well  as  hair.  Its 
hair  was  stated  to  consist  of  three  kinds.  One  being 
stiff  black  long  bristles,  another  flexible  hair  of  a  reddish 
brown  colour,  and  the  third  a  reddish  brown  wool  which 
grew  among  the  roots  of  the  long  hair.'  Now  with  respect 
to  sheep,  there^  is  evidently  a  difference  with  regard  to 
their  coat  in  those  that  live  in  warm  climates,  and  those 
that  inhabit  cold  ones,  the  coat  of  the  former  usually 
consisting  chiefly  of  hairs,  and  the  latter  of  wool;^  but 

'  Genes,  i.  21, 

«  Fabr.  Syst.  Antliat.  340.  2. 

3  Cuvier,  Theory  of  the  Earth,  by  Jameson,  275. 

*  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  64. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  373 

Dr.  Buckland^i  and  Dr.  Virey*  have  advanced  some  satis- 
factory arguments  which  prove  that  the  Mammoth  could 
not  have  existed  in  the  countries  in  which  its  fossil 
remains  are  so  abundant,  if  it  had  been  exposed  to  a 
great  degree  of  cold.  It  is  remarked  with  respect  to  the 
remains  of  fossil  elephants,  which  are  so  numerous  without 
the  tropics,  in  regions  too  cold  for  their  existence,  that 
none  have  been  hitherto  found  in  those  countries  which 
they  actually  inhabit  at  the  present  time.'  This  throws 
no  small  degree  of  doubt  upon  that  hypothesis  which 
assigns  them  for  their  habitation  the  countries  in  which 
their  remains  are  now  deposited :  but  with  regard  to  the 
remains  of  coral  reefs  ^  found  in  the  Arctic  seas,  no 
doubt  can  be  entertained  that  at  the  period  of  their 
formation,  those  seas  were  warm  enough  to  suit  the  tem- 
perature of  the  animals  that  formed  them ;  but  which  no 
longer  exist  and  rear  their  structures  in  those  latitudes. 
I  met  with  the  following  extract  in  the  Literary  Gazette 
for  April  7,  1832 ;  it  is  taken  from  a  work  entitled  Six 
Months  in  North  America,  by  G.  T.  Vigne,  Esq. :  "  The 
fossil  remains  of  about  thirty  animals,  now  supposed  to 
be  extinct,  have  been  found  at  the  Big-bone  lick;  and 
Mr.  Bullock  conjectures  that  there  are  more  remaining. 
That  these  animals  did  not  perish  on  the  spot,  but  were 
carried  and  deposited  by  the  mighty  torrent,  which  it  is 
evident  once  spread  over  the  country,  is  probable  from 
the  circumstance  of  marine  shells,  plants,  and  fossil  sub- 
stances having  been  found  not  only  mixed  with  the 
bones,  but  adhering  to  them,  and  tightly  wedged  in  the 

*  Supplement  to  Captain  Beechey^s  Voyage,  ii.  355,  356. 
«  N.  D.  D'H.  N.  X.  162. 

a  Ibid.  169. 

*  Dr.  Buckland  in  the  Appendix  to  Beechey's  Voyage,  ii.  355. 


374  APPENDIX.      N0TB9. 

cavities  of  the  skull— ^  those  holes  where  eyes  did  ojuce 
inhabit/  were  often  stopped  up  by  shells  or  pieces  of  coral 
forcibly  crammed  into  them/'  The  bones  of  the  Mastod^i 
were  found  by  Humboldt  at  an  elevation  of  more  thaa  7,000 
feet  above  the  sea^  and  in  central  Asia  those  of  hones 
and  deer  have  been  met  with  at  an  elevation  of  16,000.^ 

Note  8,  p.  19. — Burchel  and  Campbell  appear  to  have 
met  toitk  more  than  one  new  species  of  rhinoceros  in  that 
journey  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  into  the  interior. 
Burchel  describes  one  under  the  name  of  Rhinoceroi 
simus.^  Campbell's  had  a  straight  horn  projecting  three 
feet  from  the  forehead,  different  from  any  he  had  seen, 
and  its  horn  resembled  that  of  the  supposed  unicorn.^ 
There  is  in  the  Norwich  Museum  a  horn  flattened  at  the 
summit,  nearly  straight,  and  three  feet  long,  which  also 
seems  to  belong  to  another  species. 

Note  9,  p.  23.-— J%e  word  of  God,  in  many  places, 
speaks  of  an  abyss  of  waters  under  the  earth.  Scientific 
men  in  the  present  day  seem  to  question  this.  The  passages 
in  Holy  Writ,  besides  those  quoted  in  the  text,  that 
appear  evidently  to  affirm  that  an  abyss  exists  in  the 
earth,  are  chiefly  the  following. 

In  the  book  of  Genesis,  in  the  blessings  pronounced, 
both  by  ^acob  and  Moses,^  previous  to  their  death,  upon 
the  tribes  of  Israel,  in  that  relating  to  Joseph,  amongst 
others  are  mentioned— TAe  blessings  of  the  deep  that  heth 
under,  or  as  the  same  words  are  more  literally  translated 

«  Quarterly  Review,  No,  LVII.  p.  155^ 

«  Travels,  ii.  75.     Bulletin  des  Sc.  Juin  1817.  96. 

=  Travels,  295. 

*  Comp.  Genes,  xlix.  25  with  Deut.  xxxiii.  13. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  375 

in  Moses'  blessing — The  deep  that  coucheth  beneath^  The 
expression  in  these  passages  evidently  allades  to  an  abyss 
under  the  crust  of  the  earth,  from  which  blessings  may  be 
derived ;  and  which  is  emphatically  described  as  cotiching 
beneath,  as  if  the  mighty  waters  it  contained  were  lying 
in  repose  like  a  beast  at  rest,  and  chewing  the  cud,  in  con- 
trast with  the  incessantly  fluctuating  and  stormy  ocean. 

When  the  children  of  Israel  murmured  for  water  in 
Rephidim,  Moses  at  the  Divine  command  smote  the  rock 
in  Horeb,  and  water  flowed  out  of  it  in  a  copious  stream, 
which  there  is  reason  to  believe  followed  them  in  all  their 
wanderings  through  the  wilderness.  If  we  consider  the 
nature  of  that  dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  water  isy  it 
is  evident  that  this  perennial  stream  could  not  be  derived 
from  the  clouds  that  hovered  round  the  summits  of  Mount 
Sinai,  the  rocks  of  that  district  were  washed  by  no  rivers 
derived  from  above,  and  seem  not  calculated  for  perco** 
lation.  But  what  was  the  case-^the  stroke  of  the  wonder- 
working rod  of  the  Lawgiver  of  Israel  produced  a  fissure 
in  the  rock,  which  opened  a  channel  through  which  the 
waters,  before  in  repose  in  the  great  deep,  rushed  forth  in 
a  mighty  stream;  and  therefore  the  Psalmist  says — He 
clave  the  rocks  in  the  wildernessy  and  he  gave  them  drink, 
as  out  of  the  great  abysses.  Alluding  evidently  to  a  source 
of  sweet  waters  below. 

The  prophet  Jonah,  in  the  prayer  he  uttered  when 
incarcerated  in  the  fish's  belly,  has  these  words— J  went 
down  to  the  bottoms  of  the  mountains ;  the  earth  with  her 
bars  was  about  me  for  ever.^    A  parallel  expression  is  used 

in  Moses'  song-*il  fire  shall  bum  to  the  lowest  hell 

it  shall  set  on  fire  the  foundations  of  the  mountains.* 

1  Heb.  nnn  nva*)  ^  See  1  Cor,  x,  4. 

*  Jonahy  ii.  6.  *  Deut,  xxxii.  22. 


370  APPENDIX.       NOTES. 

This  last  passage  shews  that  the  Hades^  of  Scriptare-* 
usually  translated  Hell,  but  distinct  from  the  Gehenna  or 
Hell  of  the  New  Testament — ^is  synonymous  with  the 
abyss.  As  is  further  proved  by  the  following  passage  of 
the  book  of  Job.  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  springs  &f 
the  sea  ?  Or  hast  thou  walked  in  the  search  of  the  abyss? 
Have  the  gates  of  death  been  opened  unto  thee,  or  hast  thou 
seen  the  gates  of  the  shadow  of  death? ^  In  this  passage 
the  springs  of  the  sea,  the  abyss,  the  gates  of  death,  and 
the  gates  of  the  shadow  of  death,  seem  nearly  synonymousi 
or  to  indicate,  at  least,  different  portions,  of  the  womb  of 
our  globe.  The  bottomless  pit,  or  rather  the  pit  of  the 
abyss  of  the  apocalypse,  also  belongs  to  the  same  place: 
the  word  rendered  pit  means  also  a  welL  Schleusner,  in 
his  lexicon,  translates  the  phrase  by  Puteus  seu  fms 
abyssi,  so  that  it  seems  to  indicate  a  mighty  source  of 
waters.  But  as  the  terms  abyss  and  great  abyss  are  applied 
to  the  receptacle  of  waters  exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  as 
well  as  to  those  which  are  concealed  in  the  womb  of  our 
globe,'  it  is  evident  that  they  form  one  great  body  of 
waters  in  connexion  with  each  other. 

Note  10,  p.  27. — He  who  willed  the  deluge,  and  the 
destruction  of  the  primeval  earth  and  heavens  by  it,  ijc. 
When  it  is  considered  that  all  the  knowledge  which  we 
have,  and  can  have,  of  the  contents  of  the  globe  that  we 
inhabit,  is  very  superficial;  that  it  is  only,  as  it  were,  skin 
deep,  and  consequently  very  imperfect,  it  seems  as  if  we 
stood  in  great  need  of  some  other  guide,  besides  our  own 
reasonings  and  guesses  upon  the  little  that  we  can  jBxpIore 
of  the  earth's  crust,  to  enable  us  to  form  a  correct  judg- 

1  Heb.  ^i«tt^.  «  Job  xxxviii.  16,  17. 

3  Job  xli.  31.     Ps.  cvi.  9.     Isai.  li.  10,  &c. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  377 

ment,  and  to  arrive  at  the  truth  as  to  what  changes  may 
have  taken  place  in  it,  and  by  what  means.  When  we 
furdier  consider  that  we  are  informed  by  the  highest 
authority,  that  the  original  earth  and  its  heavens,  with  all 
their  animal  inhabitants — those  only  excepted,  which,  by 
his  command,  took  refuge  in  a  vessel  built  according  to 
his  direction-^were  destroyed  by  a  universal  deluge,  which 
overtopped  the  highest  mountains,  and  continued  in  force 
for  nearly  a  year:  when  this  great  catastrophe  is  duly 
considered,  surely,  from  the  account  given  of  it  in  Scrip- 
ture, much  may  be  gleaned  that  will  throw  a  light  upon 
the  subject,  that  can  never  be  struck  out  by  the  unassisted 
investigations  of  the  Geologist  who  can  penetrate  so  little 
below  the  earth's  surface. 

My  own  knowledge  of  Geology  and  its  principles,  as 
now  laid  down,  is  too  slight  to  qualify  me  to  compare  them 
with  what  has  been  delivered  in  Scripture  on  the  subjects 
here  alluded  to;  but  as  it  appears  to  me  that  the  scrip- 
tural account  of  the  great  Cataclysm  has  not  been  duly 
weighed,  and  its  magnitude,  duration,  momentum,  varied 
agency,  and  their  consequences,  suj£ciently  estimated  by 
geologists,  I  will  endeavour,  as  briefly  as  I  can,  to  call 
their  attention,  and  that  of  .Christian  Philosophers  in 
general,  to  the  most  striking  features  exhibited  by  it,  as 
stated  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  chapters  of  the  book  of 
Genesis,  still  requesting  them  to  bear  in  mind  these  words 
of  the  poet,  as  expressing  my  own  feelings. 

Fungor  vice  cotis  exors  ipse  secandi. 

My  only  wish  being  to  excite  others  better  qualified,  by 
their  knowledge  both  of  Scripture  and  Nature,  the  Word 
and  the  Work  of  the  same  Almighty  Being,  to  undertake 
the  task. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  scriptural  account 


378  APPENDIX.      NOTES, 

is  not  ^figurative  one,  in  which  the  object  is  to  represent 
one  thing  by  another,  but  a  statement  of  epochs,  and 
naked  facts;  pf  causes  and  effects;  in  which  ail  that  is- 
requisite  is  to  ascertain  the  meaning  of  the  terms  emfdi^ed 
to  describe  them. 

The  came  of  the  universal  deluge,  every  one  is  aware, 
was,  with  the  exception  of  one  family,  the  uniyersal  eor- 
ruption  of  the  human  race.  AU  fiesh  had  corrupted  hu 
way  upon  the  earths  In  consequence  of  which  God.  de- 
termined Uh^  Bring  a  fiood  of  waters  upon  the  earth  to 
destroy  all  fiesh,  wherein  was  the  breath  x>f  life  from  under 
heaven;  and  every  living  substance  from  off  the  face  o^ 
the  earth,^  To  accomplish  this  purpose^  it  was  evidently 
necessary  that  the  whole  globe  should  be  submerged,  and 
the  .tops  of  all  the  mountains  covered  to  such  a  depth  as 
to  prevent  any  thing  in  which  was  the  breach  of  life  from 
making  its  escape. 

Having  mentioned  the  cause  and  object  of  the  delii|e, 
we  must  next  consider  the  means  by  which  this  universal 
destruction  is  stated  to  have  been  effected.  Three  only 
are  mentioned.  AU  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  ivere 
broken  up,  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened,  and 
the  rain  wus  upon  the  earth  forty^  days  4ind  forty  nights^ 

I,  AU  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  were  broken  up. 
The  radical  idea  of  the  word  here  rendered  broken  up  is 
that  of  division  or  disruption,  therefore  the  meaning  is 
that  those  fountains  by  which  the  waters  >  of  th^  great 
abyss  issued  ordinarily  upon  the  earth  to  water  it  by 
numerous  streams  and  rivers,  were  so  cleft,  disruptured, 
and  broken  up^  as  to  form  vast  chasms  vomiting  up  the 
fluid  contents  of  the  womb  of  the  earth,  and  sending 

*  Genes,  vi.  12.  «  Ibid,  17,  and  vii.  4. 

^XWrf.  vii.  11. 


APPENDIX.       NOTES.  379 

forth  torrents  of  incalculable  force  and  volume.  The 
vestiges  of  such  clefts  in  the  earth's  crust  are  still  to  be 
traced  in  many  places.  Malte  Brun,  in  his  Geography ^ 
observes,  with  respect  to  valleys — ^'^  Those  which  are  found 
between  high  mountains  are  commonly  narrow  and  long, 
as  if  they  had  originally  been  only  fissures^  dividing  their 
respective  chains,  or  for  the  passage  of  extensive  torrents. 
The  angles  of  their  direction  sometimes  exhibit  a  singular 
symmetry ;  we  see  in  the  Pyrenees,  says  M.  Raymond, 
some  valleys  whose  salient  and  reentrant  angles  so  per- 
fectly correspond,  that  if  the  force  that  separated  them 
were  to  act  in  a  contrary  direction,  and  bring  their  sides 
together  again,  they  would  unite  so  exactly,  that  even  the 
fissure  would  not  be  perceived."  ^ 

2.  The  windows  of  heaven  were  openedr^s  stated  by 
Moses  to  be  the  second  cause  by  which  the  deluge  was 
effected.  The  word,*  which  in  our  translation  of  the 
Bible,  is  here  and  in  other  places  rendered  windows,  does 
not  mean  an  opening  for  the  transmission  of  light,  for 
which  another  term  is  usually  employed.*  In  the  Septua- 
gint  and  other  ancient  versions  it  is  supposed  to  signify 
water  falling  from  the  heavens  in  large  masses,  and  cataract 
or  a  corresponding  term  is  used. 

The  radical  idea  is  that  of  lying  in  wait,  as  a  wild  beast 
in  its  den.  In  other  parts  of  Scripture  it  is  used  for 
dovecots,  or  the  holes  in  rocks  that  doves  frequent;*  for 
the  sockets  of  the  eyes;^  for  the  heavens  when  shedding 
copiously  blessings  or  plenty  ;7  and  for  the  action  of  some* 
thing  from  above  producing  earthquakes.* 


8 


^  nrpi  is  Hebrew  for  a  valley,  and  jrpiJ  is  the  verb  used  to 
express  the  disruption  of  the  fountains  of  the  great  abyss. 

*  System  of  Geography,  I.  i.  168.  E.  Tr. 

*  ntai«  *  ]^b^  *  Isai.  Ix.  8.  •  Eccles,  xii.  3. 
^  2  Kings,  vii.  2.     Malachi,  iii.  10.  •  Iscd.  xxiv.  18. 

VOL.  I.  c  c 


380  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

My  yenerated  friend,  the  late  Rev.  Wm.  Jones,  of  Nay- 
land — well  known  for  his  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew,  and 
the  variety  and  ability  of  his  researches  on  every  subject 
connected  with  the  interpretation  of  Scripture — in  his 
Phy^ological  Disquisitions  thus  expresses  himself,  con- 
cerning the  term  in  question.  "  We  suppose  then  that 
the  air  was  driven  downwards,  for  this  purpose,  through 
those  passages  which  are  called  windows  of  heaven.  These 
may  seem  very  obscure  terms  to  express  such  a  sense  by; 
but  heaven  is  the  Jirmamentj  or  expanded  substance  of  the 
atmosphere;  and  windows,  as  they  are  here  called,  are 
holes,  or  channels  of  any  kind.  The  same  word  is  used 
for  chimneys,^  through  which  smoke  passes,  and  for  the 
holes,  probably  cliffs  of  a  rock,  in  which  the  doves  of  the 
eastern  countries  have  their  habitation."^ 
.  It  strikes  me  as  not  very  improbable  that  the  term  I  am 
speaking  of  may  allude  to  volcanos  and  their .  craters, 
which  may  be  called  the  chimneys  of  this  globe,  by  which 
its  subterranean  fires  communicate  with  the  atinos]^ere, 
and  by  which  the  air  rushing  into  the  earth,  when  circum- 
stances are  favourable,  may  possibly  act  the  part  of  the 
fabled  Cyclops,  and  blow  them  up  previous  to  an  erup- 
tion: thus  they  become  literally  channels  or  chimneys, 
through  which  the  matter  constituting  the  expanse  or 
•firmament  passes,  either  from  heaven,  or,  in  an  eruptioD, 
towards  heaven.  The  expression,  in  Isaiah,  quoted  abov^ 
The  windows  from  on  high^  are  opened,  and  thefoundor 
tions  of  the  earth  do  shake — ^seems  to  indicate  that  earth- 
quakes are  connected  with  the  opening  of  the  windows  of 

^  Hosea^  xiii.  3. 

^  Isai.  Ix.  8.    See  Jones*  Works,  z.  264.    See  aho  Park- 
hurst,  Heb,  Lex.  under  mn  II. 
5  Heb.  onoo 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  381 

heaven,*  thus  pointing  to  volcanic  action  as  the  result. 
Still  the  expression  is  ambiguous,  and  requires  further 
elucidation :  it  may,  however,  be  intended  to  include  both 
interpretations.  The  violent  disruption  of  the  fountains  of 
the  great  deep,  which  appears  to  have  been  the  first  step 
towards  producing  the  deluge,  since  God  generally  employs 
means  to  effect  his  purposes,  was  probably  occasioned  by 
the  expansive  power  of  heaty  and  the  same  agent  would,  as 
it  does  at  this  very  time  in  some  countries,  send  out  the 
waters,  and  it  seems  equally  probable,  that  in  proportion 
as  the  waters  rushed  out  the  air  would  rush  in  and  take 
their  place,  and  thus  form  a  centre  of  repulsion,  or  vis 
centrifugal  to  counteract  the  pressure  of  the  superin* 
cumbent  'waters.  It  seems  not  improbable,  if  this  were 
the  case,  that  in  its  transit  from  the  surface  of  the  earth, 
to  its  centre,  the  air  might  bring  with  it  vast  cataracts 
of  water  attended  by  thunder  and  lightning  and  other 
electric  phenomena^ 

Heat,  the  most  elastic  of  all  fluids,  at  the  first  creation, 
undei*  the  name  of  the  expansion  or  frmament,  acting  in 
the  bosom  of  the  chaotic  waters  divided  them,  and  there- 
fore it  is  consistent  with  the  Divine  proceedings  that  the 
same  mighty  elenient  should  be  put  in  action  to  bring 
them  again  together.  And  we  learn  from  Scripture,  that 
the  same  irresistible  agent  will  be  employed  for  the  destruc* 
tion  of  the  present  earth  and  its  atmosphere  or  heavens, 
which  are  reserved  unto  Jire,  when  the  heavens  shall  pass 
away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with 
fervent  heat ;  the  earth  also  and  the  works  that  are  therein 
shall  be  burned  up,^  As  the  opening  of  the  windows  of  the 
heavens  seems  the  consequence  of  the  breaking  up  of  the 
fountains  of  the  great  deep,  it  is  therefore  mentioned  in 
the  second  place. 

1  2P€^iii.  7,  10. 


382  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

3.  The  third  ingtniment  of  Divine  Power  to  produce 
the  deluge  was  rain.  And  the  rain  was  upon  the  earth 
forty  days  and  forty  nights.^  It  is  a  common  form  of 
expression^ — It  rains  as  if  hearen  and  earth  would  come 
together ;  and  this  probably  was  the  character  of  the  rain 
that  now  fell  for  forty  Nycthemera,  or  entire  days  of 
twenty-four  hours.  A  circumstance  that  does  not  require 
further  explanation. 

By  the  united  operation  of  these  three  mighty  agents, 
guided  by  the  Almighty  hand  of  the  Deity — Whose  way 
is  in  the  sea,  and  whose  path  is  in  the  great  waters,  and 
whose  footsteps  are  not  known^ — the  waters  kept  gradually 
rising  and  prevailing  more  and  more,  till  they  overtopped 
all  the  high  mountains '  that  were  under  the  whole  heavens 
fifteen  cubits,*  by  which  the  Divine  decree  to  destroy  the 
earth  with  all  its  inhabitants,  both  rational  and  irrational, 
except  those  in  the  ark,  was  fully  executed.  With  respect 
to  the  earth  itself,  when  we  consider  the  violent  action  of 
the  ascending  and  descending  waters,  and  of  the  firmament 
rushing  downwards;  the  disruptions,  dislocations,  intro- 
versions, comminutions,  deportations  here  and  there  of  the 
original  strata  of  the  crust  of  our  globe,  can  scarcely  be  con- 
ceived, and  are  still  more  di£Bcult  to  calculate  and  explain 
exactly*  In  the  waters  thus  again,  as  at  the  creation, 
masters  of  the  whole  earth,  Ood  had  an  instrument  by 
which  his  will  with  respect  to  its  crust,  and  the  changes 
to  take  place  in  it,  might  have  full  accomplishment,  espe* 
cially  when  we  consider  the  long  time  daring  which  tke 
vraters  kept  rising  or  prevailed,  till  they  reached  the  height 


J   Genes,  vii.  12.  «  Ps.  Ixxvii.  19. 

*  Genes,  vii.  19.     In  our  translation,  onnn  in  this  verae  fi 
rendered  hills,  and  in  the  20th  mountains. 

♦  Ibid.  20. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  3^3 

oacessary  to  fulfil  the  Dirine  decree.  It  seems  not  clear 
whether  the  forty  days  during  which  the  rain  fell  are  in- 
eluded  in  the  hundred  and  fifty  days  that  th^  waters  are 
stated  to  have  prevailed.  If  they  were  includedi  the 
period  would  be  fire  lunar  months  and  ten  days ;  and  if 
they  were  not,  it  would  extend  to  six  such  months  and 
twenty-two  days.  What  a  time,  even  according  to  the 
shortest  calculation,  for  the  continued  action  of  such  a 
body. of  fluctuating  waters,  continually  increasing,  till  they 
left  no  peak  or  pinnacle  of  the  most  elevated  mountains 
of  the  globe  visible  1  Who  can  calculate  the  effects  of 
that  action  ? 

During  this  period  of  the  increase  and  prevalence  of 
the  waters,  when  the  mountains  were  covered,  all  ingress 
of  the  atmosphere  into  the  earth  by  the  chimneys  of  the 
volcanos,  if  that  is  the  meaning  of  stopping  the  windows  of 
heaven,  would  cease ;  and  the  abyss,  at  or  before  the  end 
of  it,  no  longer  vomit  forth  its  waters  by  its  innumerable 
mouths. 

Having  considered  the  secondary  causes  to  which  the 
Word  of  Qod  attributes  the  rise  and  prevalence  of  the 
deluge,  I  must  next  make  a  few  observations  upon  the 
means  to  which  Divine  Wisdom,  Power,  and  Goodness 
had  recourse  to  effect  this,  and  to  cause  the  waters  to 
return  to  their  ancient  receptacle.  At  the  first  creation. 
The  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.  The 
consequence  of  which  was  that  order  arose  out  of  con-* 
fusicm.  The  motion  was  then  begun,  by  which  the  wind^ 
bloweth  where  it  listeth,  the  Ught  shines  forth,  heat 
expands,  the  clotids  are  formed,  and  the  physical  che^ 

^  Avtfioc  »^€V  €Tt  -jrXjjv  ajjp  iroXvc  pcwv  &?iq  &fta  icai  Trvtvfia 
Xeyerai.     Aristot,  De  Mundo. 


384  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

rubim,  under  the  guidance,  and  according  to  the  will  of 
Jehovah  of  Hosts,  are  in  action,  and  fulfil  his  purpose, 
and  the  consequence  is  that  The  waters  under  the  heaven 
are  gathered  together  into  one.  place  and  the  dry  land 
appears.^  Similar  steps  were  taken  at  the  deluge.  For 
God  remembered  Noah  and  every  living  thing,  and  all  the 
cattle  that  were  with  him  in  the  ark :  and  God  made  a  wind 
to  pass  over  the  earth,  and  the  waters  asstuiged.^  It  is  not 
here  said,  as  on  the  occasion  just  alluded  to,  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  brooded  over  the  water,  but  literally  that  God 
passed  (a)  wind  (or  spirit)  over  the  earth.  The  action, 
though  not  the  same,  was  analogous,  wind  under  the 
direction  of  God  was  employed  to  do,  in  part,  what  the 
incubation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  had  before  effected,  to  begin 
that  action  by  which  the  globe  and  its  atmosphere  would 
be  again  placed  in  statu  quo,  the  water  again  divided,  so 
that  one  part  should  return  to  the  great  abyss,  its  destined 
abode;  and  the  other  be  suspended  in  the  atmosphere; 
and,  by  the  same  means,  the  dislocated  crust  of  the  earth 
be  re-formed ;  the  matter  suspended  in  the  water  or  float- 
ing on  it  deposited,  the  detritus  of  the  old  one  being 
mixed,  and  often,  as  it  were,  intercalated  with  vegetable 
and  animal  substances  and  remains.  This  wind  from  God 
having  passed  over  the  earth,  the  waters  assuaged ;  that 
is,  their  rage  and  violence  ceased ;  the  fountains  of  the 
abyss  and  the  windows  of  heaven  being  stopped ;  the  one 
no  longer  poured  forth  its  waters  upon  the. earth  ;.  and  the 
other  no  longer  descended  to  occupy  their  place ;  and  the 
rain  had  ceased  to  fall.  When  the  above  three  causes  of 
the  deluge  ceased  their  auction,  and  had  given  place  to  the 
wind  from  God,  the  waters  of  course  began  to  subside. 

1  Genes,  i.  9.  *  Ibid.  viii.  1. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  385. 

We  are  now  arrived  at  the  last  epoch  of  this  great 
event,  the  gradual  decrease  and  final  subsidence  of  the. 
diluvial  waters.  The  period  of  their  increase,  if  with, 
Lightfoot  we  add  the  40  days  to  the  150,  would  be  190 
days,  or,  as  was  before  observed,  six  lunar  months  and 
about,  three  weeks.  In  the  seventh  month  of  the  deluge, 
as  the  same  author  observes,^  on  the  seventeenth  day  of 
the  month,  the  ark  rested  on  the  mountains  of  Ararat,^ 
from  which  period  the  waters  returned  off  the  face  of  the 
earth,  going  and  returning^  as  it  is  in  the  Hebrew,^  ren- 
dered in  our  translation  by  the  word  continually,  but 
almost  all  the  ancient  versions  adhere  to  the  literal  sense, 
which  seems  to  be  important,  and  to  indicate  a  flux  and 
reflux  of  the  waters,  which  would  affect  the  deposition  of 
the  matt^^  floating  upon  or  suspended  in  them.  Whether 
this  flux  and  reflux  partook  of  the  nature  of  a  tide,  and 
was  produced  by  the  action  of  the  moon,  or  whether  it  was 
occasioned  by  the  wind,  which,  as  Solomon  observes, 
Gaeth  towards  the  south  and  turneth  about  to  the  north,"^ 
does  not  appear. 

After  the  resting  of  the  ark,  more  than  two  months  elapsed 
before  the  tops  of  the  mountains  were  seen,  and  finally, 
in  nearly  two  months  more  the  waters  had  universally 
disappeared ;  and  after  their  long  domination  over  the 
earth,  lasting  nearly  eleven  months,  were  confined  again 
within  the  limits  that  God  had  originally  assigned  to 
them.  Reckoning  to  the  day  of  Noah's  going  oat  of  the 
ark,  on  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the  second  month,  the 
whole  period  of  his  confinement  appears  to  have  been  one 


1   Ubi  supra.  *  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  45. 

»  Heb.  aitt^i  yhn  p«n  ^xro  D»on  nu^^i 
*  Eccles,  i.  6. 


386  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

year  and  ten  days.  It  is  evident,  from  the  period  tkat 
intervened  between  the  resting  of  the  ark,  and  the  subse- 
quent emergence  of  the  tops  of  the  mountains  more  than 
two  months  afterwards,^  that  the  subsidence  of  the  waters 
at  jGirst  was  very  gradual ;  but,  in  proportion  as  their  volume 
diminished,  it  probably  became  more  and  more  rapid. 

The  tumult  and  violence  of  the  descending  waters,  and 
the  effects  produced  by  them,  in  the  new  mixture^  as  it 
were,  of  the  substances  now  forming  the  crust  of  our  globe, 
and  the  putting  it  into  its  present  order— always  under 
the  direction  and  guidance  of  the  Deity,  who  sitteth  above 
the  water^Jloody  employing  as  his  hands  those  physical 
agents  which  rule  in  nature,  to  fulfil  his  purpose— must 
have  been  the  reverse  of  those  of  the  ascending  ones :  the 
object  now  was  not  disruption,  and  dislocation,  and  de- 
struction, but  to  form  anew  the  earth  and  its  heavens 
which  had  been  thus  destroyed,  and  by  the  addition  of  a 
vast  body  of  fresh  materials  not  entering  into  the  compo- 
sition of  the  old  crust  of  the  former,  to  render  it  naaterially 
different  from  it;  and  that  when  the  attention  of  mankind 
was  directed  to  the  study  of  God's  works,  and  of  those 
remains  of  the  fcM'mer  world,  a  proof  might  be  supplied  of 
the  existence  of  this  sad  catastrophe,  confirmative  of  the 
account  given  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  adding  to  the  force 
of  the  warning  that  universal  corruption  will  be  a  prelude 
to  universal  destruction. 

When  we  consider  what  an  infinite  host  of  animals  of 
every  description  must  have  perished  in  the  diluvial  waters, 
as  well  as  the  incalculable  magnitude  of  the  mass  of  vege- 
table substances  that  must  have  been  severed  by  the  vio- 
lence of  the  conflicting  waters  from  the  earth's  surface,  or 
uprooted  afterwards  in  consequence  of  its  being  so  tho- 

*  Genes,  viii.  4,  5. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  387 

roughly  soaked  by  themi  yre  see  immediately  that  their 
deposition  and  sepulture^  as  well  as  the  putting  together 
again  of  the  dislocated  remains  of  the  primeval  earth,  must 
have  been  an  important  part  of  the  office  of  the  subsiding 
waters,  upon  which  I  shall  now  offer  a  few  observations. 

It  has  been  a  matter  of  surprize  that  amidst  so  many 
fossil  animals  which  are  daily  brought  to  light,  and  those 
of  some  of  the  largest  quadrupeds  in  great  numbers,^  no 
remains  of  the  human  race  have  yet  been  discovered,  except 
in  one  or  two  solitary  instances.  As  the  deluge  was  caused 
by  the  wickedness  of  these  old  giants,  as  they  have  been 
called,  but  really  apostates,^  these  nien  of  renown,  it  was 
evidently  a  miraculous  interference  of  the  Deity  for  their 
punishment ;  it  seems,  therefore,  by  no  means  improbable, 
that  the  place  of  their  burial  was  not  left  to  chance,  or  the 
uninfluenced  action  of  physical  causes,  but,  like  the  burial 
place  of  Moses,  was  decreed  by  God,  and  fixed  so  as  to  be 
placed  beyond  discovery. 

It  seems  to  have  been  the  opinion  of  most  modem 
geologists,  that  fossil  animals  in  general  were  natives  of 
those  districts  or  countries  in  which  their  remains  have 
been  discovered.  But  whoever  takes  into  consideration 
the  account,  above  detailed,  which  the  sacred  writings 
give  us  of  the  universal  deluge,  and  of  the  prevalence  of  the 
waters  above  the  summits  of  the  highest  mountains,  will 
see  at  once,  with  the  exception  of  those  that  were  over- 
taken and  drowned  by  the  waters  in  dens  or  caverns,  they 
must  have  floated  when  the  waters  had  reached  and 
flooded  all  the  elevations  upon  which  they  had  taken  tb^ir 
last  refuge,  and  they  would  have  drifted  off  north  or  south, 
or  in  any  other  direction  the  fluctuating  element  was 
taking,  and  if  there  was  an  alternate  flux  and  reflux,  they 

1  See  ReliquicB  Diluv,  138—182.  =  Heb.  d»^dj 


388  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

would  have  been  carried  by  it  backwards  and  forwards 
till  they  were  deposited  some  here  and  some  there ;  some 
upon  mountain  summits^^  and  others  at  different  heights 
ruled  by  the  circumstances  of  the.  earth's  surface  and  the 
action  of  the  subsiding  waters.  Few,  indeed,  would  be  im- 
bedded in  their  native  country,  except  those  that  perished, 
as  above  mentioned,  in  caverns ;  though  probably,  in  many 
cases,  those  of  the  same  species  might  congregate,  and  so 
floating  off  together  might  be  buried  together.  It  has 
been  remarked  that  no  fossil  elephants  have  been  found 
in  the  countries  that  those  animals  now  frequent.  It 
seems,  therefore,  by  no  means  certain  that  the  gigantic 
Saurians  now  found  in  our  southern  coasts,  or  that  the 
Mammoths  or  other  gigantic  Pachyderms  of  Northern 
Russia  or  Nova  Zembla,  were  really  natives  of  those 
recrions. 

o 

What  Geologist,  then,  however  practised,  however 
deeply  conversant  with  his  subject,  can  estimate  and 
exactly  calculate  the  action  and  operation  of  these  mighty 
waters,  both  during  their  rise,  prevalence,  and  subsidence 
for  so  extended  a  period;  especially  when  those  of  an 
Almighty  superintending  and  directing  Cause,  upon  the 
whole  body  of  means  that  he  employed  to  accomplish  his 
purposes,  and  execute  his  decrees  with  regard  both  to  the 
destruction  and  renovation  of  our  globe,  are  duly  con- 
sidered ? 

By  what  I  have  here  argued  I  do  not  mean  to  contend 
that  there  may  not  have  been  many  partial  convulsions 
which  may  have  produced  very  important  changes  in 
different  countries  of  our  globe :  it  is  not  moreover  at  aU 
improbable  that  while  its  population  was  concentrated, 

*  See  above,  p.  374. 


APPENDIX;      NOTES.  389 

many  regions  when  uninhabited,  God  so  willing,  by  dilu- 
Tialy  volcanic,  or  other  action  of  the  elements,  might  be 
materially  altered,  new  mountain  ridges  might  be.elevated, 
mighty  disruptions  take  place,  and  other  changes  to  which 
there  could  be  no  witnesses,  but  which  can  only  be  con- 
jectured by  the  features  such  countries  now  exhibit* 

.  Note  11,  p.  41. —  We  ham  from  the  Apostle  St,  Peter, 
that  the  primeval  globe,  and  its  heavens  or  atmosphere, 
perished  at  the  deluge,  I  shall  add  a  few  words  here  on 
the  passs^e  of  St  Peter  alluded  to  in  the  text.  Speaking 
of  the  scoffers  of  the  last  days,  and  of  the  deluge.  Whereby, 
he  says,  the  world  that  then  was  being  overflowed  with 
water  perished ;  he  adds.  But  the  heavens  and  earth,  which 
are  now,  by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  store,  &c.  In  this 
passage  it  must  be  observed  that  the  term  world  in  the 
sixth  verse  is  synonymous  with  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
taken  together  of  the  fifth  and  seventh  verses,  and  by  it 
seems  to  be  meant  that  the  earth  with  its  own  heavens,  or 
the  atmosphere  that  surrounds  it,  both  perished  or  were  de^ 
8trot/ed,^  which  is  rendered  further  evident  by  the  expres- 
sion:  But  the  heavens  and  earth  which  are  now.  From 
which  it  may  be  gathered  that  the  heavens  and  earth 
iphich  are  now,  are  different  from  the  heavens  and  earth 
which  were  destroyed  at  the  deluge ;  and  as  the  latter  has 
evidently  been  reconstructed,  and  vegetable  and  animal 
remains  have  been  mixed  with  the  dislocated  materials 
and  as  it  were  detritus  of  the  original  world  ;^  so  the  new 
atmosphere  might  be,  and  probably  was  differently  mixed, 
so  as  to  be  less  friendly  to  health  and  longevity,  which 

*  Gr.  awtoXBTo. 

*  See  above,  p.  384,  and  Herschel  in  Cab.  Cyclop,  xiv.  141, 
No.  135. 


390  APPENDIX*      NOTES. 

would  account  physically  for  the  gradual  reductioo  of  tiie 
former  eiztended  period  of  human  life  to  it^  present  brief 
standard.  Animals  as  weU  as  man  might  be  affected  by 
this  change^  their  bulk  might  be  diminished,  and  other 
variations  be  produced  in  them  which  have  not  been  ascer- 
tained.. When  God  fixed  upon  the  rainbow  as  the  token 
of  his  covenant  with  Noah,  the  changes,  here  alluded  to, 
in  the  atmosphere  might  be  the  cause  of  the  appearance, 
under  certain  circumstances,  of  that  phenomenon. 

Scientific  men  have  judged  it  not  improbable,  without 
referring  to  this  doctrine  of  Revelation,  that  changes  in 
the  composition  of  the  atmosphere,  according  to  circum- 
stances, may  have  taken  place.^ 

Note  14,  p.  62. — Whoever  exammet  the  animals  (^ 
North  America  vnll  Jitid  a  vast  number  that  correspond 
with  European  species — on  the  Rocky  Moutdains,  and  in 
the  country  westward  of  that  range  Asiatic  types  are  dis- 
-coverabk.  The  rein-deer,  the  fox,  the  weasel,  the  rat,  the 
mouse,  the  golden  eagle,  the  peregrine  CeQcou,  and  many 
other  birds  are  of  the  former  description.  In  the  lattm* 
paragraph  1  allude  to  a  fine  Carabus,^  which  is  found  in 
Siberia;  and  likewise  to  a  new  genus*  related  to  Trechus, 
Qi  which  I  possess  a  specimen,  found  in  India,  both  takm 
also  in  the  Rocky  Mountains.  Mr.  Sabine  informed  me 
that  sevemi  new  Poeonias,  and  a  Laurus  that  reached  the 
height  of  sixty  feet,  were  natives  of  the  same  eountry. 
In  Chili,  Molina  found  the  green  and  temporary  frogs, 
the*  heron,  the  turtle-^dove,  and  several  other  old-world 
Animals. 

1  Ann.  Des  So.  Nat.  xix.  432. 

«  C.  VietinghovU.     Fisch.  3  Jsopkurus,  K.  M.  S. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  391 

Note  15,  p.  64.— JBm^  which  in  their  immediate  or  remote 
consequences,  may  be  productive  of  effects  that  are  important 
to  be  attended  to,  and  provided  for.  When  we  reflect 
upon  the  action  of  the  Deity,  we  can  scarcely  avoid  taking 
our  ideas  of  it,  in  some  degree  from  that  of  man.  Man's 
^tt^tion  is  usually  directed  to  things  that  appear  to  him 
important,  as  affecting  either  his  passions  or  his  interests, 
but  he  passes  by  those  that  appear  to  him  trivial,  as  having 
no  bearing  upon  his  pain,  or  pleasure,  or  welfare.  But 
here  there  is  a  great  difference,  for  though  some 

By  long  experience  do  attain 

To  something  like  prophetic  strain, 

the  generality  can  trace  the  chain  of  causes  and  effects, 
but  for  a  very  few  links;  and  therefore  they  disregard 
Bome  things  as  trivial,  which,  in  the  event,  produce  effects 
of  the  greatest  importance.  But  it  is  not  so  with  God ; 
he  sees  the  most  distant  consequences  of  every  thing  that 
happens  in  his  whole  universe,  and  therefore  knows  exactly 
in  what  proportions  every  thing  appertaining  to  the  nature 
of  every  creature  should  be  measured  out  to  it  in  order 
to  produce  the  effects  he  intends  should  take  place,  if  I 
may  so  speak,  during  its  ministration;  so  combining 
i^ents  and  actions,  as  may  infallibly  fulfil  his  law,  and 
general  purpose.  He  foresees  the  effect  of  what  are 
regarded  as  the  most  trivial  things,  as  the  number  of  our 
hairs  and  the  death  of  a  sparrow,  as  well  as  of  those  that 
are  most  important :  and  his  general  object  is  to  provide 
for  the  execution  of  the  laws  both  physical  and  meta- 
physical by  which  he  governs  the  universe,  and  so  upholds 
all  things,  but  not  so  as  never  to  suspend  the  action  of 
these  laws.  The  following  events  recorded  in  Scripture 
were  remarkable  instances  of  such  suspension. 


392  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

1.  The  Universal  Deluge,  by  the  means  of  which  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  of  the  primeval  world  were 
destroyed. 

2.  The  Egyptian  palpable  darkness  for  three  ds^ys  and 
nights. 

3.  The  passage  of  the  Israelites  through  the  Red  Sea, 
the  waters  standing  as  a  wall  on  either  hand. 

4.  The  sun  apparently  standing  still  in  the  heavens  at 
the  command  of  Joshua,  or  the  earth  ceasing  to 
revolve  on  its  axis. 

5.  The  shadow  going  back  on  the  dial  of  Ahaz  three 
degrees^  or  the  earth  retrograding. 

6.  The  supernatural  darkness  that  took  place  at  our 
Saviour's  crucifixion. 

Note  16,  p.  86. — Which  mil  take  place  in  his  time 
and  at  his  word;  and  by  the  means  and  instruments  that 
he  empowers  and  commissions.  Ever  since  the  fall  of  our 
first  parents  a  copious  harvest  of  evil  and  sorrow,  the  fruit 
of  sin,  has  been  reaped  by  their  descendants,  amongst 
others,  that  of  slavery  has  been  one  of  the  bitterest.  In 
the  case  of  Ham  it  was  predicted  and  decreed  by  the  Deity 
himself  that  his' son  Canaan  should  be  a  servant  of  servants 
or  slave  to  his  brethren,  a  prediction  which,  to  judge  by 
the  event,  affected  all  the  descendants  of  the  offending 
patriarch,  for  no  races  have  been  so  much  degraded,  in 
all  respects,  as  the  African  negroes  who  derived  their 
origin  from  him. 

Much  has  of  late  been  done  with  the  view  of  ame- 
liorating their  condition,  and  most  of  the  European  nations 
have  concurred  in  the  benevolent  endeavour.  In  conse- 
quence of  the  exertions  of  this  country,  the  debasing  traffic 
in  slaves,  and  the  niiseries  and  waste  of  human  life  that  it 
occasioned,  have  been  very  much  diminished.    But  though 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  393 

Christian  nations  have  agreed  to  relinquish  the  trade  in 
slaves,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  many  of  the  wars  that 
were  expressly  kindled  amongst  the  Africans  themselves, 
for  the  purpose  of  making  slaves  will  cease :  still  there  are 
markets  for  slaves  that  we  have  no  power  to  close,  and 
therefore  it  is  to  be  apprehended  that  the  good  expected 
from  the  abolition,  by  European  states,  of  the  traffic  in 
question,  will  not  be  altogether  realized:  so  that  it  still 
seems  doubtful  whether  slavery  is  near  its  extinction,  or 
whether  it  ever  will  be  extinguished  during  the  present 
state  of  society,  and  while  the  nations  amongst  whom  it  is 
practised  continue  to  be  apostates  from  the  knowledge  and 
worship  of  their  Creator.  While  the  souls  of  the  sons  of 
Adam  are  thus  enslaved  and  sold  under  sin,  it  seems  im- 
probable that  God's  time  for  their  general  emancipation 
from  bodily  slavery  should  be  at  hand;  but  when  their 
heart  $hall  turn  to  the  Lord,  this,  and  numberless  other 
evils,  at  his  bidding,  and  by  instruments  that  he  appoints, 
will  cease.  The  best  way  therefore  of  accomplishing  this 
object  is  by  providing  means,  wherever  God  has  made  an 
opening,  for  the  education  of  the  negroes,  and  for  training 
them  to  habits  of  industry  and  order :  to  give  them  freedom 
before  they  are  qualified  to  use  it  for  the  benefit  of  society, 
is  giving  them  not  a  boon,  but  a  curse. 

Note  17,  p.  87.— SAouW  another  and  last  cloud  of  error 
envelope  the  world  with  darkness.  There  are  many  passages 
of  Holy  Writ,  from  which  it  appears  that,  before  the  final 
triumph  of  the  gospel,  there  shall  be  a  time  of  great 
spiritual  darkness  upon  earth;  and  it  seems  also  to  be 
intimated  that  this  reign  of  evil  shall  be  brought  on  by 
men  that  Despise  dominion,  and  speak  evil  of  dignities,^ 

*  Judfe,  8. 


394  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

who  ahall  prcmiise  liberty  to  their  followers^  while  they 
themselves  are  the  servants  of  corruption;^  who  shall 
resemble  Corah,  and  his  companions  in  rebellion  Dathan 
and  Abiram,^  and  rise  up  against  their  dyil  and  eccle* 
siastical  rulers.;  and  who  shall  for  a  time  prevail  agaiost 
them,  as  seems  to  be  intimated  by  one  of  the  most  ancient 
prophecies  in  the  Bible.  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the 
way,  an  adder  in  the  path,  that  biteth  the  horse^heels,  so 
that  his  rider  shall  fall  backward.^  So  says  the  venerable 
patriarch,  in  his  valedictory  and  prophetic  address  to  his 
twelve  sons  before  his  death.  These  words  seem  to  foretell 
that  serpents,  or  apostates,  symbolized  by  the  tribe  of  Dan, 
would,  in  the  last  times,  incite  the  lower  orders  to  rebd 
against  their  governors  and  reject  their  authority;  and  when 
Jacob  adds  /  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  O  Jeho^vah,  it 
seems  to  be  further  indicated  that  this  event  wiU.be  followed 
by  the  great  day  of  salvation.  It  was  au  ancient  opinion 
that  Antichrist  would  be  an  individual  of  the  tribe  of  Dan> 
who,  in  the  last  times,  to  use  the  words  of  IrenaBus,  would 
leap  like  a  lion  upon  the  human  race;^  an  opinion  probably 
derived  from  this  prophecy,  or  from  that  of  Moses  delivered 
on  a  similar  occasion,  Dan  is  a  lion's  whelp :  he  shall  leap 
from  Bashan;^  and  from  the  exclusion  of  that  tribe  fiom 
the  number  of  those  that  were  sealed,  as  recorded  in  the 
Apocalypse.^  St.  Paul,  in  his  description  of  the  man  of 
sin,  describes  him  as  exalting  himself  above  all  that  is 
called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped  or  vmerated^  This  has 
been  interpreted  as  meaning  idols,  but  in  Seiipture  princes 
and"  rulers  are  called  Gods,  as  when  it  is  said  Thou  shalt 

'  2  Pet,  ii.  9,  19.  «  Numb.  xvi.  1—3,  31—35. 

«  Genes,  xlix.  17.  *  Adv.  Hares.  1.  iii.  c.  38. 

*  Deut.  xxxuu  22.  ^  Revel,  xvi,  5 — 8. 

7  Gr.  aejSatrfjui.     2  Thess.  ii.  4. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  305 

not  revile  the  Oods  nor  speak  evil  cf  the  rnkr  of  thy 
people;^  whence  it  seems  as  if  St.  Paul  meant  to  indicate 
a  power  that  was  to  exalt  itself  above  all  authority  whether 
ciril  or  ecclesiastioal.  Ireneeus  expected  his  personal 
Antichrist  to  reign  three  years  and  a  half,  interpreting  the 
{m>piietic  period  of  1260  days  literally;^  but  this  period, 
if  interpreted  a  year  for  a  day,  would  only  agree  with  a 
succession  of  individuals.  The  ancient  opinion  of  a  personal 
Antichrist,  may  be  reconciled  with  the  modem  one  of  a 
succession  of  individuals  entitled  to  that  appellation,  by 
considering  St  Jofati's  prophecy  of  the  two  witnesses.  They 
are  to  prophecy  clothed  in  sackcloth  1260  days.^  This 
period  synchronizes  with  the  reign  of  the  Antichristian 
power  which  corrupts  the  gospel^  headed  by  a  succesinon  of 
individuals.  Again,  they  are  to  be  killed,  and  their  bodies 
exposed  without  sepulture  in  the  street  of  the  great  city 
for  three  days  and  a  half  ;^  this  second  period  synchronizes 
with  the  reign  of  the  personal  Antichrist,  who  denies  the 
gospel,  who  is  to  be  a  single  individual ;  and  mote  particu^ 
larly  entitled  to  the  name  of  Antichrist  by  his  infidelity, 
and  atheistic  principles.  He  is  the  Antichrist  that  denieth 
the  Father  and  the  8<m^  It  may  be  asked-*-  When  God 
doeth  thisj  who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?  will  any  Christian 
church  escape?  We  learn  from  the  case  of  that  of  Phila* 
delphia,^  that  if  any  such  church  holds  fast  her  profession, 
has  kept .  the  word  of  Ckriat,  and  not.  denied  bis  name, 
though  beset  by  d  host  of  eiMmies,  she  shall  be  keptfron^ 
the  hour  of  temptation. 

Note  18,  p.  87. — And  he  restored  to  the  faHour  of  their 
God  and  their  own  land.    Some  Divines  have  thought 

1  Exod.  xxii.  28.  «  Ubi  supr.  1.  v.  c.  25. 

»  Revel,  xi.  3.  ♦  Ibid.  7—11. 

a  1  John,  ii.  22.  «  Itev.  iii.  7—10. 

VOL.  I.  D  D 


396  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

that  there  will  be  no  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  their  own 
land ;  but  as  it  is  evident,  from  what  St.  Paul  says,  that 
they  will  at  a  period  fixed  in  the  Divine  councils  be 
converted  to  the  faith  of  Christ,^  .so  it  appears  equally 
clear,  from  what  is  foretold  in  the  concluding  diapters  of 
Ezekiel  and  by  other  prophets,^  that  they  shall  also  s^ain 
inhabit  Judea  and  Jerusalem.  Some  interpreters  are  also 
of  opinion,  that  the  pouring  out  of  the  vial  of  the  sixth 
angel  upon  the  river  Euphrates  and  the  drying  up  of  its 
waters,^  signify  the  dissolution  of  the  empire  of  the  Turks; 
that,  by  the  Kings  of  the  East  therein  mentioned,  sure 
meant  the  Jews ;  and  that  their  return  to  their  own  land 
is  indicated,  by  their  way  being  prepared.  Bishop  Horsley 
supposes,  likewise,  that  the  eighteenth  of  Isaiah  £Dretell& 
this  event,  and  that  the  great  commercial  nation  of  the  day 
will  be  instrumental  in  bringing  it  about.'* 

St.  Paul's  conversion  is  thought  to  have  been  a  type  of 
the  conversion  of  the  Jewish  nation  in  the  latter  days,  and 
as  his  zeal  and  success  seem  to  have  exceeded  that  of  the 
other  apostles,  and  he  was  the  great  instrument  of  the 
conversion  of  the  gentile  world  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  so  it 
has-  been  supposed  that  the  Jewd.when  converted,  will  be 
the  main  instruments  of  the  conversion  of  the  then  heathen 
world. 

Note  19,  p.  88. — Unless  some  means  can  be  devised  at 
homey  by  which  the  pressure  may  be  lightened,  and  tie 
suffering  classes  be  enabled  to  procure  the  necessaries  of  life. 
There  are  two  mighty  nations  on  our  globe  in  which  a 
system  has  long  been  acted  upon,  enabling  them  to  support 

1  Rom.  xi.  25,  26. 

2  Ezek.  xxxvii.  &c.     Isai,  Ix.    Jerem.  xxx.  &c, 
^  Rev.  xvi.  12.  comp.  ix.  14. 

♦  See  also  Ix.  8,  9,  and  Zeph,  iii.  10. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  397 

h  population^  never  diminished  by  foreign  wars^  greatly 
exceeding  that  of  any  other  country,  whose  numbers  have 
only  been  diminished  occasionally  by  famine,  by  devas- 
tating inundations  and  unfavourable  seasons,  from  which 
nothing  can  altogether  insure  a  people.  The  nations  I 
allude  to  are  China  and  Japan.  We  are  informed,  in  the 
Account  of  Lord  Macartney's  Embassy,  that  in  the  former 
of  these  countries,  ''  Every  square  mile  contains  upon  an 
average  one  third  more  inhabitants,  being  upwards  of  three 
hundred,  than  are  found  upon  an  equal  quantity  of  land, 
also  upon  an  average,  in  the  most  populous  country  in 
Europe."^  The  population  of  the  latter  is  also  stated  to  be 
prodigious.^  The  encouragement  of  Agriculture  appears 
to  be  the  sole  mean  which  enables  these  countries  to  main- 
tain so  vast  a  mass  of  population.  In  China,  it  is  stated, 
that  the  whole  surface  of  the  country  is  dedicated  to  the 
production  of  food  for  man  alone,  that  even  the  steepest 
mountains  are  brought  into  cultivation ;  they  are  cut  into 
terraces,  and  the  water  that  runs  at  their  feet  is  raised  by 
chain-pumps,  worked  each  by  two  men,  from  terrace  to 
terrace,  to  irrigate  them ;  and  steep  and  barren  places  are 
not  suffered  to  run  waste,  but  are  planted  with  pines  and 
larches.'  A  similar  account  is  given  of  the  state  of  agri- 
culture in  Japan,  where  attention  to  it  is  enjoined  by  the 
laws  as  one  of  the  most  essential  duties ;  and  if  any  one 
leaves  his  land  uncultivated  his  more  active  neighbour 
may  take  possession  of  it.  In  both  these  countries  no 
article  that  can  possibly  be  used  as  manure  is  wasted,  so 
that  the  soil  and  crops  have  every  possible  attention  of 
this  kind.*     Malte-Brun  has  given   a   very  interesting 

1  Macartney  Embassy  by  Sir  G.  Staunton,  iii.  388. 

2  Malte-Brun.     Stjst.  ofGeogr.  Asia  II.  ii.  533.  E.T. 

3  Macartney  Embass,  iii.  386.     Malte-Brun.  Asia,  560. 
*  Thumb.  Japan,  iv.  82.     Malte-Brun.  561, 


398  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

account  of  the  honours  paid  by  the  Emperor  of  China  and 
his  court  to  agriculture:  who  annually  in  the  beginning 
of  March,  after  adoring  the  God  of  Heaven^  and  invoking 
his  Blessing  on  his  labour  and  on  that  of  his  whole  people, 
himself,  laying  aside  his  imperial  robes,  holding  a  plough 
opens  several  furrows,  and  is  succeeded  by  his  chief 
mandarins,  who  in  succession,  follow  the  example  of  the 
prince.^  Some  allowance  probably  must  be  made  for  too 
warm  colouring  in  these  statements,  as  most  of  them  must 
have  been  derived  from  the  report  of  the  natives,  yet  there 
seems  no  doubt  with  respect  to  their  general  accuracy. 
What  an  example  is  here  set  by  nations  which  we  are 
accustomed  to  consider  as  far  behind  ourselves  in  every 
art  of  life :  bow  vast  a  portion  of  our  own  home  empire  is 
suffered  to  lie  waste,  while  all  the  time  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  our  agricultural  population  are  languishing 
for  want  of  employment,  and  compelled  to  live  upon  a 
pittance,  which,  unless  they  add  to  it  by  theft  or  fraud,  is 
scarcely  sufficient  to  keep  body  and  soul  together;  and  in 
the  mean  while  the  morals  of  our  peasantry  are  gradually 
corrupted;  they  grow  daily  less  industrious;  they  wiH 
often  congregate  at  the  beep-shops^  and  get  inveterate 
habits  of  intemperance;  they  lose  all  respect  for  their 
superiors,  and  the  bonds  of  union  betwixt  the  upper  and 
lower  classes  are  graduaUy  dissolving;  and  unless  some 
remedy  for  this  fearful  evil  is  soon  discovered,  who  can 
say  what  the  consequences  may  be?  When  a  man  once 
loses  his  self-«steem,  and  is  degraded  from  his  natural 
dependence  upon  himself,  under  God,  and  the  labour  of 
his  hands,  for  the  support  of  himself  and  family,  bebg  no 
longer  of  use  to  himself  or  others,  he  becomes  careless  of 
his  actions;  and  being,  as  it  were,  rejected  by  society, 

I  Malte-Brun,  561, 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  399 

becomes  the  enemy  of  those  above  him,  and  the  ready 
associate  of  evil  men,  in  evil  works. 

Note  20,  p.  166. — Those  that  are  loricated  and  covered 
with  som^  kind  of  shell.  The  varied  means  by  which  a 
provident  and  beneficent  Creator  has  provided  animals 
with  different  means  of  defence  ought  not  to  be  over- 
looked. When  we  see  even  these  invisible  atoms  as  it 
Weife  provided  with  armour,  to  defend  them  probably 
from  the  attack  of  animals  of  their  own  class,  we  feel 
confident  that  he  will  not  neglect  us.  This  distinctioa 
of  animals  into  loricated  and  naked  may  be  traced 
through  most  of  their  Classes ;  thus  the  Coleopterd  stand 
in  contrast  with  most  of  the  other  Orders  of  insects; 
the  fishes  and  reptiles  that  are  covered  with  scales  with 
those  that  are  covered  with  skin.^  In  birds,  however,  this 
distinction  does  not  appear  to  obtain  at  all :  in  quadrupeds 
the  giant  Megatherium,  the  Armadillo,  the  Chlanufphorus, 
and  the  Manis,  are  distinguished  from  the  either  Mam- 
malians by  the  armour  that  protects  them. 

Note  21,  p.  XGQ.-^The  first  plants  and  the  first  animals 
are  scarcely  more  than  animated  molecules,  and  appear 
analogues  of  each  other;  and  those  above  them  in  each 
kingdom  represent  jointed  fibrils*  A  discovery  may  here 
be  noticed  of  one  of  the  most  scientific  Botanists  of  the 
present  age,  and  whose  keen  eye  and  philosophic  spirit 
have  penetrated  into  depths  and  mysteries  before  unex* 
plored,  belonging  to  the  science  of  which  he  is  so  great  an 
ornament.  In  the  investigation  of  some  of  these,  he  dis- 
covered that  not  only  vegetable,  but  even  mineral  mole- 

1  In  some  fishes  the  scales  are  invisible,  so  that  they  may  foe 
almost  reckoned  naked.     Vol.  II.  p.  306. 


400  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

cules,  when  placed  in  a  fluid  medium,  would  move  aboat 
in  various  directions,  but  by  what  cause  these  motions 
were  generated  he  offers  no  conjecture.    He  very  kindly 
shewed  me  this  singular  phenom^ion,  if  my  memory  does 
not  deceive  me,  with  respect  to  some  mineral  snbstancses. 
Mr.  Brown  has  observed  that  the  motions  in  question,  he 
was  satisfied,  arose  neither  from  currents  in  the  fluid,  nor 
from  its  gradual  evaporation,  but  belon^d  to  the  partide 
itself;^  and  of  the  spherical  molecules  mixed  with  the  otber 
oblong  particles  obtained  from  Clarckia  pukkella,  that 
they  were  in  rapid  oscillatory  motion  :^  in  both  mineral,' 
vegetable,^  and  animal  substances,^  along  with  the  mole- 
cules, he  found  other  corpuscles,  like  short  fibres  scnne* 
what  moniliformf  or  having  transverse  contractions,  conrea- 
ponding  in  number,  as  he  conjectured,  with  that  of  the 
molecules  composing  them:  and  these  fibrils,  when  not 
consisting  of  a  greater  number  than  four  or  five  molecules, 
exhibited  motion  resembling  that  of  the  mineral  filuils, 
while  longer  ones  of  the  same  apparent  diameter  were  at 
rest^    It  does  not  appear  clearly  from  the  words  of  the 
learned  author,  whether  the  motion  of  the  mineral  mole- 
cules was  similar  to  that  of  the  vegetable  ones,  which  he 
describes  as  oscillatory.    The  motions  of  the  mineral  fibrils, 
when  not  composed  of  more  than  two  or  three  molecules, 
were  at  least  as  vivid  as  those  of  the  simple  molecule,  and 
which  from  the  fibril  often  changing  its  position  in  the 
fluid,  and  from  its  occasional  bending,  might  be  said  to 
be  somewhat  vermicular  ;'>^  now  vermicular  movement  is 
a  kind  of  progressive  oscillation^  the  anterior  extremity 
going  from  side  to  side  and  being  followed  by  the  body. 

*  Brief  Account  of  Microscopical  Observations^  Sfc.  4. 

«  Ibid.  5,  6,  »  Ibid.  10.  ♦  Ibid.  U,  «  Ibid. 

«  Ibid.  comp.  10,  11.  .7  Jbid.  10. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  401 

In  other  mineral  bodies^  as  in  white  arsenic^  which  did 
not  exhibit  the  fibrils,  he  Cound  oval  particles  about  the 
size  of  two  molecules,  which  he  conjectureato  be  primary 
combinations  of  them :  their  motion,  which  was  more  vivid 
than  that  of  the  simple  molecule,  consisted  usually  in 
turning  on  their  longer  axis,  and  then  often  appearing  to 
be  flattened.^  The  revolution  of  a  body  upon  its  axis,  it 
may  be  observed,  implies  the  action  upon  it  of  two  equal 
conflicting  forces,  by  the  counteraction  of  which  the  revo- 
lution is  produced  and  maintained:  the  same  action  on 
the  longer  fibrils^  would  keep  them  at  rest. 

My  motive  for  introducing  a  topic,  which,  at  the  first 
blush,  seems  to  have  a  very  slight  connexion  with  the 
subject  now  before  me,  was  a  suspicion  that  sometimes 
Mr.  Brown's  molecules  may  have  been  mistaken  for 
Infusory  Animals.  Comparing  the  oscillatory  motion  he 
observed  in  them,  and  Cams'  observation  that  the  motions 
of  Infusories  occasionally  present  the  appearance  of  attrac- 
tion and  repulsion,^  this  suspicion  seems  to  merit  attention, 
and  to  call  for  more  close  examination;  and  it  may  be 
observed  that  the  action  of  these  two  powers  seems  suffi- 
ciently to  account  for  the  oscillatory  motions  of  the  mole- 
cules, and  takes  away  all  idea  of  any  spontaneity.  With 
regard  to  the  Infusories  this  has  been  most  satisfactorily 
established  in  a  former  part  of  this  chapter,^  and  this 
clearly  proves  their  animal  nature,  as  do  their  modes  of 
motion,  &c.^  but  when  we  recollect  that  they  abound  in 
vegetable  infusions,  and  that  the.  more  vegetables  are 
macerated,  and  as  it  were  decomposed,  the  more  numerous 
are  the  animalcula  that  they  appear  to  give  out  when 

1  Ubi  supra,  ^  Ibid,  1 1 . 

^  Introd,  to  Comp.  Anat,  E.  Tr.  i.  45.  §  57. 
*  See  above,  p.  150.  *  Ibid,  153. 


40S  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

infased,  it  would  be  nothing  extraordinary  eidier  thai  th^ 
should  be  mistaken  for  moving  molecules,  or  numng  mole* 
eules  for  tiiem.  Farther  we  may  observe  a  kUid  of  analogy 
between  the  spherical  Infiisoriea  and  the  Molecules,  and 
between  the  fllifenn  ones  transversely  annulated  with  a 
vennicttlar  motion,  and  the  fibrils  of  Mr.  Brown« 

Another  law  of  natufe  seems  to  result  from,  the  experi- 
ments of  this  acute  natumlist— that  all  bodies  whether 
organized  or  inorganized,  are  formed,  as  fibrin  is  in  the 
animal  kingdom,  by  spherical  molecules  made,  as  it  were, 
into  necklaces,  .and  then  adhering  in  bundles,  and  that 
these  are  the  substratum  of  all  subetatice.  In  fluids  the 
spherules  are  not  united,  and  so  have  free  moticm  inter  se. 

Note  22,  p.  198. — Several  of  them,  for  it  t$'noi  ccmm 
to  them  aUf  token  touched  came  a  sensation  simUar  to  thai 
produced  by  the  sting  of  a  nettk.  Aristotle  mentioDS  a 
marine  animal,  under  the  name  of  Ac€Uephe,^  and  another, 
if  it  be  not  the  same,  under  that  of  Guide,*  both  of  which 
words,  according  to  the  Greek  lexicographers,  are  used  to 
designate  the  same  plant,  the  stinging-nettle^^  but  it 
seems  not  quite  certain  that,  in  either  case,  he  had  the 
stinging.  Gelatines  or  sea^nettles  in  his  eye.  Describiiig 
his  Acalephe,  he  says,  **  It'  adheres  to  the  rocks,  as  do 
some  of  the  shelKfisb,  but  sometimes  it  roves  at  large. 
It  has  no  shell,  but  the  whole  body  is  fleshy.  If  the  hand 
is  moved  to  it,  it  perceives,  seizes,  and  adheres  to  it,  like 
the  Polype,  by  means  of  its  tentacles,^  so  that  the  flesh 
swells.    It  has  its  mouth  in  the  middle,  and  the  rock 


*  Or.  AicaXi^^i;,  Aulus  Gellins  {NocL  Ait.  1.  iv.  c.  11.)  writes 
it  AxaXw^ri, 

2  Gr.  Kvi^fj.  ^  Heschius. explains  AKoXtf^  by  Kri&u. 

*  Gr.  wXiKTapai, 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  403 

seems  to  serve  it  for  a  shell :  if  it  meets  with  any  of  the 
small  fishes,  it  detains  them  in  the  same  way  that  it  does 
ti^e  hand*  Thus  whatever  edible  thing  it  meets  with,  it 
derours*  One  kind  of  them  is  at .  large,  and  deyoum 
whatever  sea-urchins/  or  coekles/  it  meets  with :  it  appears 
to  have  no  excrement,  in  this  respect  resembling  plants. 
There  are  Yioa  imdaot  Acalephe^;  one  smaller,  and  best 
adapted  for  the  table;  the. other  large  and  hard,  such  as 
are  produced  about  Chalcis.  In  the  winter  their  flesh  is 
firmr-4;hey  are  therefore  caught  and  eaten  at  that  season 
-^but  in  summer  they  dissolve,  for  they  become  watery, 
and  when  touched  they  immediately  are  so  damaged  as 
not  to  be'  removable.^  When  suffering  fiom  the  heat  they 
withdraw  within  the  rocks/' ^  And  again — '^  It  has  a 
mo^th  in  the  middle,  which  is  ehiefly  conspicuous  in  the 
large  ones ;  it  has,  like  the  bivdlve  shell-fish,  a  passage 
by  whidi  the  excrements  are  voided,  which  is  in  their 
tipper  surface :  like  them  too  it  has  the  fleshy  part 
within,  but  it  uses  the  rock  as  a  shelL''^ 

With  regard  to  his  Cnide,  of  which  he  treats  at  the 
same  time  with  the  sponges,  as  inhabiting  the  caverns 
of  the  roeks-^he  says,  '^  Of  the  Cnides  there  .are  two 
kinds,  one  in  the  hdlows,  which  adheres  to  the  rocks; 
others,  that  range  at  large,  are  met  with  kv  sogyooth  places,^ 
and  on  the  flat  shore/' ^ 

^  E')(ivoi<  *  Gr.  jcro^cc* 

'  The  word  I  have  rendered  watery  (/loSopoc)  means  properly 
without  hairs ;  but  fia^oM  is  used  by  Theophrastus  to  express 
moisture,  and  is  used  here  evidendy  in  a  similar  sense. 

*  Aristot.  Hist,  Anim,  1.  iv.  c.  6.  ^  Ibid.  1.  viii.  c.  2. 

^  In  the  text  it  is  ev  rots  fui^otri^  but  Atheneeus  reads  ey  rocc 
Xeioicy  which  better  agrees  with  the  context. 

7  Gr.  wXaTOfjuahffiv^t  may  perhaps  mean  fiat  rocks.  Aristot. 
Ibid.  I.  v-  c.  16. 


404  APPENDIX.      NOTES* 

It  seems  not  accordant  with  the  usual  accuracy  of  thin 
great  Philosopher  and  Naturalist,  where  he  is  treating 
formally  of  the  same  kind  of  object,  to  distinguish  it  by 
two  different  names,  nor  is  it  likely  that  he  would  have 
placed  them  in  separate  chapters,  as  if  they  were  distinct 
things.  He  would  surely  not  have  devoted  one  whole 
chapter  to  the  Tetkys  and  Acalephe,  and  another  to  the 
Cnide  and  Sparse,  unless  he  had  meant  they  should  be 
considered  as  distinct  animals.  Still  there  is  one  circum- 
stance that  seems  in  one  respect  to  indicate  their  identity, 
one  species  of  each  appears  to  be  usually  fixed,  and  the 
other  free*  But  this,  by  itself,  does  not  furnish  a  satis- 
factory proof.  With  regard  to  these  Acakphes  or  Cmdes 
'of  Aristotle  having  any  right  to  be  considered  as  belonging 
to  Linne's  genus  Medusa,  it  seems  chiefly  based  upon 
their  name  of  Nettles,  which  probably  was  given  them, 
from  a  faculty  they  possessed  of  stinging,  in  some  measure, 
like  a  nettle,  a  faculty  which  some  of  the  Medusas  are 
known  to  possess  in  a  remarkable  <^ree.^  But  Aristotle 
does  not  appear  to  intimate  that  fl^ich  an  effect  follows 
its  touch,  except  that  the  fixing  of  ks  tentacles  caused  a 
swelling.  If  either  of  his  species  is  entitled  to  be  con* 
sidered  as  a  Medusa  it  must  be  the  smaller;  the  larger  or 
fixed  one  appears  in  one  respect  to  resemble  the  Anq^hi- 
trite  magnifica  :<  they  are  stated  to  use  the  rock  to  which 
they  are  fixed  as  a  shell,  whence  it  should  seem  that  they 

^  The  stinging  property  of  many  such  Tentacula,  for  instSDcey 
ID  the  Medusa  and  Holotkuria,  likewise  deserves  notice.  This, 
which,  with  some  modifications,  also  exists  in  several  plants, 
appears  to  be  the  lowest  degree  of  the,  so  called,  electric  power 
in  several  fishes,  not  recarring  in  the  higher  ordere  of  animals, 
and  perhaps  comparable  as  regards  man,  to  the  magnetic  influ- 
ence alone.— >Carus.  J.  47.  §  60. 

^  Tubularia  magnifica,  Linn.  Tr,  v.  228.  t.  ix. 


APPENDIX.      NOTES.  405 

retire  occasionally  into  it,  like  the  above  animal.     With 

regard  to  his  second  species^  though  some  parts  of  his 

description  agree  with  the  common  jelly*fish,  yet  their 

devouring  Echini  and   Cockles  seems  to  indicate  some 

animal  furnished  with  a  more   powerful  apparatus  for 

makiug  their  way  to  the  animieLl  inhabiting  these  shells. 

Pliny  does  not  in  his  description  merely  copy  Aristotle; 

for  he  speaks  of  his  sea-nettle  as  producing  the  same 

efibct  as  the  vegetable  nettle.    Yet  he  mentions  them  and 

the  sponges  as  being  something  intermediate  between  the 

animal  and  the  plant,  which  can  scarcely  apply  to  our 

Jelly-fish.     It  seems,  I  think,  probable,  that  the  term  in 

question  was  employed  by  the  ancients,  to  designate  more 

than  one   group  of  animals,  and   more  particularly  the 

Tunicaries  of  Lamarck,  both  those  that  are  fixed  and  those 

that  are  free.     Aristotle's  fixed  species,  which  he  described 

as  retreating  into  the  rocks,  as  into  a  shell,  will  probably 

one  day  be  found  near  the  eastern  coast  of  the  Black  Sea. 

It  is  worth  while  also  to  inquire  whether  any  animal 

answering  the  description  of  Aristotle's  second  species  is 

still  eaten,  in  the  winter,  by  the  Greeks,  customs  of  that 

kind  seldom  changing. 

Note  23,  p.  240. — It  seems  to  me  most  probable  that 
they  are  the  animals,  and  not  the  pholads,  as  is  usually 
supposed,  which  the  Roman  naturalist  describes  under  the 
name  of  Dactyle.  Pliny  says  of  his  Dactyli  that  they  are 
so  called,  because  of  their  resemblance  to  the  human  nail  ;* 
in  the  Pholads  this  resemblance  is  very  slight,  but  in  the 
rasor-shells  and  some  tulip-shells  it  is  much  more  striking. 
He  also  observes  that  the  Dactylus  when  replete  with 
moisture  sparkles  in  the  mouth  of  the  eater,  and  that  the 

»  Hist,  Nat »  1.  ix^-e.  61. 


406  APPENDIX.      NOTES. 

falling  drops  also  emit  light.^  If  Pliny,  in  his  account  of 
this  creature,  was  really  speaking  of  the  pholad,  it  is  sin- 
gular he  should  not  mention  its  habit  of  boring  rocks. 

Note  24,  p.  262. — Their  byssut  has  long  been  celebrated, 
Jbr  it  is  mentioned  by  Aristotle.  Aristotle's  mode  of  ex- 
pression is  singular*  Ai  it  mwcu  Of^ai  ^vovrau  at  t8  &wt(th  ev 
roif  ofjLfmhcn  ncu  0o0ofahiriv.  He  says  also  when  they  are 
deprived  of  the  pinnophylax,  they  perish^*  Pliny,  who 
mostly  copies  Aristotle's  account,  does  not  notice  tfie 
byssus.' 

>  His  natura  in  tenebris  remoto  lumine,  alio  fulgere  claro;  et 
quanto  magis  humorem  habeant^  lucere  in  ore  mandentium, 
lucere  in  manibus,  atque  etiam  in  solo  et  veste  decidentibbs 
guttis.     Ibid. 

«  Hist.  Anim,  1.  v.  c.  16.  ^  ffist.  Nat.  1.  ix.  c.  42. 


END  OF  VOL.  1. 


%. 


C.  WNIITINGMAM,  TOOKS  OOCRT,  CHANCERY    LANK. 


\ 


J 


