2  X  - 


4^- 


LIBRA.RY 

OF  THE 

( 

Theological   Seminary, 

PRINCETON,    N.J. 

Case, .s?^.S??rr Diyision 

Shelf,     C>l<:Xo   (         Section. 

1 

BQoh, .-r. .f^.*. .-: 

■ 

! 
1 

THE 

WISDOM  of  GOD 

Manlfefted  in  the 


OR 


O        THE 


<^ 


CREATION. 


In    TWO    PARTS. 
VIZ. 

The  heavenly  Bodies,  Elements,  Meteors, 
FoffiJs,  Vegetables,  Animals,  (Beafts,  Birds,  Fiflies,  and 
Infects)  more  particularly  in  the  Body  of  the  Ea^rth,  its 
Figure,  Motion,  and  Confiftency  \  and  in  the  admirable 
Stru(51:L!re  of  the  Bodies  of  Man  and  other  Animals:  as 
alfo  in  their  Generation,  l^c.  With  Anfwers  to  fome 
Obje61:ions.  '* 


s/J</Upu^    C^/l  Jc/Uxy^ 


By  JOHN  RAT,  late  Fellow  of  the 
ROYAL    SOCIETY. 


The  Tenth  Edition,  Correc^ted. 

L  o  N  D  o  .N'J'^drK:^.  i^ 

Printed  by  Wi  L  L  i  a  m  I  n  nys  and  Richard  M  a  n  b  y, 
Printers  to  the  Royal  Society y  at  the  Wefl-End  of  St.  Paurs 

M  Dec  XXXV. 


'•■'•^^v:* 


T  O    T  H  E 
Much  honoured  and  truly  religious 

LAD   Y, 

THE 

Lady  Lettice  Wendy, 

o  F 

Wendy  in  Cambridgepire. 

Madam, 

WO  or  three Reafons  induce  me  to 
prefent  this  Difcourfe  to  your  Lady- 
{hip,  and  to  make  choice  of  you  for 
its  Patronefs.  .  Firji,  Becaufe  I  owe 
it  to  the  Liberality  of  your  honoured' 
Bcother  that  I  have  this  Leifure  to  write  any 
thing.  Secoitdly\  Becaufe  alfo  your  many  and 
fignal  Favours,  feeing  I  am  not  in  a  Capacity  to 
requite  them,  feem  to  exaft  from  me  at  leaft  a 

A  2  jpublick 


T^he  Epijile  Dedicatory.     .- 
publick  Acknowledgment,  which  fuch  a  Dedica- 
tion gives  me  an  Opportunity  to  make.     Thirdly^ 
Becaufe  of  fuch  kind  of  Writings  I  know  not 
where  to  chufe  a  more  able  Judge  or  more  can-; 
did  Reader.     I  am  fenfible  that  you  do  fo  much 
abhor  any  thing  that  looks  like  Flattery,   tha 
out  of  an  Excefs  of  Modefty,  you  cannot  pat 
ently  bear  the  hearing  of  your  own  juft  Commen- 
dations J  and  therefore  (hould  I  enlarge  upon  that 
Subjed:,,  Linow  I  ffcould  have  but  little  Thanks 
for  my  Pains.       ' 


Indeed  you  have  much  better  Motives  to  do 
well  than  the  Praife  of  Men,  the  Favour  of  God, 
Peace  of  Confcience,  the  Hope  and  Expectation 
of  a  future  Reward  oi  eternal  Happi7iej5',  znd 
therefore  I  had  rather  write  of  you  to  others,  to 
provoke  them  to  imitate  fo  excellent  an  Example, 
than  to  your  felf,  to  encourage  you  in  your  Chri- 
ftian  Courfe^  and  to  fortify  you  in  your  athletick 
Conflids  with  the  greateft  of  temporal  Evils, 
bodily  Pain  and  Anguifhj  tho'  I  do  not  know 
why  you  fliould  rejed:  any  Confideration  that 
may  conduce  to  fupport  you  under  fo  heavy 
Preffures,  and  of  fo  long  Continuance ;  of  whictv 
to  ingenious  Nature?,  true. HQnour,,  that  is,  the 
current  Teftimony  and  Approbation  of  good 
Men,  is  not  the  meaneft'.  No  lefs  Man  than 
St.  Augujlin  was  doubtful  whether  the  E^xtremity 
of  bodily  Pain  were  not  the  greateft > Evil  that 
human  Nature  was  capable  of  fuffei'ing  5  Nay 
(faith  "he)  /  was  Jbmetimes  compelVd  to'honjhit  to 
C'ornelius  Cdfus,  /to  7^  %\as:Jo\  neither  did  hi% 
%  -     K-  Jleajom 


T'he  Epijik  Dedicatory. 

Reafons  feem  to  me  abfurd^  we  being  compounded  of 
two  Parts,  Soul  and  Body,  of  which  the  frji  is  the 
better,  the  latter  the  worfer  -,  the  great  eft  Good  7nuft 
be  the  beft  thing  belonging  to  the  better  Fart,  that  is^ 
Wifdom  'y  and  the  great  eft  Evil  the  worft  thi?ig  i?2ci- 
dent  to  the  worfer  Part  (the  Body)  that  is^  Pain. 
Now,  tho'  I  know  not  whether  tliis  Reafon  be 
firm  and  conclufive,  yet  I  am  of  accord  with 
^im,  that  of  all  the  Evils  we  are  fenfible  of  in  this 
World  it  is  the  foreft,  the  moft  refolute  Patience 
being  baffled  and  proftrated  by  a  fierce  and  laft- 
ing  Paroxyfm  of  the  Gout,  or  Stone,  or  Cholick, 
and  compeird  to  yield  to  its  furious  Infults,  and 
confefs  itfelf  vanquifh'd,  the  Soul  being  unable 
to  divert,  or  to  do  any  thing  elfe  but  pore  upon 
the  Pain  j  and  therefore  thofe  Stoical  Vaunts  of 
their  wife  Man's  being  happy  mPhalaris^  Bull, 
I  utterly  rejecSt  and  explode,  as  vain  Rhodomon- 
tades  and  chimerical  Figments,  for  that  there 
never  was  fuch  a  wife  Man  among  them,  or  in- 
deed could  be ;  yet  do  I  not  fay  that  the  Patience 
of  a  good  Man  can  be  fo  far  conquered  by  the 
fliarpeft  and  fevereft  Torments  as  to  be  compell'd 
to  deny  or  blafpheme  God  or  his  Religion^  yea,  or 
fo  much  as  to  complain  of  his  Injuftice;  tho' 
perchance  he  may  be  brought  with  fob  to  curfe 
his  Day,  yet  not  curfe  his  God,  as  his  Wife  tempt- 
ed him  to  do. 

Now^that  the  great  kydv6^Ti\^  and  B^S<l/T^i^, 
the  moft  juft  Judge  and  Rewarder,  would  be 
pleased  fo  to  qualify  and  mitigate  your  Sufferings, 

as 


Tie  Eptjlle  Dedicatory. 

as  not  to  exceed  the  Meafure  of  your  Strength  and 
Patience^  or  elfe  arm  you  with  fuch  an  high  de- 
gree of  Chriftian  Fortitude,  as  to  be  able  to  grap- 
ple with  the  moft  Extreme ;  and  when  you  have 
finifli'd  your  Courfe  in  this  World,  grant  you  a 
placid  and  eafy  Paffage  out  of  it,  and  dignify 
you  as  one  of  his  Vidors,  with  a  Crown  of  eter- 
nal Glory  and  Felicity,  is  the  Prayer  of. 


MA  DA  My 


Tour  LADYSHIP'S 


Mojl  devoted  in  all  Service^ 


JOHN  RAY. 


THE 


PREFACE. 


iV"  all  Jges  wherein  Learning  hath 
jioiaij},)  d^  Complaint  hath  been  made 
of  the  Itch  of  Writings  and  the  MuU 
titude  of  worthlefs  Books  wherewith 
importunate  Scriblers  have  pejlerd 
the  World:  Scribimus  indoflii  do- 

Tenet  infanabile  multos  fcri- 

bendi  cacoethes.     /  ajn  fenfble  that  this  TraBate 


dtique :  And 


may  likely  incur  the  Cenfure  of  a  fuperfuous  Piece^ 
and^myfelf  the  Blame  of  giving  the  Reader  unnecef 
fary  Trouble ^  there  having  been  fo  much  fo  well  writ- 
ten of  this  SuhjeB  by  the  mofl  learned  Men  of  our 
7ime,  Dr.  Moore,  Dr.  Cud  worth ,  Dr.  Stilling- 
^fleet,  late  Bifj/)p  of  Worctdtr,  Dr,  Parker,  late  of 
Oxen ;  and,  to  name  no  more,  the  honourable  Robert 
Boyle  Efq-,  fo  that  it  will  fieedfome  Apology,  -.  Firft 
therefore  in  Excufe  of  it  1  plead,  that  there  are  in 
it  fome  Conf.  derations  new  and  untouched  by  others  -, 
wherein  i/-^  I  be  mifiaken,  I  alle^ge^  Secondly,  That 

the 


The     PREFACE. 

the  Manner  of  Delivery  and  'Exprejjion  may  he  more 
fait  able  tofome  Mens  Apprehenjion,  andfacil  to  their 
TJnderJlandi7tgs,  If  that  will  not  hold^  I  pretejid^ 
Thirdly,  T^hat  all  the  Particulars  contain  d  in  this 
Book  cannot  be  found  in  a7iy  one  Piece  known  to  mCy 
but  lie  fcatterd  and  difpers'd  in  many^  and  fo  this 
tnayferve  to  relieve  thofe  fajiidious  Readers  that  are 
not  willing  to  take  the  Pains  to  fear  ch  them  out-, 
and  pofjibly  there  may  be  fome  whofe  Ability  (what- 
ever  their  Indufiry  might  be)  will  not  ferve  them  to 
pur  chafe  ^  nor  their  Opportunity  to  borrow  thofe 
Books^  who  yet  may  fpare  Money  enough  to  buy  fo  in- 
confiderable  a  'Trifle.  If  none  of  thefe  Excufes  fuffice 
to  acquit  me  of  Blame ^  and  remove  all  Prejudice^  I 
have  two  farther  Reafons  to  offer ^  which  I  think 
will  reach  home^  andju/lify  this  Undertaking.  Firft, 
That  all  Men  who  prefume  to  write^  at  leafi  whofe 
Writijtgs  the  Printers  will  venture  to  puhlifh^  are 
of  fome  Note  in  the  World -^^  and  where  they  doy 
cr  have  livd  and  convers'd^  have  fome  Sphere  of 
Friends  and  Acquaintance^  that  know  and  efieejn 
them^  who  it  is  likely  will  buy  any  Book  they  fjall 
write  for  the  Author  s  Sake,  who  otherwije  would 
have  read  none  of  that  SubjeB,  tbo  ten  times  better -, 
and  fo  the  Book,  however  inferior  to  what  have 
been  already  publifod,'  may  happen  to  do  much 
Good.  Secondly,  By  Virtue  of  my  FunBion  I 
fufpeB  my  felf  to  be  obligd  to  write  fomething 
in  Divinity,  having  written  fo  much  on  other 
SubjeBs ',  for  being  not  permitted  to  ferve  the 
Church  with  my  Tongue  in  Preaching,  I  know 
not  but  it  may  be  my  Duty  to  ferve  it  with  my 

Hand 


The     PREFACE. 

Hand  by  Writing :  And  I  have  made  choice  of  this 
Subject^  as  thinking  myjelf  hejl  qualify d  to  treat  of 
it.  If  what  I  have  now  written  Jh all  find  fo  fa-- 
vourable  Acceptance  as  to  encourage  me  to  proceed^ 
God  granting  Life  and  Health  the  Reader  may  ex- 
pe5l  more  5  ifotherwife^  I  ?7mfi  be  content  to  be  laid 
a  fide  as  ufelefs^  and  fatisfy  myjelf  in  having  made 
this  Experiment, 

^  As  J  or  this  Difcourfe^  I  have  been  careful  to  ad^ 
mit  nothing  for  Matter  of  FaB  or  Experime?it  but 
what  is  undoubtedly  true,  left  I  Jhould  build  upon  a 
fandy  and  ruinous  Foundation  ;  and  by  the  Admix^ 
ture  of  what  is  falfe,  render  that  which  is  truefuf 
picious, 

I  might  have  added  many  more  Particulars  j  72ay^ 
my  T'ext  warrants  me  to  run  over  all  the  vifible 
Works  of  God  in  particular,  and  to  trace  the  Foot-- 
fieps  of  his  Wifdom  in  the  Compcfition,  Order,  Har^ 
mony,  and  Ufes  of  every  one  of  them,  as  well  as  of 
thofe  that  I  have  feleBed,  But,  Firft,  this  would 
be  a  Task  far  trajfcendhig  my  Skill  and  Abilities ; 
nay,  the  joint  Skill  and  Fndeavours  of  all  Men  now 
living,  or  that  fjall  live  after  a  t hot f and  Ages ^ 
foould  the  World  laftfo  long.  For  no  Man  can  find . 
out  the  Work  that  God  maketh  from  the  Begin- 
ning to  the  End,  Ecclef  iii.  1 1.  Secondly,  I  was 
willing  to  confult  the  Infirmity  of  the  Reader,  or  in- 
deed  of  Marikiiid  in  ge?ieral  -,  which,  after  a  fbort 
Confinement  to  one  fort  of  Dijh^  is  apt  to  loath  it,  thd 
never  fo  wholfome,  and  which  at  firft  was  moft  plea- 
faiit  ajid  acceptable-,  and  fo  to  moderate  my  Dif 
courfe,  as  to  make  an  end  of  writing  before  I  might 
prefume  he  ftjould  be  quite  tird  with  reading, 

B  ^  IJhall 


The     PREFACE. 

T  fkall  now  add  a  Word  or  two  concerning  the 
Vfcfidnefs  of  the  Argument^  or  Matter  of  this  Dif- 
courjcy  and  the  reafon  I  had  to  make  choice  of  it^  be^ 
Jidei  "what  I  have  already  offer  d, 

Firft,  T^he  Belief  of  a  Deity  being  the  Foundation 
of  all  Religion  (Religion  being  nothing  but  a  devout 
worjljipping  of  God^  or  an  Inclination  of  Mind  to 
ferve  and  worfhip  him)  for  he  that  cometh  to  God 
muft  believe  that  he  is  God,  it  is  a  Matter  of  the 
highejl  Concernment  to  be  firmly  fettled  and  efia- 
blijh'd  in  a  full  Perfiiafion  of  this  main  Point  y  now 
this  mujl  be  demonfirated  by  Arguments  drawn  from 
the  Light  of  Nature  and  Works  of  the  Creation  \  for 
as  all  other  Sciences^  fo  Divinity^  proves  not^  but 
fuppofes  its  SubjeBsy  taking  it  for  granted^  that  by 
natural  Light  Men  are  fufficiently  convincd  of  the 
Being  of  a  Deity ;  there  are  indeed  fupernatural 
T>emonftratio7ts  of  this  fundamental  Truths  but  not 
common  to  all  Perfons  or  I'imes^  and  Jo  liable  to  Ca- 
vil  and  'Exception  by  atheijiical  Perfons^  as  inward . 
Illuminations  of  Mindy  a  Spirit  of  Prophecy ^  and 
foretelling  future  Contingent s^  illujtrious  Miracles, 
and  the  like  ^  but  thefe  Proofs^  taken  from  EffeBs 
and  OperatioJiSy  expos d  to  every  Mans  VieWy  not 
to  be  denyd  or  quejtiond  by  any,  are  moji  effectual 
to  convince  all  that  deny  or  doubt  of  it ;  neither  are 
they  only  conviBive  of  the  great  eft  and  fubtleft  Ad- 
verfarieSy  but  intelligible  alfo  to  the  meanefi  Capa- 
cities y  for  you  may  hear  illiterate  PerfonSy  cj  the 
loweft  Rank  of  the  Commonalty y  affirming^  that  they 
need  no  Proof  of  the  Being  of  a  God,  for  that  every 
Pile  of  Graf  or  Ear  of  Cornfufficiently  proves  that ; 
for ^  fay  tbey^  all  the  Men  of  the  World  cannot  make 
9  fich 


The     PREFACE. 

fuch  a  thing  as  one  ofthefe ;  and  if  they  cannot  do  it^ 
who  can  or  did  make  it  but  God?  To  tell  them  that 
it  made  itfelf^  or  fprung  up  by  chance^  would  be  as 
ridiculous  as  to  tell  the  great eji  Philojbpher  fo. 

Secondly,  The  Particulars  of  this  Difcourfe ferve 
not  only  to  de^nonjlrate  the  Being  of  a  'Deity ^  but  alfa 
to  illiijlrate  fome  of  his  principal  Attributes ;  aSy 
namely^  his  infinite  Power  a7id  Wifdom\  the  vafl 
*  Multitude  of  Creatures^  and  thofe  7iot  only  fmall^  but 
imme?ifely  greats  the  Sun  arid  Moon^  and  all  the  hea-- 
'vejily  Hofi^  are  EffeBs  and  Proofs  of  his  Almighty 
Power,  The  Heavens  declare  the  Glory  of  God^ 
and  the  Firmament  iheweth  his  Handy-work, 
PfaL  xix.  I.  The  admirable  Co7itrivance  of  all  and 
each  of  them  y  the  adapting  all  the  Parts  of  Animah 
to  their  feveral  Ufes^  the  Provifion  that  is  made  for 
their  Suftenance^  which  is  often  taken  notice  of  in 
Scripture,  Pfal.  cxlv.  15,  16.  The  Eyes  of  all 
wait  upon  thee:  thou  giveft  them  their  meat  in 
due  feafon.  Thou  opened  thy  hand,  and  fatisfieft 
the  deiire  of  every  living  thing.  Matth.  vi.  26. 
Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air,  for  they  fow  not,  nei- 
ther do  they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns,  yet  your 
heavenly  Father  feedeth  them.  Pfil-  cxlvii.  9. 
He  giveth  to  the  beaft  his  food,  and  to  the  young 
Ravens  when  they  cry.  And  lafily^  their  ??mtual 
Subferviency  to  each  others  and  imani?HOus  confpiring 
to  promote  and  carry  on  the  Publick  Good^  are  e-vt- 
de?2t  Demonft  rat  ions  cf  his  Sovereign  IVifdom. 

Laft!y,  They  few e  to  fiir  up  and  increafe  in  us 
the  Afi-ecl ions  a?id  Habits  of  Adtniration^  Hu?ni!ityy 
and  Gratitude.  Pfal,  viii.  3.  When  I  confider 
the  heavens,  the  work  of  thy  fin§ers>  the  moon 

B  z  and 


the     P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

'And  the  ftars  which  thou  haft  ordain'd  :  What  U 
jnan  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him,  or  the  fon  of 
man  that  thou  viliteft  him  ?  j^nd  to  thefe  Furpojh 
the  holy  Pfalmijl  is  njery  frequent  in  the  Enumera- 
tion and  Conjideration  of  thefe  Works,  u^hich  may 
warrant  me  doing  the  like^  andjuftify  the  denonn- 
nating  fuch  a  Difcourfe  as  this  rather  theological 
than  philofophicaL 

\Notey  That  by  the  Works  of  the  Creation  in 
the  Title,  I  mean  the  Works  created  by  God  at 
firft,  and  by  him  conferv'd  to  this  Day  in  the 
fame  State  and  Condition  in  which  they  were  at 
firft  made;  for  Confervation  (according  to  the 
Judgment  both  of  Philofophers  and  Divines)  is  a 
continud  Creation^ 


T  H  E 


s^< 


mj^ 


THE 

CONTENTS 


O  F    T  H  E 


FIRST    PART. 


e232K332S232--S2(K;S2K2SD3aiCS2''3C'SCS0 


THE  Multitude  of  Creatures  an  Argument  of  the  Wifdom  and 
Power  of  God,  Page  i8.  and  26. 

That  the  fixed  Stars  are  innumerable,  agreed  on  all  Sides,  as  'well  as 
by  fuch  as  embrace  the  new  Hypothefis. 

That  there  are  fo  many  Suns  placed  at  unequal  Difiances,  and  each 
having  its  Planets  moving  about  it,  furnifly'd  with  their  Inhabit" 
tants,  like  the  Earth ;  as  by  thofe  that  adhere  to  the  old,  that  they 
are  all  fituate  in  the  fame  fpherical  Superficies.  p.  18,  19,  20. 

A  Guefs  at  the  Number  of  terrejirial  Bodies.  1 .  Inanimate,  as  Stones, 
Earths,  concrete  and  inconcrete  Juices,  Metals  and  Minerals.  ■  2. 
Animals,  Birds,  Beafis ,  Fijhes  and  Infers.  3.  Plants,  Herbs , 
and  Trees.  p-  21,  22,   23,  24. 

Working  the  fame  Effect  by  divers  Means  and  Infiruments,  an  Argu- 
ment of  Wifdom  ;  and  that  God  doth  this  in  the  Works  of  the  Cre-* 
ation,  proved  by  feveral  Examples.    .  p.  25,  26,  27,  28. 

That  the  material  Works  of  God  are  wifely  contrived  and  adapted  to 
Ends  both  general  and  particular.  p-  29,  30< 

The  Ariiloteljan  Hypothefis ,  That  the  World  was  (O-eternal  with 
God,  condemned,  "  P-  3o>  i'* 


Bj 


Tbi 


The    CONTENTS. 

^he  Epicurean  Hypothefis,  7hat  the  World  was  made  by  a  eafual 
Concurrence  and  Cohejton  of  Atoms ^  rejeBed^  31,  32,  33.  T^heir 
Declination  of  Atoms  jujily  deride dj  and  their  whole  Hypothefis 
ingenioujly  confuted  by  Cicero.  Page  34,  35,  36,  37. 

^e  Cartefian  Hypothefis,  That  fuppojing  God  had  only  created  Mat- 
ter, divided  it  into  a  certain  Number  of  Parts y  and  put  it  into 
Motion,  according  to  afezv  Laws,  it  would  of  itfelf  have  produced 
the  World  without  any  more  ado,  confuted  in  Dr.  CudworthV 
Words.  P-  37>  &^c.  to  46. 

pes  Cartes  his  AJfertion,  That  the  Ends  of  God  in  any  of  his  Works 
are  equally  undifcoveid  by  us,  cenfur  d  and  reproved. 

p.  38,  39,  40,  41. 

His  Opinion  concerning  the  Caufe  of  the  Motion  of  the  Heart. 

p.  45,  46,  47. 

^e  honourable  Mr.  BoylcV  Hypothefis  confder'd,  and  pleaded  ^« 
gainjl.  p.  48,  49,  50. 

The  Author^s  Miflake  concerning  the  Hypothefis  of  Mr.  Boyle,  ac- 
knozvled^d.  p-  50. 

The  Parts  of  the  Body  forin^d  and  fituated  contrary  to  the  Laws  of  the 
fpecifick  Gravity.  P-  5 1  ♦ 

\4  plajiick  Nature  under  God,  fuperintending  and  e feeing  natural 
Produ5lions.  p.  52,  53. 

Their  Opinion  that  hold  the  Souls  of  Brutes  to  be  material,  and  the 
whole  animal  Body  and  Soul  to  be  a  mere  Machine,  not  agreeable  to 
ihe  general  Senfe  of  Mankind.  p.  54,  55,  56. 

Of  the  vifible  Works  of  God,  and  their  Diviflon,  p.  $"],  58.  The 
atomick  Hypothefis  approved.  p.  59. 

^be  Works  of  Nature  far  more  exquijitely  formed  than  the  Works  of 
Art.  p.  59,  60. 

Hhe  various  Species  of  inanimate  Bodies  to  be  attributed  to  the  divers 
Figures  of  their  Principles,  or  minute  component  Particles,  p.  60. 
That  thefe  Principles  are  naturally  indivifible,  proved,  ibid.  They 
are  not  very  nufnerous.       .  p.  61. 

Of  the  heavenly  Bodies,  p.  61.  That  the  whole  Vnlverfe  is  divided 
into  two  Sorts  of  Bodies,  viz.  thin  and  fluid,  denfe  and  confiflent, 
ibid.  That  this  laji  Sort  are  endtCd  zvith  a  twofold  Power,  i .  Of 
Gravity.  2.  Of  circular  Motion,  and  zvhy,  p.  62.  The  heavenly 
Bodies  7nov''d  in  the  mojl  regular,  facil,  and  convenient  manner. 

p.  63,  64. 

f>f  the  Sun ,  his  Ufes ,  and  the  Co?ivenience  of  his  Situation  and 
Motion.  p.  65. 

Of  the  Moon,  and  its  Ufes.  p.  66. 

Of  the  reft  of  the  Planets,  and  fixed  Stars ;  the  Regularity  and  Con- 

jlancy  of  their  Motions  ;  zobence  Cicero  rationally  infers,  that  they 

are  govertid  by  Reafon,  p.  67. 

'^clipjes 


The    C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 

Eclipfes    ufeful   to  fettle  Chronology  ^    and    determine  Longitudes, 

Page  68. 

Of  terreflrial  inanimate  fimple  Bodies ,  as  Elements ,  commonly  fa 
called:  i.  Fire,  its  various  Ufes  i  p.  69,  70.  Of  Air,  its  JJfs 
and  Neceffity  for  breathing  to  all  Sorts  of  Animals,  aquatick  as 
well  as  t err ef  rial;  nay,  in  a  fort  to  Plants  themfelves,  p.  71,  72, 
73.     ne  Effects  and  Ufes  of  its  Gravity  and  elaflick  ^ality, 

P-  72      7? 

That  the  Foetus  in  the  Womb  hath  a  kind  ofRefpiration,  and  whence 
it  receives  the  Air.  P-  73»  74,  75. 

That  the  Air  infinuates  itfelf  into  the  Water  for  the  Refpiration  ef 
Fifhes,  p.  76.  and  even  into  fubterraneous  Waters,  whence  it  clears 

*  the  Mines  of  Da?nps,  p.  76,  yj.  A  plafiick  Nature  necejfary  for 
putting  the  Diaphragm  and  Mufcles  for  Refpiration  into  motion  at 

firft-  p.  77. 

Of  Water,  its  Ufes,  p.  78,  Of  the  Sea,  and  its  Tides,  p.  79.  An 
ObjeBion  concerning  the  Needlefnefs  of  fo  much  Sea,  of  710  Ufe  to 
Mankind ,  anfwer  d ;  and  the  Wifdom  of  God  in  thus  unequally 
dividing  Sea  and  Land,  manifefled  and  ajferted,  p.  80,  8 1 .  The 
XJfe  of  Floods.  p.  82,  83. 

That  the  Winds  bring  up  more  Vapours  from  the  Sea  than  they  carry 
down  thither.  p.  84,  8  c. 

That  the  Motion  of  the  Water  levels  the  Bottom  of  the  Sea,  p.  8r, 
The  reafon  why  the  Sea  Plants  grow  for  the  mofi  part  flat,  like  a 
Fan,  and  none  in  the  great  Depths.  p.  86. 

Of  Springs  and  Rivers,  Baths  and  mineral  Waters.  Simple  Water 
nourifheth  not.  P-  87. 

Of  the  Earth,  its  Ufes  and  Differences.  ibj^, 

Cy  Meteors,  or  Bodies' imperfeStly  mix'd.  And,  \.  Of  Rain,  p.  88. 
2.  Of  Wind,  and  its  various  Ufes.  p,  oq^ 

Of  tnanirnate  mix'd  Bodies.  \.  Stones,  their  ^talities  and  Ufes, 
p.-  91 »  92»  93-  Particularly  of  the  Loadftone ,  its  admirable 
Phcenomejia,  Effe^s  and  Ufes,  p.  95.  2.  Metals,  their  various 
Ufes,  of  great  bnportance  to  Mankind,  as  Iron,  without  which  we 
could  have  had  nothing  of  Culture  or  Civility  ;  Gold  and  Silver  for 
the  coining  of  Money,  which  how  many  ways  ufeful,  is  fhezvn  out 
of  Dr.  Cockburn'j  Effays.  p.  ^6,  97. 

That  the  minute  component  Particles  of  Bodies  are  naturally  indivi- 
fible,  proved.  p.  cj8,  99. 

0/ Vegetables  or  Plants,  their  Stature  and  Magnitude,  Figure,  Shape, 
and  Site  of  Leaves,  Flowers,  and  Fruits,  and  their  Part s;  all  deter- 
mind,  as  alfo  their  Age  and  Duration,  p.  100,  101.  The  admi- 
rable explication  of  the  feminal  Plants,  p.  loi ,  102.  The  Ufes 
of  the  feveral  Parts  of  Plants,  Roots,  Fibres,  Vejels,  Barks  and 
Leaves y  p.  103,  104.    -The  Beauty  and  Elegancy  of  the  Leaves^ 

B  4  Flowers j^ 


The    C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 

flow  its,  and  Fruits  of  Plants^  p.  105.     That  there  is  fuel  a  thing 
as  Beauty  and  Cornel inefs  of  Proportion,  proved.  Page  io6. 

TheUfes  of  Flowers,  p.  107.  Of  Seeds ^  and  their  Teguments,  and 
Obfervations  concerning  them,  p.  108,  109.  Their  lajiing  Vita- 
lity or  Fcecundity,  p.  no.  The  pappons  Plumage  of  Seeds,  ibid. 
7'he  Tendrels  and  Prickles  of  Plants,  of  what  Ufe.  p.  1 1 1 . 

7bat  Wheat,  the  beji  of  all  Grains,  is  patient  both  of  Heat  and  Cold, 
and  fear  ce  refufeth  any  Climate,  and  that  fear  ce  any  Grain  is  more 
fruitful.  p.  112. 

Of  the  Signatures  of  Plants,  p.  113. 

Of  Animals,  the  Provifion  that  is  made  for  the  Continuance  of  Spe- 
cies, p.  114.  That  Females  have  within  them  from  the  beginning 
the  Seeds  of  ail  the  Young  they  pall  ever  bring  forth,  p.  1 1 5-  -/in 
Obfervation  of  Q'lctro's  about  multiparous  Creatures,  p.  116.  Why 
Birds  lay  Eggs,  ibid.  Of  zvhat  Ufe  the  Tolk  of  the  Egg  is  to  the 
Chicken,  p.  117. 

Birds  that  cannot  number,  yet  omit  not  any  one  of  their  Young  in  feed- 
^^g  (f  them,  p.  117.  Tho'  they  cannot  number,  yet  that  they  can 
diftinguif?  many  from  fezv,  proij'd,  p.  118.  The  fpeedy  Growth  of 
the  'young  Birds  in  the  Neft,  p.  119.  The  Procefs  of  building  their 
Nejis,  and  Incubation,  p.  120.  Feeding,  breeding,  and  defending 
their  Young,  and  the  admirable  STcf>  w,  ibid.  The  due  nufnerical 
Proportion  between  Males  and  Females  in  all  Kinds  of  Animals  kept 
np  conflantly,  p.  121.  The  Conveniency  of  the  Time  of  the  Year  ^ 
when  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Animals  are  brought  forth,  p.  122.  Why 
Birds  fwallozu  Pebble-Stoves,  p.  1 30.  The  Provifion  of  Nature  for 
keeping  ofBirds-Nefis  clean,  p.  132,133.  Various  firange  InfiinRs 
cf  Animals,  p.  125,  126,  127,  &c.  as,  that  Animals  fhould  knozu 
-where  their  natural  Weapons  are  fituate,  and  how  to  make  ufe  of 
them  I  that  the  Weak  and  Timorous  fhould  be  made  fzvift  of  Foot  or 
IVing  for  Flight ;  that  they  fljould  naturally  know  their  Enemies, 
end  fuch  as  prey  upon  them,  tho'  they  had  never  feen  them  before  ; 
that  as  foon  as  they  are  brought  forth  they  fhould  knozv  their  proper 
Food ',  that  Ducklings,  tho'  led  by  a  Hen,  fo  foon  as  they  fee  Water 
fhould  venture  into  it,  the  Hen  in  vain  endeavouring  to  hinder  or 
reclaim  them  ;  that  Birds  of  the  fame  Kind  fhould  make  Nefts  ex- 
actly aliki,  wherefoever  bred,  and  tho^  they  had  never  feen  a  Nefi 
made. 

7he  Migration  of  Birds  from  one  Country  to  another ,  a  f  range  and 
unaccountable  Aa ion,  p.  128. 

Thi 


The     CONTENTS. 

Ihe  zvonderful  Art  ohfevjnhle  in  the  ConflruBion^  Situation,  and  Tt- 
gure  of  the  Cells  in  Honcy-Combsy  p.  132,  133,  134.  ^hat  Bees 
and  other  Animals  lay  up  in  Jlorc^  either  for  the  Food  of  their  Toungy 
or  their  own  Winter  Frovifon.  Page  135. 

The  Frovifion  that  is  made  for  the  F refer-:' ation  and  Security  of  zveak 
and  timorous  Creatures,  and  for  the  diminijhing  of  the  rapacious. 

p.  136,   137,  133. 

Tbe  Fitnefs  of  the  Parts  of  the  Bodies  of  Animals  to  every  one'^s  Nature 
and  manner  of  living y  injlanc^d  in.  i.  ne  Szuine^  p.  139,  &c. 
2.  The  Mole ,  p.  141.  3.  The  Tamnndua,  or  Ant -Bear  y  p.  142. 
4.  The  Chamselion,  p.  143.  5.  77?^  whole  Genus  ^Wood-peckers, 
ijpid.      6.  Swallows,  p.  144.      7.  Doukers  or  Loons,       p.  145, 

In  Birds  all  the  Members  are  fitted  for  the  life  of  flying,  p.  146,  &o 
The  Ufe  of  the  Tail  in  Birds.  p.  1 47. 

^^he  Bodies  ofFiJhes  mojl  conveniently  forrnd  and  provided  for  the  Ufe 
of  fzuimming  y  p.  150,  151.  And  particularly  thofe  of  cetaceous 
FiJheSy  for  the  Refpiration,  and  preferving  their  natural  Heat, 
p    151,  152.     And  of  amphibious  Creatures.  ibid. 

The  fitting  of  the  Farts  of  Animals  one  to  another y  viz.  the  Genitals 
of  the  Sexes y  p.  153.  The  Nipples  of  the  Faps  to  the  Mouth  and 
Organs  of  Su  ft  ion,  ibid.  The  admirable  Stru5lure  of  the  Breajls  or 
PapSy  for  the  preparing  and  feparatingy  the  cofitaining  and  retain- 
ing of  the  Milky  that  it  doth  not  flow  out  without  Frejfure  or 
Suction .  p.  154. 

Several  Obfervations  (?/*Ariflotle'i  relating  to  the  Fitnefs  of  the  Parts 
to  the  Creatures  Nature  and  manner  of  living,  and  to  their  refpe- 
aive  Ufes.  p.  155,  156. 

Another  remarkable  Inftancey  in  proportioning  the  Length  of  the  Necks 
to  that  of  Legs  in  Animalsy  p.  157,  158.  Of  the  Aponeurofis  in 
the  Necky  why  given  to  moft  ^adrupeds,  and  not  to  Many  p.  157. 
That  fome  Birds  have  but  Jhort  LegSy  and  yet  long  Necks ;  and 
why,  p.  158.  That  this  Infiance  cannot  be  accounted  for  by 
Athcijls.  ibid. 

The  various  Kinds  of  Voices  the  fame  Animal  ufes  on  divers  Occafions, 
and  to  divers  Purpofes,  argumentative  of  Providence  and  Council 
in  conferring  them  upon  it,  being  fo  extrea?nly  ufeful  and  fervice^ 
able  to  the  Creature.  p.  159. 

An  Objection  again/}  the  Ufe  of  fever  a  I  Bodies  I  have  infianc''d  in  re- 
lating to  Man,  anfzver'd,  p.  i6o.  A  Difourfe  in  the  P erf  on  of 
Almighty  Qod  to  Man.  p.  161,  162,  &c. 

The  incredible  Smallnefs  and  Subtlcnefs  of  fome  Animalcule  s,  an  Argu- 
ment and  Proof  vf  the  admirable  Art  of  the  Creator,    p.  166,  167. 

Pralfical 


The     C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 

"PraBical  Inferences  from  the  precedent  Difcourfe,  wherein  it  is  fhewn^ 
that  the  World  was  in  fome  Senfe  made  for  Man,  yet  not  fo  as  to 
have  710  other  End  or  Vfe  of  its  Creation  but  to  ferve  him,  p.  169, 
1 70,  &c.  The  Contemplation  and  Confideration  of  the  Works  of 
Cod  may  probably  be  fome  Part  of  our  Employment  in  Heaven^ 

Page  171,  172. 

^he  Sun,  Moon,  Stars,  Sec.  are  called  upon  to  praife  God,  which  they 
can  do  no  otherwife,  than  by  affording  Man,  and  other  intelligent 
Being\  Matter  or  Subject  of  praifing  him ;  and  therefore  Men  and 
Angels  are  called  upon  to  confider  thofe  great  EffeBs  of  the  divine 
Tower,  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs,  and  to  give  God  the  Praife  and 
Glory  due  to  him  for  them,  p.  178,  179,  180,  &c.  T:hat  God 
dotb,  and  may  jujily  intend  and  deftgn  his  own  Glory. 

p.  182,  183,  184,  185, 


T  II  E 


THE 

CONTENTS 

O  F     T  H  E 

SECOND  PART. 

I./^  F  the  whole  Body  of  the  Earth  \  and  fir Jl  of  its  Figure,  which 
\_)  is  demonjlrated  to  be  fpherical.  Page  190,   191. 

*Ihe  Conveniences  of  this  Figure  Jhewn  for  Union  of  Parts y  Strength, 
CoTivenience  of  Habitation,  and  circular  Motion,  upon  its  own  Poles ^ 

p.  191,  192,  193. 

II.  Of  its  Motion,  both  diurnal  upon  its  own  Poles,  and  annual  in 
the  Ecliptick ;  and  both  thefe  fhewn  to  be  rational,  and  not  dijjonanf 
to  Scripture,  p.  193,  194,  &c.  The  prefent  Direction  and  conftant 
Parallelifm  of  its  Axis  tu  itfelf,  fiezvn  to  be  moft  convenient  for  the 
Inhabitants  of  the  Earth,  by  the  Inconvenience  of  any  different  Po- 
fit  ion,  p.  196,  197,  198,  &c.  That  the  Torrid  Zone  is  habitable, 
and  Jlor'd  with  great  Multitudes  of  Men  and  other  Animals,  con- 
trary to  the  Opinion  of  fome  of  the  Ancients,  p.  200.  Neither  are 
the  Heats  there  prejudicial  to  the  Longevity  of  Men,  ibid.  A  Di- 
grejjion,  to  prove  that  the  Lives  of  Men  are  longeji  in  the  hottefi 
Countries,  p.  201,  202-  That  it  zuould  not  be  more  convenient  for 
the  Inhabitants  of  the  Earth  if  the  Tropicks  food  at  a  greater  di- 
fiance,  proved,  p.  204,  205.  A  very  confiderable,  and  heretofore 
ujiobfervd  Convenience  of  this  Inclination  of  the  Earths  Axi?, 
which  Mr.  Keill  affords  us.  p.  203,  204. 

Of  the  Ufefulnefs  of  the  prefent  Figure y  Conftitution,  and  Confifiency 
of  the  feveral  Parts  of  this  terraqueous  Globe.      p.  205,  20b,  207. 

An  Enu?nerativn  of  fome  Plants  which  afford  almoji  whatever  is  ne- 
ceffary  for  human  Life.  p.  208,  209,  210,  &c. 

Pla?its  having  a  kind  of  Cijlerns  or  Bafons  forni'd  of  their  Leaves 
compacted  together y  for  the  containing  and  preferving  of  Water, 
Scq:  p.  212. 

Of 


The    C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 

Of  Mountains,  and  their  Ufes,  Pa^e  215.  to  220. 

II.  The  Wifdom  of  God  dijcover'd  in  the  Stru^ure  of  the  Bodies  ef 

Men  and  other  Animals. 
"Eleven  general  Obfervations  demonf  rating  this  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs 

of  God  in  forming  our  Bodies. 

1.  The  ereB  Foflure  of  the  Body  of  Man,  p.  221.  commodious,  [i.} 
For  the  fujlaining  of  the  Head,  p.  222.  [2.]  For  ProfpeSt,  ibid. 
[3.]  For  walking  and  uftng  our  Hands,  p.  223,  224.  That  this 
EreSlion  of  the  Body  zuas  intended  by  Nature,  proved  by  fever  at 
Arguments,  and  particularly  by  the  faftcning  the  Cone  of  the  Heart 
to  the  Midriff',  of  -which  an  Account  is  given  out  of  Dr.  TyfonV 
Anatomy  of  the  Orang-Outang.  p.  225,  226. 

2.  In  that  there  is  nothing  deficient  or  redundant  in  the  Body  of 
Man,  p.  227.  J  notable  Story  of  a  Man^s  giving  Suck  to- a  young 
Child,  well  attefted.  ibid. 

3.  The  Parts  of  the  Body  mof  conveniently  fituate,  for  Ufe,  for  Or- 
nament,  and  for  mutual  Afftjiance.  p.  229,  230. 

4.  Ample  Provifion  made  for  the  Defence  and  Security  of  the  principal 
Parts,  Heart,  Brain,  and  Lungs.  p.  231,  232,  233,. 

5.  Abundant  Provifion  made  againft  evil  Accidents  and  Inconveni- 
ences, p.  234,  235. 

^ome  Obfervations  concerning  Sleep,  p.  235,  236. 

^hat  the  Infenfiblenefs  of  Pain  during  Sleep  proceeds^  rather  from  the 

Relaxation  of  the  Nerves  than  their  ObJiruBion.  p.  237. 

6.  The  Con  [I  an  cy  obferv'd  in  the  Number,  Figure,  and  Site  of  the 
principal  Parts,  and  the  Variety  in  the  lefs.  p.  238. 

7.  The  annexing  of  Plea  Jure  to  thoje  Anions  that  are  neceffary  for  )he 
Support  of  the  Individuum,  and  the  Continuation  and  Propagation 
of  the  Kind.  p.  239. 

8.  The  Multitude  of  Intentions  the  Creator  mujl  have  in  the  Forma- 
tion and  fitting  the  fever al  Parts  for  their  refpefiive  ASlions  and 
^f^'        _  p.  240,  241. 

9.  The  fitting  and  accommodating  fome  Parts  to  divers  Offices  and 
Ufes,  an  Argument  of  Wifdom  and  Defign  in  the  Contrivance  of  the 
Body  of  Man  and  other  Animals.  p.  241,  242. 

1  o.  In  the  Nourijhment  of  their  Bodies,  viaking  that  Food  -which  is 
proper  to  preferve  them  in  a  healthful  State,  grateful  to  the  Tafie, 
and  agreeable  to  the  Stomach.     Of  the  great  Ufe  of  Pain. 

p.  243,  244. 

II.  The  Variety  of  Lineaments  and  Difftmilitude  of  the  Faces  of  Men, 
as  alfo  of  their  Voices  and  Hand-zvritings,  all  of  mighty  Importance 
to  Man.  p.  245,  246,  247. 

Of 


The    C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 

Of  the  particular  Parts  of  the  Body.  And;  i.  Of  the  Head  arid  Hair, 
p.  248.  'The  reafoTi  ofBaldnefs.  2.  Of  the  Eye,  its  Beauty,  p.  249. 
Its  Humours  and  Tun  ides  tranfparent ,  p.  250,  Src.  [i.]  For  the 
Clearnefs,  [2.]  For  the  Difin>^nefs  of  Fifon,  ibid.  The  Parts  of 
the  Eye  of  a  Figure  moft  co?wenie?it  for  the  Collet^ ion  of  the  vifual 
Rays,  viz.  convex,  p.  252.  The  uveous  Tunicle  hath  a  inufculous 
Pozuer  for  contraBing  and  dilating  of  the  Pupil,  ibid.  Its  infide^ 
and  that  of  the  Choroids,  why  blackened,  p.  253.  The  Figure  of 
the  Eye  alterable,  according  to  the  Exigency  of  the  ObjeB,  in  re- 

Jpe8  of  Dijlance  or  Propinquity,  p.  254,  255.  Why  the  optick 
Nerve  is  not  infer  ted  right  behind  the  Eye,  ibid.  PFhy,  tho'  the 
Rajs  be  decuffated  in  the  Pupil  of  the  Eye,  the  Object  is  not  feen. 
inverted,  p.  255.     The  Ufe  of  the  aqueous  Humour,  and  that  it  is 

fuddenly  reparable,  p.  256.  The  Tunica  Cornea  protuberant  above 
the  White  of  the  Eye,  and  why,  p.  257.  The  Ufe  of  the  Mufcles 
if  the  Eye,  ibid.  The  Provifion  for  the  Defence  and  Security  of 
this  precious  Part,  p.  258.     The  Ufes  of  the  Eye-lids,  and  their 

frequent  winking,  p.  259.     That  as  Man  wants,  fo  he  needs  not  the 

feventh  or  fufpenfory  Mufcle,  zuhich  is  of  great  Uje  and  NeceJJity  ta 
Brutes,  p.  261.  The  Need  and  Ufe  of  the  nictating  Membrane  in 
Brutes,  and  that  Man  needs  it  not.  ibid. 

Tliirdly,  Of  the  Ear,  p.  262.  The  Ufe  of  the  Auricula,  p.  263. 
Of  the  TyTc\'^^ViWvci  of  theEar,  its  Bones,  and  their  Mufcles -,  and 
of  the  Ufe  of  the  Ear -wax.  See.  p.  264. 

Fourthly,  Of  the  Teeth,  nine  remarkable  Obfervations  concerning 
their  Situation,  StruBure,  and  Ufes.  p.  264,  265,  266,  Sic, 

Fifthly,  Of  the  Tongue,  and  its  various  Ufes  -,  for  tajiing,  and  ga- 
thering  of  Food ;  for  managing  of  Majiication ;  for  forming  of 
Words,  &c.  p.  268.  Speaking  proper  to  Man,  ibid.  Of  the  Du- 
ctus Salivales,  and  of  the  great  Ufe  of  the  Saliva,  or  Spittle,  p.  269. 

Sixthly,*  Of  the  Wind-pipe,  its  admirable  StruBure  and  Ufes.  p.  270. 

Seventhly,  Of  the  Heart,  the  Ufe  and  Neceflty  of  its  Pulfe  for  the 
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  and  the  admirable  Make  and  Contrivance 
cf  it  for  that  Office,  p.  271 ,  272,  &c.  Oj  the  ?nufcular  Coat,  ajid 
Palfe  of  the  Arteries,  effected  by  a  kind  of  Conjlri^ion,  or  perijUl- 
tick  Motion,  and  not  merely  by  a  Wave  of  the  Blood  every  Pulfe, 

P- 273'  274,  &c- 

The  wonderful  Artifice  cf  Nature  in  regulating  the  Motion  of  the 
Blood  in  the  Veins  and  Arteries,  by  i  fifing  and  promoting  it  in  the 
one,  and  ?nod crating  it  in  the  other.  The  Ufe  of  the  Vena  iine 
pari.  '  p.  277. 

Eighthly,  Of  the  Hand,  its  Stru^ure  and  various  Ufes,  not  eaftly  to 
le  enumerated.  .  '  p.  278,  279. 

s  Ninthly,. 


The    C  O  N  T  E  N  T  a 

Ninthly,  Of  the  Back- Bone,  its  Figure y  and  why  divided  into 
Vertehres,  Page  282,  283. 

Ihe  Provifio7i  that  is  made  for  the  eafy  and  expedite  Motion  of  the 
Bones  in  their  Articulation  by  a  twofold  Juice,  i.  An  oily  one, 
Jupplfd  by  the  Marrow.  2.  Mucilaginous ^  prepared  and  feparated 
iy  certain  Glandules  made  for  that  purpofe,  p.  284,  285.  This 
JnunSlion  of  the  head  of  the  Bones  with  theje  Juices  is  ujefdy  1 .  To 
facilitate  Motion,     2.  To  prevent  Attrition.  p.  286. 

Why  the  Bones  are  made  hollozu.  p.  287. 

Why  the  Belly  is  flejhy^  and  not  inclosed  with  Bones  like  the  Breaft, 

p.  288. 

The  Motion  of  the  GutSy  p.  289.     Of  the  Liver,  and  Ufe  of  the  Gall, 

ibid. 

Of  the  Bladdery  its  Stru^ure  and  Ufe',  of  the  Kidneys,  and  Glan- 
dules^ and  Ureters,  their  Compojition  and  Ufes,  ibid. 

The  adapting  all  the  Bones,  Mufcles  and  Veffels  to  their  fever al  Ufes, 
a?id  the  pining  and  co?np acting  of  them  together  noted.  p.  290- 

The  geometrical  Contrivance  of  the  Mufcles,  and  fitting  them  for  their 
feveral  Motions  and  Actions ,  according  to  the  exa^eji  Rules  of 
Mechanicks.  ibid. 

The  packing  and  thrvfiing  together  fuch  a  Multitude  of  various  and 
different  Parts  fo  clofe,  that  there  pould  be  no  unneceffary  Vacuity 
in  the  Body,  nor  any  clajhing  between  them,  but  mutual  JJJiJlance, 
admirable.  ibid. 

Membranes  capable  of  a  prodigious  Extenfion ,  Ufe  in  Geftation  of 
Twins,  Sec.  p.  291. 

The  Parts  that  feem  of  little  or  no  Ufe,  as  the  Y2X,Jhetun  to  be  greatly 
ufeful,  p.  292.  How  feparated  from  the  Blood,  and  received  into 
it  again.  -  P-  293,  294. 

The  Confideration  of  the  formation  of  the  Foetus  in  the  Womb  zvav  d, 
and  luh).  p-  295,  296. 

What  a  Fitnefs  the^eed  hath  to  fajhion  and  form,  and  why  the  Child 
refembles  the  Parent,  and  Jometimes  the  Ancejior.  p.  296. 

The  ConflruBion  of  a  Set  of  temporary  Parts  for  the  Ufe  of  the  Fcetus 
only  while  in  the  Wo?nb,  a  clear  Proof  of  Defign.  p.  297. 

JVtf  equivocal  or  fpontaneous  Generation,  but  that  all  Animals  are  ge- 
nerated by  Animal  Parents  of  their  own  Kind,  p.  298,  299.  And 
probably  all  Plants  too  produc'^d  by  Seed ,  and  none  fpontaneous , 
proved  and   vindicated ,    and  the  Obje£tions  againfi  it  anjwer''d, 

p.  300.  to  307. 

That  the  CofTus  of  the  Ancients  was  not  the  Hexapod  of  a  Beetle, 
as  I  thought,  but  an  Eruca,  agreed  with  Dr.  Lifter.  p.  307. 

The  Loufe  fear  thing  out  fordid  and  nafiy  Clothes  to  harbour  and  breed 
in,  probably  drfign^d  to  deter  Men  and  Women  from  Sluttifhnefs 
and  Unclcaniimfs.  p.  308. 

Ati 


The    C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 

An  additional  and  moft  effe5lual  Argument  again/}  fpontaneous  Geni- 
ration,  viz.  ^hat  thtre  are  no  new  Species  of  Animals  produced. 

Page  308,  309. 

Whence  thofe  vajl  Numbers  of  f mall  Frogs,  which  have  been  obfervd 
to  appear  upon  refrejhing  Shozvers  after  Drought,  do  probably  pro- 
ceed, Jhez&n  in  an  Injiance  of  his  own  Obfervations  by  Mr.  Derham. 

p.  316,  317. 

Of  Toads  found  in  the  Heart  of  Timber  Trees,  and  in  the  middle  of 
great  Stones.  P-  323,  324. 

Mifcdlaneoui  Obfervations  concerning  the  StruHure,  Anions  and  Ufes 
of  fome  Parts  of  Animals,  omitted  in  the  fir Jl  Part-,  as  alfo  the 
Reafons  of  fome  InJlinBs  and  Anions  of  Brutes,  p.  325,  326,  &c, 
TSe  Stvine''s  Snout  fitted  for  digging  up  of  Roots,  which  are  his  na- 
tural Food,  as  likewife  the  Porpeffe  for  rooting  up  of  Sand-Eels , 

ibid. 

The  Manner  and  Organs  of  Refpiration  accommodated  to  the  Temper 
of  Animals,  their  Place  and  manner  of  living,  fhewn  in  three  Sorts 
of  Refpiration.  i .  By  Lungs,  with  two  Ventricles  of  the  Heart 
in  hotter  ^ni?nals,  p.  327.  2.  By  Lungs,  with  but  one  Ventricle, 
3.  By  Gills,  with  one  only  Ventricle  of  the  Heart,  p.  329,  &c. 
Why  the  Foramen  Ovale  is  kept  open  in  fome  amphibious  Animals, 
p.  330.  In  fome  of  them  the  Epiglottis  is  large,  and  why,  P-  33i- 
No  Epiglottis  in  Elephants,  and  zvhy  ;  and  hozu  that  Creature  fe- 
cures  himfelf  from  Mice  creeping  up  his  Proborcis  into  his  Lur.gs. 

p.  332, 

Two  notable  Obfervations  of  the  Sagacity  of  the  Tortoife,  the  one  of 
the  Land,  the  other  of  the  Si  a  Tortoife.  P-  333»  334- 

The  Armour  of  the  Hedge-Hog  ^;^^  Taton,  and  their  Power  of  con- 
tracing  themfehes  into  a  round  Ball,  a  great  Infiance  of  Defign 
for  their  Defence  and  Security.  P-  335»  33^- 

The  Manner  and  Ufe  of  the  extending  and  withdrawing  the  Curtain 
cf  the-  Periophthalmium  ,  or  nictating  Membrane,  in  Beafts  and 
Birds,  p.  338,  339.  That  the  aqueous  Humour  of  the  Eye  will  not 
freeze.  p.  343. 

Of  the  Make  of  a  CamePs  Foot,  and  his  Bags  to  referve  Water  in  his 
Stomach  for  his  Needs.  p.  344,  345. 

The  Ufe  of  rapacious  Creatures .  fwallowing  fome  of  the  Hair,  Furr 
and  Feathers  of  the  Beafis  or  Birds  they  prey  upon.  ibid. 

A  Conjecture  by  zuhat  means  cartiL^ginous  Fifkes  raife  and  fink  tbem- 
J elves  in  the  Water.  p.  346. 

That  Nature  employs  all  the  Methods  and  Artifices  of  Chymifis,  in 
analizing  of  Bodies ,  and  feparating  their  Part- ,  and  out-does 
them,  and  t^e  fever al  Particulars  infianc'^d  in.  p.  347- 

Obfervations  about  the  Gullet  and  Diaphrag?n.  p.  348. 

Ar, 


The    CONTENTS. 

An  admirable  Story  out  of  Galen,  about  the  taking  a  Kid  out  of  the 
Womb  of  its  Damy  and  bringing  it  up  by  hand  ;  and  Remarks  upon 
it.  Page  349,  350. 

7be  natural  Texture  of  Membranes  fo  made,  as  to  be  ifnmenfely  dila- 
table, oj-  great  Ufe  and  Necejfity  in  Gejlation.  p.  353. 

A  notable  hijlance  of  Providence  in  the  Make  of  the  Veins  and  Arteries 
near  the  Heart.  p.  354,  355. 

An  Anfzuer  to  an  Objection  againji  the  Wifdom  of  God  in  making' in- 
ferior Ranks  of  Creatures.  p.  357. 

The  Atheijis  main  Subterfuge  and  Pretence,  to  elude  and  evade  all 
our  Arguments  and  Inftances,  to  detnonjirate  the  'Necejfity  of  Pro- 
vidence, Defgn  and  Wifiom,  in  the  Formation  of  all  the  Parts  of 
the  World,  viz.  That  Things  made  Ufes,  and  not  Ules  Things, 
precluded  and  confuted.  p-  357,  358. 

Of  the  Ufe  ofthofe  vaft  Numbers  of  prodigioujly  fmall  Infers  that  are 
bred  in  the  Waters.  p.  363,  364. 

An  ObjeSlion  againji  the  Wifdoin  of  God  in  creating  fuch  a  Multitude 
of  ufelefs  InJ'e^s,  and  fome  aljo  noxious  and  pernicious  to  Man,  and 
other  Animals,  anfzver'd  j  and  the  various  Ufes  of  them  dcclar''d, 

p.  368,  369,  &c. 

MaJiy  practical  Inferences  and  Obfervations,  from  375  to  the  End  of 
the  Book. 


THE 


WISDOMofGOD 


Manifeiled  in  the 


WORKS 


O  F    T  H  E 


CREATION, 


^^^59?SiScCSi3fiCC33fiCE  ] 


iScia355£fJ 


r  iVrrr'r  ts  n'  tY  rrm' 


F33?« 


PART.     I. 

rrtrnfrfTr-ni  rin  tsr^nn  rrfri 

Ps  AL.  civ.  24. 

How  manifold  are  thy  Worh^  0  Lord! 
In  Wijdoin  hajl  thou  made  them  alL 

N  thefe  Words  are  two  Claufes  j  in 
the  firfl  whereof  the  Pfahnift  ad- 
mires the  Multitude  of  God's 
Works,  H(nv  inanifold  are  thy 
Wo7^ks,  V  Lord!  In  the  fecond  he 
celebrates  his  Wifdom  in  the  Creation  of  them  j 
In  Wijdom  haji  thou  made  them  all,     ^ 

C  Of 


i8         77)eWisDou  of  GOD      Parti. 

Of  the  firft  of  thefe  I  fhall  fay  little,    only 
briefly  run  over  the  Works  of  this  vifible  World, 
and  give  fome  guefs  at  the  Number  of  them ; 
whence  it  will  appear,  That  upon  this  Account 
they  will  deferve  Admiration,    the  Number  of 
them  being  uninveftigable  by  us,    and  fo  afford- 
ing us  a  demonflrative  Proof  of  the  unlimited 
Extent  of  the  Creator's  Skill,  and  the  Foecundi- 
ty  of  his  Wifdom  and  Power.     That  the  Num- 
ber   of   corporeal    Creatures    is    unmeafurably 
great,    and  known   only   to  the  Creator  him- 
felf,     may  thus   probably  be    coUedled :    Firft 
of  all.    The  Number  of    fixed  Stars  is  on  all 
Hands  acknowledg'd  to  be  next  to  infinite :  Se- 
condly,    every  fix'd  Star,    in  the  now-receiv'd 
HypotheJiSy    is  a  Sun,    or  Sun-like  Body,    and  in 
like  Manner  incircled  with  a  Chorus  of  Planets 
moving  about  it ;   for  the  Fixd  Stars  are  not  all 
placed  in  one  and  the  fame   concave  Spheri- 
cal SuperJicieSy   and  equidiftant  from  us,   as  they 
feem   to  be,     but  are  varioufly  and  diforderly 
fituate,  fome  nearer,    fome  further  off,  juft  like 
Trees  in  a  Wood  or  Foreft,    as  Gajfendus  ex- 
emplifies them.     And  as  in  a  Wood,    tho'  the 
Trees  grow  never  fo  irregularly,   yet  the  Eye  of 
the  Spectator,    wherever  plac'd,    or  whitherfo- 
ever  remov'd,  defcribes  ftill  a  Circle  of  Trees : 
So  would  it  in  like  Manner  whenever  it  were 
in  the  Foreft  of  Stars,    defcribe  a  Spherical  Su- 
perjicies  about  it.     Thirdly,  Each  of  thefe  Pla- 
nets is  in  all  likelihood  furnifhed  with  as  great 
Variety  of  corporeal  Creatures,  animate  and  in- 
animate,   as  the  Earth  is,    and  all  as  different 
I  in 


Fart  I.         /;^  /^^  C  R  E  A  T  r  o  N.  19 

in  Nature  as  they  are  in  Place  from  the  Terre- 
ftrial,  and  from  each  other.  Whence  it  will  fol- 
low, That  thefe  muft  be  much  more  infinite  than 
the  Stars  ;  I  do  not  mean  abfolutely  according 
to  Philofophick  Exadnefs  infinite,  but  only  infi- 
nite or  innumerable  as  to  us,  or  their  Number 
prodigioufly  great. 

That  the  fix'd  Stars  are  innumerable,  may 
thus  be  made  out :  Thofe  vifible  to  the  naked 
Eye  are  by  the  leaft  Account  acknowledged  to 
be  above  a  Thoufand,  excluding  thofe  towards 
the  South  Pole,  which  are  not  vifible  in  our 
Horizon :  Befides  thefe,  there  have  been  incom- 
parably more  detected  and  brought  to  Light 
by  the  Telefcopes ;  the  Milky-way  being  found 
to  be  (as  was  formerly  conjedur'd)  nothing  but 
great  Companies  or  Swarms  of  Minute  Stars 
fingly  invifible,  but  by  reafon  of  their  Proximity 
mingling  and  confounding  their  Lights,  and 
appearing  like  lucid  Clouds.  And  ic  is  likely 
that,  had  we  more  perfed:  Telefcopes,  many 
Thoufands  more  might  be  difcovered ;  and 
yet,  after  all,  an  incredible  Multitude  remaim, 
by  reafon  of  their  immenfe  Uiftance  beyond 
all  Ken,  by  the  beft  Telefcopes  that  could 
poflibly  be  invented  or  polifti'd  by  the  Wit  and 
Hand  of  an  Angel:  For  if  the  World  be  (as 
Des  Cartes  would  have  it)  indefinitely  e^^ten- 
ded,  that  is,  fo  far  as  no  human  Luelledl-  can 
fancy  any.  Bound  of  it  -,  then  what  we  fee,  or 
can  come  to  fee,  muft  be  the  leaft  Part  of  what 
is  undifcoverable  by  us,  the  whole  Univerfe 
extending  a  thoufand  times  farther  beyond  the 

C  2  ^         utmoft 


20       The  Wisdom  vf  GOD     Part  I. 

xnmoft  Stars  we  can  poffibly  dcfcry,  than  thofe 
i)e  diftant  from  the  Earth  we  live  upon.  This 
Hypothejh  of  the  Fix'd  Stars  being  fo  many  Su7iSy 
&c.  feems  more  agreeable  to  the -Divine  Great- 
nefs  and  Magnificence.  But  that  which  in- 
duces me  much  to  doubt  of  the  Magnitude  of 
the  Univerfe,  and  immenfe  Diftance  of  the  Fixd 
StarSy  is  the  ftupendous  P/j^nome?ia  of  Comets^ 
their  fudden  Accefilon,  or  Appearance  in  full 
Magnitude,  the  Length  of  their  Tails,  and  Swift- 
nefs  of  their  Motion,  and  gradual  Diminution 
of  Bulk  and  Motion,  'till  at  laft  they  difap- 
pear.  That  the  Univerfe  is  indefinitely  ex- 
tended, des  Cartes^  upon  a  falfe  Ground,  (that 
the  formal  Ratio  of  a  Body  was  nothing  but 
Extenfion  into  Length,  Breadth,  and  Profun- 
dity, or  having  partes  extra  partes^  and  that 
Body  and  Space  were  fynonymous  Terms)  af- 
ferted  ;  it  may  as  well  be  limited  this  Way, 
as  in  the  old  HypothefSy  which  places  the  Fix'd 
Stars  in  the  fame  Spherical  Superficies ;  according 
to  which  (old  Hypothefis)  they  may  alfo  be  de- 
monftrated  by  the  fame  Mediums  to  be  innu- 
merable, only  inftead  of  their  Diftance  fubfti- 
tuting  their  Smalnefs  for  the  Reafon  of  their  Invi- 
fibility. 

But  leaving  the  Ccelefiial  Bodies,  I  come 
now  to  the  T^errefliial ;  which  are  either  inani- 
mate ^  or  aiiimate.  The  inanimate  are  the  £/^- 
mejits.  Meteors^  and  Fojils  of  all  Sorts,  at  the 
Number  of  which  laft  I  cannot  give  any  pro- 
bable Guefs :  But  if  the  Rule,  which  fome  con- 
fiderate  Philofophers  deliver,  holds  good,  mz. 
t  how 


Part  L       171  the  Creation.  21 

how  much  more  imperfecft  any  Genus^  or  Order 
of  Beings,  is,  fo  much  more  numerous  are  the 
Species  contain'd  under  it.  As  for  Example: 
Birds  being  a  more  perfed:  Kind  of  Animals 
than-  Fi(hes,  there  are  more  of  thefe  than  of 
thofe  3  and  for  the  like  Reafon  more  Birds 
than  Quadrupeds,  and  more  Infefts  than  of  any 
of  the  Reft,  and  fo  more  Plants  than  Animals, 
ISlature  being  more  fparing  in  her  more  excel- 
lent Produdions.  If  this  Rule,  I  fay,  holds 
good,  then  fliould  there  be  more  Species  of  FcJ^ 
Jils^  or  generally  of  inanimate  Bodies^  than  of 
Vegetables^  of  which  there  is  fome  Reafon  to 
doubt,  unlefs  we  will  admit  all  Sorts  of  formed 
Stones  to  be  diftincS:  Species, 

Animate  Bodies  are  divided  into  four  great 
Genera,  or  Orders,  Beajis^  Birds,  Fijhes,  and 
InfeBs, 

The  Species  of  Beajis,  including  ahb  Serpents, 
are  not  very  numerous:  Of  fuch  as  are  certainly 
known  and  defcrib'd,  I  dare  not  Hiy  above  150; 
and  yet  I  believe,  not  many,  that  are  of  any  con- 
fiderable  Bignefs,  in  the  known  Regions  of  the 
World,  have  efcap'd  the  Cognizance  of  the  Cu- 
rious. (I  reckon  all  Dogs  to  be  of  one  Species,^ 
they  mingling  together  in  Generation,  and  the 
Breed  of  fuch  Mixtures  being  prolifick.) 

The  Number  of  Birds  known  and  defcrib'd 
may  be  near  500  ;  and  the  Number  oi  Fijhes, 
fecluding.  Sbell-Fijh,  as  many :  But  if  the  ShelL 
Fijld  be  taken  in,  more  than  fix  times  the  Num- 
ber. How  many  of  each  Genus  remain  yet  un- 
difcover'd,    one  cannot  certainly  nor  very  near- 

C    3  -  ly 


22      He  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

ly  conjedlure ;  but  we  may  fuppofe  the  whole 
Sum  of  Beajls  and  Birds  to  exceed  by  a  third  Part, 
and  Fijhes  by  one  half,  thofe  known. 

The  InfeBs,  if  we  take  in  the  Exanguious 
both  Terrejirial  and  Aquatick^  iriay,  in  Deroga- 
tion to  the  precedent  Rule,  for  Number,  vie 
even  with  Plants  themfelves :  For  the  Exangui" 
cus  alone,  by  what  that  Learned  and  Critical 
Naturalift,  my  honour'd  Friend,  Dr.  Martin 
JJjier^  hath  already  obferv'd  and  delineated,  I 
conjedure,  cannot  be  fewer  than  3000  Species^ 
perhaps  many  more. 

The  Butterflies  or  Beetles  are  fuch  numerous 
Tribes,  that  I  beheve  in  our  own  native  Coun- 
try alone  the  Species  of  each  Kind  may  amount 
to  150  or  more.  And  if  we  ihould  m.ake  the 
Caterpillers  and  Hexapods^  from  whence  thefe 
come,  to  be  diftind:  Species,  as  moft  Naturalifts 
have  done,  the  Number  will  be  doubled,  and 
thefe  two  Genera  will  afford  us  600  Species-, 
But  if  thofe  be  admitted  for  diftindl  Species^  I 
fee  no  Reafon  but  their  Aureli(2  alfo  may  pre- 
tend to  a  fpecifick  Difference  from  the  Caterpil- 
lers and  Butterfies,  and  fo  we  fhall  have  300 
Species  more  ;  therefore  we  exclude  both  thefe 
from  the  Degree  of  Species,  making  them  to  be 
the  fame  hifeB  under  a  different  Larva  or 
Habit. 

The  Fly-kind,  if  under  that  Name  we  com- 
prehend all  other  flying  Infers,  as  well  fuch  as 
have  four,  as  fuch  as  have  but  two  Wings,  of 
both  which  Kinds  there  are  many  fubordinate 
Genera^    will  be  found  in  Multitude  of  Species 

to 


Part  I.        /;^  /^^  C  R  E  A  T  I  o N.  23 

to  equal,    if  not  exceed,  both  the  foremen tion'd 
Kinds. 

The  creepmg  InfeBs  that  never  come   to  be 
wing'd,    tho'  for  Number  they  may  fall  fliort  of 
the  flying  or  winged,    yet  are  they  alfo  very  nu- 
merous ;    as  by  running  over  the  feveral  Kinds 
I  could  eafily  demonftrate.   Supppfing  then  there 
be  a  Thoufand  feveral  Sorts  of  Infedte  in  this 
Ifland  and  the  Sea  near  it,    if  the  fame  Propor- 
tion holds  between  the  Infedls  native  in  England^ 
ann  thofe  of  the  reft  of  the  World,    as  doch  be- 
tween Plants  domejiick  and  exotick^    (that  Is,    as 
I  guefs,    near  a  Decuple)  the  Species  of  Infects 
in  the    whole  Earth   (Land    and   Water)  will 
amount  to  loooo,    and  I  do  believe  they  rather 
exceed  than  fall  {hort  of  that  Sum.     Since  the 
Writing  hereof,  having  this  Summer,  Ann.  169 1, 
with  fome  Diligence  profecuted  the*  Hiftory  of 
our  Englijh  InfedVs,    and  making  Collections  of 
the  feveral  Species  of  each  Tribe,    but  particu- 
larly and  efpecially  of  the  Butt  erf ics^  both  no- 
durnal  and  diurnal,  I  find  the  Number  of  fuch 
of  rhefe  alone  as  breed  in  our  Neighbourhood 
(about  Braintree  and  Notely  in  Ejjex)  to  exceed 
the  Sum  I  laft  Year  afiign'd  to  all  England^    ha- 
ving my  felf  obfcrv'd  and  defcrib'd  about  200 
Kinds  great  and  fmall,  many  yet  remaining,  as 
I  have  good  Reafon  to  believe,    by  me  undifco- 
ver'd.     This  I  have,    fmce  the  writing  hereof, 
found  troie  in  Experience,     having  every  Year 
obferv'd  not  a  few  new  Kinds:  Nor  do  I  think 
that,  if  I  fhould  live  20  Years  longer,  I  fljould 
by-  my  utmoft  Diligence  and  Induftry  in  fearch^ 

C  4  .  ing 


24       The  Wisdom  of  GOD      Parti. 

ing  them  out,  come  to  an  End  of  them.    If  then, 
within  the  fmall  Compafs  of  a  Mile  or  two, 
there  are  fo  many  Species  to  be  found,    furely 
the  moft  modeft  Conjecture  cannot  eftimate  the 
Number  of  all  the  Kinds  of  Fapilio\  native  of 
this  Illand  to  fall  (hort  of  500,    which  is  twice 
fo  many  as  I  Igft  Summer  guefs'd  them  to  be ; 
wherefoBe,    ufing  the  fame  Argumentations,  the 
Numiber  of  all  the  Britifh  hijedfs  will  amount  to 
aooo,    and  the  total  Sum  of  thofe  of  the  whole 
Earth  will  be  20000.      The  Number  of  Plants 
contained  in  C.  Bauhtn^  Penax  is  about  6000, 
which  are  all  that  had  been  defcrib'd  by  the  Au- 
thors that  wrote  before  him,     or  obferv'd  by 
himfelf ;  in  which  Works,    befides  Miftakes  and 
Repetitions  incident  to  the  mofl  wary  and  know- 
ing Men  in  fuch  a  Work  as  that,    there  are  a 
great  many,*    I  might  fay  fome  Hundreds,    put 
down  for  different  Species,    which  in  my  opini- 
on are  but  accidental  Varieties :    Which  I  do  not 
fay  to  detrad:  from  the  excellent  Pains  and  Per- 
formance of  that  Learned,    Judicious  and  La- 
borious Herbarift,  or  to  defraud  him  of  his  de- 
ferv'd  Honour,    but  only  to  fhew  that  he  was 
too  much  fway'd  by  the  Opinions  then  gene- 
rally current  among   Herbarifts,    that,  different 
Colour  or  Multiplicity  of  Leaves  in  the  Flower, 
and  the  like  Accidents,    were  fufficient  to  con- 
ftitute  a  fpecijfick   Difference.      But  fuppofing 
there  had  been  6000  then  known  and  defcrib'd, 
I  cannot  think  but  that  there  are  in  the  World 
more  than  triple  that  Number  j    there  being  in 
the  vaft  Continent  of  America  as  great  a  Variety 

of 


Part  I.       in  the  Creation.  25 

of  Species  as  with  us,  and  yet  but  few  common 
to  Europe,  or  perhaps  Africk  and  AJia,  And  if, 
on  the  other  Side  the  Equator,  there  be  much 
Land  ftill  remaining  undifcover'd,  as  probably 
there  may,  we  mull  fuppofe  the  Number  of 
Plants  to  be  far  greater. 

What  can  we  infer  from  all  this?  If  the  Num^ 
ber  of  Creatures  be  fo  exceeding  great,  how  great, 
nay  immenfe,  mufl:  needs  be  the  Power  and 
Wifdom  of  him  who  form'd  them  all !  For  (that 
I  may  borrow  the  Words  of  a  noble  and  excel- 
lent Author)  as  it  argues  and  manifells  more 
Skill  by  far  in  an  Artificer,  to  be  able  to  frame 
both  Clocks  and  Watches,  and  Pumps,  and  Mills^ 
and  Granadoes,  and  Rockets,  than  he  could  dif- 
play  in  making  but  one  of  thofe  forts  of  En- 
gines; fo  the  Almighty  difcovers  more  of  his 
Wifdom  in  forming  fuch  a  vaft  Multitude  of 
different  Sorts  of  Creatures,  and  all  with  admi- 
rable and  irreproveable  Art,  than  if  he  had  cre- 
ated but  a  few;  for  this  declares  the  Greatnefs 
and  unbounded  Capacity  of  his  Underftanding. 
Again •  the  fame  Superiority  of  Knowledge 
would  be  difplay'd,  by  contriving  Engines  of 
the  fame  Kind,  or  for  the  fame  Purpofes,  after 
different  Fafhions,  as  the  moving  of  Clocks  or 
other  Engines  by  Springs  inftead  of  Weights: 
So  the  infinitely  wife  Creator  hath  fhewn  in 
many  Inflances,  that  he  is  not  confin'd  to-  one 
only  Influument  for  the  working  one  Effed:,  but 
can  perform  the  fame  Thing  by  divers  Means^ 
So,  tho'  Feathers  feem  neceffary  for  flying,  yet 
hath  he  enabled  feveral  Creatures  to  fly  without 

them, 


*26-      ne  Wis-Dou  of  GOD     Parti. 

them,  as  two  Sorts  of  Fifhes,  one  Sort  of  Lizard, 
and  the  Batt ,  not  to  mention  the  numerous 
Tribes  of  flying  Infeds.  In  like  Manner,  tho' 
the  Air-bladder  in  Fiflies  feems  neceffary  for 
fwimming,  yet  fome  are  fo  form'd  as  to  fwim 
without  it,  viz,  Firft,  the  Cartilagineous  Kind, 
which  by  what  Artifice  they  poize  themfelves, 
afcend  and  defcend  at  Pleafure,  and  continue  in 
what  Depth  of  Water  they  lift,  is  as  yet  un- 
known to  us.  Secondly  the  Cetaceous  Kind,  or 
Sea-beafts,  differing  in  nothing  almoft  from  Qua- 
drupeds but  the  Want  of  Feet.  The  Air  which 
in  Refpiration  thefe  receive  into  their  Lungs, 
may  ferve  to  render  their  Bodies  equiponderant 
to  the  Water;  and  the  Conftridtion  or  Dilata- 
tion of  it,  by  the  Help  of  the  Diaphragm  and 
Mufcles  of  Refpiration,  may  probably  affift  them 
to  afcend  or  defcend  in  the  Water,  by  a  light 
Impulfe  thereof  with  their  Fins. 

Again,  Tho'  the  Water  being  a  cold  Ele- 
ment, the  moft  wife  God  hath  fo  attemper'd  the 
Blood  and  Bodies  of  Fifhes  in  general,  that  a 
fmall  Degree  of  Heat  is  fufficient  to  preferve  their 
due  Confiftency  and  Motion,  and  to  maintain 
Life;  yet  to  (hew  that  he  can  preferve  a  Crea- 
ture in  the  Sea,  and  in  the  coldeft  Part  of  the 
Sea  too,  that  may  have  as  great  a  Degree  of  Heat 
as  Quadrupeds  themfelves,  he  hath  created  Va- 
riety of  thefe  cetaceous  Fiflies,  which  converfe 
chiefly  in  the  Northern  Seas,  whofe  whole  Bo- 
dy being  incompafs^d  round  with  a  copious  Fat 
or  Blubber  ( which,  by  reflecting  and  redoub- 
ling the  internal  Heat,  and  keeping  oflfthe  exter- 
nal 


Part  I.         in  /^^  C R  e  at  i  o n.  27 

nal  Cold,  doth  the  fame  thing  to  them  that 
Cloaths  do  to  us)  is  enabled  to  abide  the  great- 
eft  Cold  of  the  Sea- water.  The  Reafon  why 
thefe  Fijhes  delight  to  frequent  chiefly  the  Nor^ 
them  Seas,  is,  I  conceive,  not  only  for  the  Quiet 
which  they  enjoy  there,  but  becaufe  the  Northern 
Air,  which  they  breathe  in,  being  more  fully 
charg'd  with  thofe  Particles  fuppos'd  nitrous, 
which  are  the  Element  of  Fire,  is  fitteft  to  main- 
tain the  vital  Heat  in  that  Adivity  which  is 
fufficient  to  move  fuch  an  unweildy  Bulk  as  their 
Bodies  are  with  due  Celerity,  and  to  bear  up  a- 
gainft  and  repel  the  ambient  Cold;  and  may 
likewife  enable  them  to  continue  longer  under 
Water  than  a  warmer  and  thinner  Air  could. 

Another  Inftance  to  prove  that  God  can  and 
doth  by  different  Means  produce  the  fame  EfFedt, 
is  the  various  Ways  of  extradling  the  nutritious 
Juice  out  of  the  Aliment,  in  feveral  Kinds  of 
Creatures. 

I.  In  Man  and  viviparous  ^adrupeds  the 
Food  moiften'd  with  the  Spittle  (faliva)  is  firft 
chew'd  and  prepared  in  the  Mouth,  then  fwal- 
lowed  into  the  Stomach,  where  being  mingled 
with  fome  diffolvent  Juices,  it  is  by  the  Heat 
hereof  concodted,  macerated,  and  reduc'd  into  a 
Chyle  or  Cremor,  and  fo  evacuated  into  the  In- 
teftines,  where  being  mixed  with  the  Choler  and 
Pancreatick]\ncQy  it  is  further  fubtiliz'd  and  rcn- 
der'd  fo  fluid  and  penetrant,  that  the  thinner 
and  finer  Part  of  it  eafily  finds  its  Way  in  at  the 
ftreight  Orifices  of  the  lafteous  Veins. 

2.  In- 


fi8        TkWi%Dou  of  GQD    PartL 

2.  In  Birds  there  is  no  Maftication  or  Gom- 
minution  of  Meat  in  the  Mouth.^  but  in  fuch 
as  are  not  Carniverous,  it  is  immediately  fwal- 
low'd  into  the  Crop  or  Craw,  or  at  leaft  into  a 
Kind  of  Anteftomach  (  which  I  have  obferv'd  in 
many,  efpecially  in  Pijcivorous  Birds)  where  it  is 
moiftned  and  mollified  by  fome  proper  Juice 
from  the  Glandules  diftilling  in  there,  and  thence 
transfer 'd  into  the  Gizard  or  Mufculous  Sto- 
mach, where  by  the  working  of  the  Mufcles 
compounding  the  Side  of  that  Ventricle,  and 
by  the  Affiftance  of  fmall  Pebbles  (  which  the 
Creature  fwallows  for  that  Purpofe)  it  is,  as  it 
were  by  Mill-ftones,  ground  fmall,  and  fo  tranf- 
mitted  to  the  Guts,  to  be  further  attenuated  and 
fubtiliz'd  by  the  fore-mentioned  Choler  and 
Pancreatick  Juice. 

.  3.  In  oviparous  ^ladrupeds^  as  ChamelionSy 
Lizards^  Frogs,  as  alfo  in  all  Sorts  of  SerpentSy 
there  is  no  Maftication  or  Comminution  of  the 
Meat  either  in  Mouth  or  Stomach ;  but  as  they 
fwallow  Infects  or  other  Animals  whole,  fo  they 
avoid  their  Skins  unbroken,  having  a  Heat,  or 
Spirits,  powerful  enough  to  extradt  the  Juice 
they  have  Need  of,  without  breaking  that  which 
contains  it;  as  the  Parijian  Academijis  leW  us. 
I  myfelf  cannot  warrant  the  Truth  of  the  Ob- 
fervation  in  all.  Here,  by  the  by,  we  take  No- 
tice of  the  wonderful  Dilatability  orExtenfive- 
nefs  of  the  Throats  and  Gullets  of  Serpents :  I 
myfelf  have  taken  two  entire  adult  Mice  out  of 
the  Stomach  of  an  Adder,  whofe  Neck  was  not 
bigger  than  my  little  Finger.  Thefe  Creatures, 
I  fay,  draw  out  the  Juice  of  what  they  fwallow 

with- 


Part  I.       in  //^^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  29 

without  any  Comminution,  or  fo  much  as  break- 
ing the  Skin ;  even  as  it  is  feen  that  the  Juice 
of  Grapes  is  drawn  as  well  *  whole  Grapes  pluck'd 
from  the  *  Rape,  where  from  the  Ciufter,  and 
thev  remain  whole ,  as  "^i^e  pour'd  upon  the^i 
from  a  Vat,  where  they  are  ^^  ^  ^''^^"^• 
bruis'd  ;  to  borrow  the  Parijian  Philofophers 
Similitude. 

4.  Fipes^  which  neither  chew  their  Meat  in 
their  Mouths,  nor  grind  it  in  their  Stomachs, 
do  by  the  Help  of  a  diffolvent  Liquor,  there  by 
Nature  provided,  corrode,  and  reduce  it,  Skin, 
Bones  and  all,  into  a  Chylus  or  Cremor ;  and  yet 
(which  may  feem  wonderful )  this  Liquor  ma- 
nifefts  nothing  of  Acidity  to  theTafte :  But  not- 
withftanding ,  how  mild  and  gentle  foever  it 
fcems  to  be,  it  corrodes  Flefh  very  ftrangely 
and  gradually,  2^^  Aquafortis^  or  the  like  corro- 
five  Waters,  do  Metals,  as  appears  to  the  Eye  \ 
for  I  have  obferved  Fifli  in  the  Stomachs  of 
others  thus  partially  corroded,  iirfl  the  fuper- 
ficial  Part  of  the  Flefh,  and  then  deeper  and 
deeper  by  Degrees  to  the  Bones. 

I  come  now  to  the  fecond  Fart  of  the  Words, 
/;;  Wijdom  haft  thou  jnadethem  all-,  in  difcourfing 
whereof  I  fhall  endeavour  to  make  out  in 
Particulars  what  the  Pfalmiji  here  afTerts  in  ge- 
neral concerning  the  Works  of  God,  that  they 
are  all  very  wifely  contrived  and  adapted  to 
Ends  both  particular  and  general. 

But  before  I  enter  upon  this  Taflc,  I  fliall,  by 
Way  of  Preface^  or  IntroduBion^  fay  fonnctning 
concerning  thofe  Syftems  which  undertake   to 

give 


30        TheWisDOM  of  GOD     Parti. 

give  an  Account  of  the  Formation  of  the  Uni- 
verfe  by  Mechanical  Hypothefes  of  Matter,  mov'd 
either  uncertainly,  or  according  to  fome  Catho- 
Hck  Laws,  without  the  Intervention  and  Affi- 
ftance  of  any  fuperior  immaterial  Agent. 

There  is  no  greater,  at  leaft  no  more  palpa- 
ble and  convincing  Argument  of  the  Exiftence 
of  a  Deity,  than  the  admirable  Art  and  Wifdom 
that  difcovers  itfelf  in  the  Make  and  Conftitu- 
tion,  the  Order  and  Difpofition,  the  Ends  and 
Ufes  of  all  the  Parts  and  Members  of  this  (late- 
ly Fabrick  of  Heaven  and  Earth  :  For  if  in  the 
Works  of  Art  (as  for  Example)  a  curious  Edifice, 
or  Machine,  Council,  Defign,  and  Direction,  to 
*  an  End  appearing  in  the  whole  Frame,  and  in 
all  the  feveral  Pieces  of  it,  do  neceffarily  infer 
the  Being  and  Operation  of  fome  intelligent 
Architeft,  or  Engineer ;  why  fhould  not  alfo,  in 
the  Works  of  Nature,  that  Grandeur  and  Mag- 
nificence, that  excellent  Contrivance  for  Beauty, 
Order,  Ufe,  &c,  which  is  obfervable  in  them, 
wherein  they  do  as  much  tranfcend  the  EfFeds 
of  human  Art,  as  infinite  Power  and  Wifdom 
exceeds  finite,  infer  the  Exiftence  and  Efficiency 
of  an  Omnipotent  and  All- wife  Creator  ?. 

To  evade  the  Force  of  this  Argument,  and 
to  give  fome  Account  of  the  Original  of  the 
World,  Atheiftical  Perfons  have  fet  up  two 
Hypothefes. 

Thefirft  is  that  of  Ariftotle,  that  the  World 
was  from  Eternity  in  the  fame  Condition  that 
now  it  is,  having  run  through  the  Succeffions 
of  infinite  Generations}  to  which  they  add,  Self- 
ex- 


Part  L        in  //^^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  3  j 

exiftent  and  Unproduc'd :  For  Arijlotle  doth  not 
deny  God  to  be  the  efficient  Canfe  of  the  World  \ 
but  only  aflerts,  that  he  created  it  from  Eter- 
nity, making  him  a  neceflary  Caiife  thereof;  it 
proceeding  from  him  by  Way  of  Emanation,  as 
Light  from  the  Sun. 

This  Hypofhejis,  which  hath  fome  Shew  of 
Reafon,  for  fomething  muft  necefTarily  exift  of 
itfd ;  and  if  fomething  why  may  not  all 
Things  ?  This  Hypothejis^  I  fay,  is  fo  clearly  and 
fully  confuted  by  the  Reverend  and  Learned 
Dr.  I'illotjon^  late  Lord  Archbifliop  of  Ca?iter- 
hury^  and  Primate  of  all  England^  in  his  firil 
printed  Sermon  ;  and  the  Right  Reverend  Fa- 
ther in  God,  "Jokn^  late  Lord  Biiliop  of  Chejler^ 
in  Book  I.  Chap.  V.  of  his  Treatife  of  the 
Principles  of  Natural  Religion^  that  nothing  ma- 
terial can  by  me  be  added:  To  whom  there- 
fore I  refer  the  Reader. 

T'bc  Epicurean  Hypothejis  rejeBed. 

The  fecond  Hypothefu  is  that  of  the  Epicii- 
ream ^  who  held,  that  there  were  two  Prin- 
ciples felf-exiftent.  Firft,  Epace^  or  Vacuity  ^ 
Secondly,  Matter^  or  Body  \  both  of  infinite 
Duration  and  Extenfion.  In  this  infinite  Space, 
or  Vacuity,  which  hath  neither  Beginning,  nor 
End,  nor  Middle,  no  Limits,  or  Extreams,  in- 
numerable minute  Bodies,  into  which  the  Mat- 
ter was  divided,  call'd  Atoms,  becaufe  by  Rea- 
fon of  their  perfed;  Solidity  they  were  really  in- 
divifible  (for  they  hold  no  Body  capable  of  Di- 

vifion, 


32       Hoe  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

vifion  ,  but  what  hath  Vacuities  interfpers'd 
with  Matter,  of  various  but  a  determinate  Num- 
ber of  Figures,  and  equally  ponderous,  do  per- 
pendicularly defcend,  and  by  their  fortuitous 
Concourfe  make  compound  Bodies,  and  at  laft 
the  World  itfelf  But  now,  hecaufe  if  all  thefe 
Atoms  (hould  defcend  plum  down  with  equal 
Velocity,  as  according  to  their  Dodlrine  they 
ought  to  do,  being  (as  we  faid  )  all  perfectly 
folid  andimporous,  and  the  Facuum  notrefifting 
their  Motion,  they  would  never  the  one  over- 
take the  other,  but  like  the  Drops  of  a  Shower 
would  alv/ays  keep  the  fame  Diftances,  and  fo 
there  could  be  no  Concourfe,  or  Coh^lion  of 
them,  and  confequently  nothing  created ;  partly 
to  avoid  this  deftrudtive  Confequence,  and 
partly  to  give  fome  Account  of  the  Freedom 
of  Will  (  which  they  did  aflert  contrary  to  the 
Democratick  Fate  )  they  did  abfurdly  feign  a  De- 
clination of  fome  of  thefe  Principles,  without 
any  Shadow,  or  Pretence  of  Reafon.  The  former 
of  thefe  Motives  you  have  fet  down  by  Liicrc^ 
tim  de  Nat,  Rerum^  L.  2.  in  thefe  Words : 

Corpora  cum  deorfum  reBum  per  inane  fenintur 
Ponderibus  propriisy  incerto  T'empore  forte^ 
Incertifque  locis^  Spatio  difcedere  paulum  \ 
Hantum  quod  7iomen  mutatum  dicer e  pojjis. 
And  again, 

^od  niji  declinare  filer ent^  omnia  deoffium 
Imbris  uti  guttce  caderent  per  inane  profundum^ 
Necforet  offenjus  natiiSy  nee  plaga  creata 
Trincipiis^  it  a  nilunquam  natura  credjfet. 

Now 


Part  I.         ifi  the  Creation.-  33 

Now  Seeds  in  downward  Motion  muft  decline, 
Tho'  vary  little  from  th'  exadleft  Line  ; 
For  did  they  dill  move  ftrait,  they  needs  muft 

fall 
Like  Drops  of  Rain,  diffolv'd  and  fcatter'd  all. 
For  ever  tumbling  thro'  the  mighty  Space, 
And  never  join  to  make  one  fingle  Mafs. 

>The  fecond  Motive  they  had  to  introduce  this 
gratuitous  Declination,  of  Atoms,  the  fame  Poet 
gives  us  in  thefe  Verfes,  Lib,  2. 

Sifemper  motm  conneBitur  omnis^ 

Et  vet  ere  exoritur  femper  novus  07^di?2e  certo  j 
Nee  declinajido  faciimt  primordia  motiis 
Principiiim  qiwddam  quod  fat  i  feeder  a  rumpat^ 
Ex  infifiito  ne  caufam  caufafequatur  -, 
Libra  per  terras  unde  hcec  animantibus,  extafy 
Unde  hac  eji^  inqiiam^  fatis  avolfa  'voluntas  ? 

Befides,  did  all  Things  move  in  direcfl  Line^ 

And  ftill  one  Motion  to  another  join 

In  certain  Order,  and  no  Seeds  decline. 

And  make  a  Motion  fit  to  diffipate 

The  well-wrought  Chains  of  Caufes  and  ftrong 

Fate ; 
Whence  comes  that  Freedom  living  Creatures 

find? 
Whence  comes  the  Will  fo  free,  fo  unconfin'd^ 
Above  the  Power  of  Fate  ? 

The  Folly  and  Uiireafonablenefs  of  this  ridi- 
culous aod  ungrounded  Figment,  I  cannot  bet- 

D  ^  ter 


34  T^^  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  L 
ter  difplay  and  reprove  than  in  the  Words  oF 
Cicero,  in  the  Beginning  of  his  firft  Book  De 
Finibus  Bonoriim  &  Malorum.  This  Declination 
(faith  he)  is  altogether  childifhly  feign'd,  and 
yet  neither  doth  it  at  all  folve  the  Difficulty,  or 
effed:  what  they  defire  :  For,  firft,  They  fay  the 
Atoms  decline,  and  yet  affign  no  Reafon  why. 
Now  nothing  is  more  fhameful  and  unworthy 
a  Natural  Philofopher  \turpius  Phyjico]  than  to 
aflert  any  thing  to  be  done  without  a  Caufe,  or 
to  give  no  Reafon  of  it.  Befides,  this  is  con- 
trary to  their  own  Hypothefis  taken  from  Senfe, 
that  all  Weights  do  naturally  move  perpendi- 
cularly downwards.  Secondly,  Again  fuppofing 
this  were  true,  and  that  there  were  fuch  a  Decli- 
nation of  Atoms,  yet  will  it  not  effedt  what  they 
intend ;  for  either  they  do  all  decline,  and  fo 
there  will  be  no  more  Concourfe  than  if  they  did 
perpendicularly  defcend ;  or  fome  decline,  and 
fome  fall  plum  down,  which  is  ridiculoufly  to 
affign  diftindt  Offices  and  Tasks  to  the  Atoms, 
which  are  all  of  the  fame  Nature  and  Solidity. 
Again,  in  his  Book  De  FatOy  he  fmartly  derides 
this  fond  Conceit  thus  5  What  Caufe  is  there  in 
Nature  which  turns  the  Atoms  afide  ?  Or  do 
they  caft  Lots  among  themfelves  which  fhall 
decline,  which  not  ?  Or  why  do  they  decline  the 
leaft  Interval  that  maybe,  and  not  a  greater? 
why  not  two  or  three  minima  as  well  as  one  ? 
Optare  hoc  quidem  eji  non  dijpiitare.  ,  For  nei- 
ther is  the  Atom  by  any  extrinfical  Impulfe  di- 
verted from  its  natural  Courfe  ;  neither  can  there 
be  any  Gaufe  imagin'd  in  the  Vacuity  through 
I  which 


Part.  I.         in  /^^  C  r  e  a  t i  o n.  35 

which  it  is  carried,  why  it  fhould  not  move  di- 
redlly  ;  neither  is  there  any  Change  made  in  the 
Atom  it  felf,  that  it  fliould  not  retain  the  Mo^ 
tion  natural  to  it,  by  Force  of  its  Weight  or 
Gravity. 

As  for  the  whole  Atoinical  Hypothefis^  either 
Epicurean  or  Democritick^  I  fliall  not,  nor  need 
I,  fpend  Time  to  confute  it  3  this  having  been 
already  folidly  and  fufficiently  done  by  many 
learned  Men,  but  efpecially  Dr.  Cudworth^  m 
his  IntelleBual  Syjiem  of  the  Univerfe,  and  the 
late  Bifhop  of  Worcejler^  Dr.  Stillingjleet^  ia 
his  Oiigines  Sacra,  Only  I  cannot  omit  the  C/- 
ceronian  Confutation  thereof,  which  I  find  in 
the  Place  firft  quoted,  and  in  the  firft  and  fecond 
Books  De  Naturd  Deorum^  becaufe  it  may  ferve 
as  a  general  Introdudion  to  the  following  Par- 
ticulars. Such  a  turbulent  ConcouFfe  of  Atoms 
could  never,  (faith  he)  hu?7c  mundi  ornatum  effL- 
cere^  compofe  fo  w^ell-order'd  and  beautiful  a 
Strudure  as  the  IVorld-,  which  therefore  both 
in  Greek  and  Latin  hath  from  thence  \ab  ornatti 
&  munditie]  obtain'd  its  Name.  And  again 
mod  fully  and  appofitely  in  his  fecond  De  Nat, 
Deorum :  If  the  W oiks  oi  Nature  are  better,  more 
exad  and  perfed,  than  the  Works  oi  Arty  2indi  Art 
effeds  nothing  without  Reafon,  neither  can  the 
Works  of  Nature  be  thought  to  be  efifeded  with- 
out Reafon;  for,  is  it  not  abfurd  and  incon- 
gruous, .that  when  thou  beholdeft  a  Statue  or 
curious  Pidure,  thou  fliould'ft  acknowledge  that 
Art  was  us'd  to  the  making  of  it ;  or  when  thou 
feed  the  Courfe  of  a  Ship  upon  the  Waters,  thou 

D  2  ^        fliouldft 


3^         The  W 1  ^jyou  of  GOD      Part  I. 

fhouldft  not  doubt  but  the  Motion  of  it  is  regu- 
lated and  diredled  by  Reafon  and  Art ;  or  when 
thou  conlidereft  a  Sun-dyal  or  Clock,  thou 
fhouldft  underftand  prefently,  that  the  Hours 
are  fliewn  by  Art,  and  not  by  Chance  ;  and  yet 
imagine  or  believe,  that  the  World,  which  com- 
prehends all  thefe  Arts  and  Artificers,  was  made 
without  Counfel  or  Reafon  ?  If  one  fliould  car- 
ry into  Scythia  or  Britain  fuch  a  Sphere  as  our 
Friend  PqlJidofiitis  lately  made,  each  of  whofe 
Converfions  did  the  fame  Thing  in  the  Sun,  and 
Mooriy  and  other  five  Planets,  which  we  fee  ef- 
fefted  every  Night  and  Day  in  the  Heavens,  who 
among  thofe  Barbarians  would  doubt  that  that 
Sphere  was  compos'd  by  Reafon  and  Art?  A 
Wonder  then  it  muft  needs  be,  that  there  (hould 
be  any  Man  found  fo  ftupid  and  forfaken  of  Rea- 
fon, as  to  pc^-fuade  himfelf,  that  this  mofl:  beau- 
tiful and  adorn'd  World,  was,  or  could,  be  pro- 
duced by  the  fortuitous  Concourfe  of  Atoms.  He 
that  can  prevail  with  himfelf  to  believe  this,  I 
do  not  fee  why  he  may  not  as  well  admit,  that 
if  there  were  made  innumerable  Figures  of  the 
one  and  twenty  Letters,  in  Gold,  fuppofe,  or 
any  other  Metal,  and  thefe  well  {haken  and 
mixt  together,  and  thrown  down  from  fome 
high  Place  to  the  Ground,  they,  when  they  light- 
ed upon  the  Earth,  would  be  fo  difpos'd  and 
rank'd  that  a  Man  might  fee  and  read  in  them 
E?iniuss  A?inah  -,  whereas  it  were  a  great  Chance 
if  he  fhould  find  one  Verfe  thereof  among  them 
all :  For  if  this  Concourfe  of  Atoms  could  make  a 
whole  World,  why  may  it  not  fometimes  make, 
I  and 


Part  L        /;/  /^^  C  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  37, 

and  why  hath  it  nof  fomewhere  or  other  in  the 
Earth  made,  a  Temple,  or  a  Gallery,  or  a  For- 
tico,  or  a  Houfe,  or  a  City  ?  which  yet  it  is  fo  far 
from  doing,  and  every  Man  fo  far  from  be- 
lieving, that  {hould  any  one  of  us  be  caft,  fup- 
pofe,  upon  a  defolate  I  [land,  and  find  there  a  mag- 
nificent Palace,  artificially  contriv'd  according  to 
the  exadteft  Rules  of  Architedlure,  and  curi- 
blifly  adorned  and  furnifli'd,  it  would  never  once 
enter  into  his  Head,  that  this  was  done  by  an 
Earthquake,  or  the  fortuitous  fliuffling  together 
of  its  component  Materials  3  or  that  it  had  flood 
there  ever  iince  the  Conftruftion  of  xht  Worlds 
or  firft  Coha^fion  of  Atoms ',  but  would  pre  fen  t- 
ly  conclude,  that  there  bad  been  fome  intelligent 
Architev^l  there,  the  Effe6l  of  whofe  i\rt  and  Skill 
it  was.  Or  fhould  he  fi-nd  there  hut  one  fingle 
Sheet  of  Parchment  or  Paper,  an  Epiftle  or  Ora- 
tion written,  full  of  profound  Senfe,  exprefs'd 
in  proper  and  fignificant  Words,  illuflrated  and 
adorn'd  with  elegant  Phrafe  ;  it  were  beyond 
the  Poflibility  of  the  Wit  of  Man  to  perluade 
him  that  this  was  done  by  the  temerarious  Dafli- 
es  of  an  unguided  Pen,  or  by  the  rude  Scattering 
of  Ink  upon  the  Paper,  or  by  the  lucky  Pro- 
jidtion  of  fo  many  Letters  at  all  Adventures;  but 
he  v/ould  be  convinced  by  the  Evidence  of  the 
Thing  at  firft  Sight,  that  there  had  been  not  on- 
ly fome  Man,  but  fome  Scholar  there. 

T[ke  Cartcfian  Flypothefis  confider'd  and  ccnjurd. 

•Having  rejefted   this  Atheifllck  Thpotbejh  of 
D  3         '         ^        Epicurus 


38        I'he  Wisdom  of  GOD      Parti. 

'Epicurus  and  Democritus,  I  fhould  now  proceed 
to  give  particular  Inftances  of  the  Art  and  Wif- 
dom  clearly  appearing  in  the  feveral  Parts  and 
Members  of  the  Univerfe  ;  from  which  we  may 
juftly  infer  this  general  Conclufion  of  the  Pfal- 
mift.  In  Wtfdom  haji  thou  made  them  all:  But 
that  there  is  a  Sort  of  profeffed  Theijlsy  I  mean 
Monf.  Des  Cartes^  and  his  Followers,  who  en- 
deavour to  difarm  us  of  his  decretory  Weapon 
to  evacuate  and  exterminate  this  Argument, 
which  hath  been  fo  fuccefsful  in  all  Ages  to  de- 
monftrate  the  Exiftence,  and  enforce  the  Belief, 
of  a  Deity,  and  to  convince  and  filence  all  Athe- 
iftick  Gainfayers.     And  this  they  do, 

Firft,  By  excluding  and  banifliing  all  Confi- 
deration  of  final  Caufes  from  Natural  Philofo- 
phy,  upon  Pretence,  that  they  are  all  and  eve- 
ry one  in  particular  undifcoverable  by  us  j  and 
that  it  is  Raflinefs  and  Arrogance  in  us  to  think 
*we  can  find  out  God's  End,  and  be  Partakers  of 
his  Councils.  Atque  ob  hanc  u?iicam  raiionemy 
totum  illud  caufarum  genus  quod  a  fine  peti  folet^ 
in  rebus  Phyficis  nullum  ufum  habere  exijiimo  \  non 
enim  abfque  temeritate  me  puto  invefiigare  pojj'es 
fines  Dei,  Medit.  Metaph.  And  for  this  only 
Reafon,  I  thinks  all  that  Kind  of  Caufes  which  is 
wont  to  be  taken  from  the  End^  to  have  no  life  in 
Thyfics  or  natural  Matters  j  for  I  cannot  with- 
out Rafionefs  thiiik  my  felf  able  to  find  out  the  Ends 
of  God,  And  again,  in  his  Principles  of  Philo- 
fophy ;  Nullas  unquam  rationes  circa  res  NaturaleSy 
a  fine  quern  Deus  aut  Natura  in  iis  faciendis  fibi 
propofuity   admittimuSy    quia  non  tantum  nobis  de- 

^  bemus 


Part  L       in  the  Creation.  39 

bemiis  arrogare  ut  ejus  Concilioriun  participes  effe 
pcfjimus.  We  can  by  ?20  Means  admit  any  Reajbns 
about  natural  Thifigs^  take?!  from  the  E?id  which 
God  or  Nature  proposed  to  themfclves  in  making  of 
them  ;  becaufe  we  ought  not  to  arrogate  fo  7nuch  to 
our  felves,  as  to  think  we  may  be  Partakers  of  his 
Counjels.  And  more  exprefly  in  his  fourth  Anfwer, 
viz.  to  GaJJendus\  Objedions ;  Nee  fingi  potefi^ 
oiiquos  Dei  fines  viagis  quam  alios  in  propatulo  elTe-, 
omnes  enim  imperfcrutabili  ejus  S apt  entice.  abyjTo  funt 
eodem  modo  reconditi ;  That  is,  Neither  can  nor 
ought  we  to  feign  or  imagine  that  fome  of  God's 
Ends  are  inore  manifejl  than  others  -,  for  all  lie  in 
like  Manner^  or  equally  hidden^  in  the  unfearchahle 
Abyfs  of  his  Wifdom. 

This  confident  Aflertion  of  Des  Cartes  is  ful- 
ly examin'd  and  reprov'd  by  that  honourable  and 
excellent  Perfon,  Mr.  Boyle^  in  his  Difquifition 
about  the  final  Caufes  of  natural  l^hi?tgs^  Sed:.  i. 
from  page  10.  to  the  End  5  and  therefore  I 
ihall  not  need  fay  much  to  it,  only  in  brief  this, 
that  it  feems  to  me  falfe,  and  of  evil  Confequence, 
as  being  derogatory  from  the  Glory  of  God,  and 
deftru6tive  of  the  Acknowledgment  and  Belief 
of  a  Deity. 

For  firft,  Seeing  (for  Inftance)  that  the  Eye 
is  employ'd  by  Man  and  all  Animals  for  the 
Ufe  of  Vifion,  which,  as  they  are  fram'd,  is  fo 
neceifary  for  them,  that  they  could  not  live 
without  it;  and  God  Almighty  knew  that  it 
would  be  fo  ;  and  feeing  it  is  fo  admirably  fit- 
ted and  adapted  to  this  Ufe,   that  all  the  M^it  and 

D  4  Art 


40      "The  Wisdom  of  GOD      Part  L 

jlrt  of  Men  and  Angels  could  not  have  contriv'd 
it  better,  if  fo  well  5  it  muft  needs  be  highly 
abfurd  and  unreafonable  to  afnrm,  either  that 
it  was  not  defign  d  at  all  for  thisUfe,  or  that  it 
is  impoffible  lor  Man  to  know  whether  it  was 
or  not. 

Secondly,  How  can  Man  give  Thanks  and 
Praife  to  God  for  the  Ufe  of  his  Limbs  and  Sen-r- 
fes,  and  tliofe  his  good  Creatures  which  ferve 
for  his  Suftenance,  when  he  cannot  be  fure  .they 
were  made  in  any  Refpeft  for  him ;  nay,  when 
'tis  as  likely  they  were  not,  and  that  he  doth 
but  abufe  them  to  ferve  Ends  for  which  they 
were  never  intended? 

Thirdly,  This  Opinion,  as  I  hinted  before, 
fuperfedes  and  caffates  the  beft  Meditwi  we  have 
to  demonftrate  the  Being  of  a  Deity,  leaving  us 
no  other  demonftrative  Proof  but  that  taken 
from  the  innate  Idea-,  which, -if  it  be  a  Demon-r 
ftration,  is  but  an  obfcure  one,  not  fatisfying 
many  of  the  Learned  theinfelves,  and  being  too 
fabtle  and  metaphyseal  to  be  apprehended  by  vul- 
gar-Capacities, and  confequently  of  no  Force 
to  perfuade  and  convince  them. 

Secondly,  They  endeavour  to  evacuate  and 
difannul  our  great  Argument,  by  pretending  to 
folve  all  the  FljcZ:nomena  of  Nature,  and  to  give 
an  Account  of  the  Production  and  EfFormation 
of  the  Univerfe,  and  all  the  corporeal  Beings 
therein,  both  celeftial  and  terreftrial,-  as  well 
animate  as  inanimate,  not  excluding  Animals 
themfelves,  by  a  flight  Hypothejis  of  Matter  fo 
and  fo  divided  and  mgved.     Tht  Hypothefis  you 

have 


Parti.         //^ //6^  Cre  ATioN.  41 

have  in  Des  Cartes^  Principles  ofPhilofoph)\  Part  2. 
All  the  Matter  of  this  vijible  PVorld  is  by  him 
fuppos'd  to  ha've  been  at  firji  divided  by  God  into 
Farts  nearly  equal  to  each  other ^  of  a  nieafi  Size^ 
viz.  about  the  Bigne/'s  of  tho/e  whereof  the  Hea- 
njenly  Bodies  are  now  co7npounded  \  all  together 
having  as  much  Motion  as  is  now  found  in  the 
World ;  and  thefe  to  have  been  equally  movd  feve- 
roMy  every  one  by  it  felf  about  its  own  Center^  and 
among  one  another^  Jb  as  to  coinpoje  a  fluid  Body  \ 
and  alfo  many  of  them  joi?2tly^  as  in  company^ 
about  fever al  other  Points  Jo  far  difiant  fro?n  one 
another^  and  in  the  fame  Manner  difposd  as  the 
Centers  of  the  fix  d  Stars  ?ww  are.  So  that  God  had 
no  more  to  do  than  to  create  the  Matter,  divide 
it  into  Parts,  and  put  it  into  Motion,  according 
to  fome  few  Laws,  and  that  would  of  it  felf 
produce  the  World,  and  all  Creatures  therein. 

For  a  Confutation  of  this  Hypothefisy  I  might 
refer  the  Reader  .  to  Dr.  Cudwortb's  Syltem 
p.  603,  604.  but  for  his  Eafe  I  will  tranfcribe  the 

Words: God,    in  the  mean  Time,  {landing 

by  as* an  idle  Spectator  of  this  Luciis  Atomorum^ 
this  fportful  Dance  of  Atoms^  and  of  the  various 
Refults  thereof  Nay,  thefe  mechanick  Thcifts 
have  here  quite  outftripp'd  and  outdone  the  yi/i?- 
mick  Theifts  themfelves,  they  being  much  more 
extravagant  than  ever  thofe  were ;  for  the  pro- 
feffed  Atheifis  durft  never  venture  to  affirm,  that 
this  regular  Syflem  of  Things  refulted  from  the 
'  fortuitous  Motions  of  Atoms  at  the  very  firft, 
before  they  had  for  a  long  Time  together  pro- 
duced many  other  inept  Combinations^  or  aggregate 

Forms 


42         jrl}e  WnsDOM  of  GOD    Parti. 

Forms  of  particular  Things,and  mnfenfica/  Syjiems 
of  the  Whole;  and  they  fuppos'd  alfo,  that  the 
Regularity  of  Things  here  in  this  World  would 
not  always  continue  fuch  neither,  but  that  fome 
Time  or  other,  Confufion  and  Diforder  will  break 
in  again.  Moreover,  that  befides  this  World 
of  ours,  there  are  at  this  very  Inftant  innume- 
rable other  Worlds  irregular,  and  that  there  is 
but  one  of  a  thoufand,  or  Ten  Thoufand  among 
the  infinite  Worlds  that  have  fuch  Regularity  in 
them  J  the  Reafon  of  all  which  is,  becaufe  it 
was  generally  taken  for  granted,  and  look'd 
upon  as  a  common  Notion,that  ruv  aVo  tv^^m  ^cl\ 
Tov  ctVTO/Lioirov  ovS'h  ciei  corce  ylvirai,  as  Arijiotle  ex- 
preffeth  it ;  none  of  thofe  Things  which  are  from 
Fortune,  or  Chance,  come  to  pafs  always  alike. 
But  our  mechanick  'Theijls  will  have  their  Atoms 
never  fo  much  as  once  to  have  fumbled  in  thefe 
their  Motions,  nor  to  have  produc'd  any  inept 
Syftem,  or  incongruous  Forms  at  all,  but  from 
the  very  firft  all  along  to  have  taken  up  their 
Places,  and  ranged  themfelves  fo  orderly,  me- 
thodically and  direftly,  as  that  they  could  not 
poflibly  have  done  it  better  had  they  been  dire- 
fled  by  the  moll  perfect  Wifdom.  Wherefore 
thefe  Atomrck  Theijh  utterly  evacuate  that  grand 
Argument  for  a  God  taken  from  the  Phc^nome- 
noii  of  the  Artificial  Frame  of  Things,  which  hath 
been  fo  much  infilled  upon  in  all  Ages,  and 
which  commonly  makes  the  flrongeft  Impreflion 
of  any  other  upon  the  Minds  of  Men,  ^c,  the 
Atheijisy  in  the  mean  Time,  laughing  in  their 
Sleeves^   and  not  a  little  triumphing  to  fee  the 

Caufc 


Part  I.       in  the  Creation.  43 

Caufe  of  Tbeifm  thus  betrayed  by  its  profefs'd 
Friends  and  Afferters,  and  the  grand  Argument 
for  the  fame  totally  flurr'd  by  them,  and  fo  their 
Work  done,  as  it  were,  to  their  Hands. 

Now  as  this  argues  the  greateft  Infenfibility  of 
Mind,  or  Sottifhnefs  and  Stupidity  in  pretended 
Theijisy  not  to  take  theleaft  Notice  of  the  regular 
and  artificial  Frame  of  Things,  or  of  the  Signa- 
tupesof  the  Divine  Art  and  Wifdom  in  them,  nor 
to  look  upon  the  World  and  Things  of  Nature  with 
any  other  Eyes  than  Oxen  and  Horfes  do;,fo 
are  there  many  Phanomenasin  Nature,  which  be- 
ing partly  above  the  Force  of  thefe  mechmiick 
Powers^  and  partly  contrary  to  the  fame,  can 
therefore  never  be  folv'd  by  them,  nor  without 
Jinal  CaufeSy  and  fome  vital  Principles :  As  for  Ex- 
ample, that  of  Gravity,  or  the  Tendency  of  Bo- 
dies downward,  the  Motion  of  the  Diaphragm  in 
Refpiration,  the  Syjiole  and  Diajiole  of  the  Heart, 
which  is  nothing  but  a  Mufcular  Conllridion 
and  Relaxation,  and  therefore  not  mechanical 
but  vital.  We  might  alfo  add,  among  many 
othefs,  the  Interfedtion  of  the  Planes  of  the 
Equator  and  Ecliptick^  or  the  Earth's  diurnal 
Motion  upon  an  Axis  not  parallel  to  that  of  the 
Eclipticky  nor  perpendicular  to  the  Plane  there- 
of: For  tho*  Des  Cartes  would  need  imagine 
this  Earth  of  ours  once  to  have  been  a  Sun,  and 
fo  it  felf  the  Centre  of  a  leffer  Vortex^  whofe 
Axis  was^  then  direded  after  this  Manner,  and 
which  therefore  ftill  kept  the  fame  Site  or  Po- 
fture,  by  Reafon  of  the  ftrait  Particles  finding 
no  fit  Pores,  or  Traces,  for  their  PalTages  through 


44       T/^e  Wis-DOM  of  GOD     Parti. 

it,  but  only  in  this  Diredion-;  yet  does  he  himfelf 
confefSj  that  becaufe  thefe  two  Motions  of  the 
Earth,  the  Annual  and  Diurnal,  would  be  much 
more  conveniently  made  upon  parallel  ^xeSy 
therefore,  according  to  the  Laws  of  Mechanifm, 
they  {hould  be  perpetually  brought  nearer  and 
nearer  together,  till  at  length  the  Equator  and 
Ecliptick  come  to  have  their  ^;c^^  parallel,  which, 
as  it  hath  not  yet  come  to  pafs,  fo  neither  hath 
there  been  for  thefe  laft  Two  Thoufand  Years 
(according  to  the  beft  Obfervations  and  Judg- 
ments of  Aftronomers)  any  nearer  Approach 
made  of  them  one  to  another.  V/herefore  the 
Continuation  of  thefe  two  Motions  of  the  Earth, 
the  Annual  and  Diurnal,  upon  :A:>^e^s  not  parallel, 
is  refolvable  into  nothing  but  ^  f?2al  and  mental 
Caufe,  or  the  to  BlAri^cr,  becaufe  it  was  beft  it 
fhould  be  fo,  the  Variety  of  the  Seafons  of  the 
Year  depending  thereupon.  But  the  greateft  of 
all  the  particular  Pfe;2(5;;^^77^,  is' the  Formation 
and  Organization  of  the  Bodies  of  Animals,  con- 
fifting  of  fuch  Variety  and  Curiofity,  that  thefe 
mechanick  Philofophers  being  no  way  able  to 
give  an  Account  thereof  from  the  neceffary' Mo- 
tion of  Matter,  imgiiided  by  Mind  for  Ends^  pru- 
dently therefore  break  off  their  Syftem  there, 
when  they  fhould  come  to  Aninials,  and  fo  leave 
it  altogether  untouch'd.  We  acknowledge  indeed 
there  is  a  Pojlhumous  Piece  extant,  imputed  to 
Carter,  and  entitled,  De  la  Formation  du  Fcetus^ 
wherein  there  is  fome  Pretence  made  to  folve  all 
this  fortuitous  Mechanifm.  But  as  the  The- 
ory thereof  is  built  wholly  upon  a  falfe  Suppo- 

fition, 


Parti.        7>//;5^  Cre  ATioK.  4^ 

lition,  fufficiently  confuted  by  our  Harvey,  m 
his  Book  of  Generation,  'that  the  Seed  doth  ma- 
terially enter  into  the  Compofition  of  the  Egg ;  fa 
is  it  all  along  precarious  and  exceptionable  :  Nor 
doth  it  extend  at  all  to  Differences  that  are  in 
feveral  Animals,  nor  offer  the  leail  Reafon  why 
an  Animal  of  one  Species  might  not  be  formed 
out  of  the  Seed  of  another.  Thus  far  the  Docior, 
wich  whom  for  the  main  I  do  confent.  I  fhall 
only  add,  that  Natural  Philofophers,  when  they 
endeavour  to  give  an  Account  of  any  of  the 
Works  of  Nature,  by  preconceived  Principles  of 
their  own,  are  for  the  moil:  Part  grofly  miftaken, 
and  confuted  by  Experience ;  as  Des  Cartes  in  a 
Matter  that  lay  before  him,  obvious  to  Senfe, 
and  infinitely  more  eafy  to  find  out  the  Caufe 
of,  than  to  give  an  Account  of  the  Forma- 
tion of  the  World ;  that  is,  the  Pulfe  of  the 
Heart,  which  he  attributes  to  an  Ebullition  and 
iiidden  Expanfion  of  the  Blood,  in  its  Ventri- 
cles, after  the  Manner  of  the  Milk,  which 
being  heated  to  fuch  a  Degree,  doth  fuddenly, 
and  as  it  were  all  at  once,  flu  ill  uo  and  run 
over  the  Veffel.  Whether  this  Ebullition  be 
caus'd  by  a  Nitro-Sulphureous  Ferment  lodg'd 
efpecially  in  the  left  Ventricle  of  the  Heart, 
which  mingling  with  the  Blood,  excites  fuch 
an  Ebullition,  as  we  fee  made  by  the  Mixture 
of  fome  chymical  Liquors,  viz.  Oil  of  Vi- 
triol, and  deliquated  Salt  of  Tartar  ;  or,  by  the 
vital  Flame  warming  and  boiling  the  Blood. 
But  this  Conceit  of  his  is  contrary  both  to  Rea- 
fon and  Experience :    For,  firfr,    it  is  altogether 

unrea- 


46       The  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

unreafonable  to  imagine  and  affirm  that  the  cool 
venal  Blood  fhould  be  heated  to  fo  high  a  Degree 
in  fo  fhort  a  Time  as  the  Interval  of  two  Pulfes, 
which  is  lefs  than  the  lixth  Part  of  a  Minute. 
Secondly,  in  cold  Animals,  as  for  Example,  Rehy 
the  Heart  will  beat  for  many  Hours  after  it  is 
taken  out  of  the  Body,  yea,  tho'  the  Ventricle 
be  open'd,  and  all  the  Blood  fqueez'd  out. 
Thirdly,  The  Procefs  of  the  Fibres  which  com- 
pound the  Sides  of  the  Ventricles  running  in 
Spiral  Lines  from  the  Tip  to  the  Bafe  of  the 
Heart,  fome  one  Way,  and  fome  the  contrary, 
do  clearly  feew  that  the  Syjlole  of  the  Heart  is 
nothing  but  a  Mufcular  Conftridion,  as  a  Purfe 
is  fhut  by  drawing  the  Strings  contrary-ways; 
which  is  alfo  confirmed  by  Experience :  For  if 
the  Vertex  of  the  Heart  be  cut  off,  and  a  Fin- 
ger thruft  up  into  one  of  the  Ventricles,  in 
every  Syjlole  the  Finger  will  be  fenfibly  and  ma- 
nifeftly  pinch'd  by  the  Sides  of  the  Ventricle. 
But  for  a  full  Confutation  of  this  Fancv,  I  refer 
the  Reader  to  Dr.  Loii-ers  Treatife  De  Corde^ 
cap.  2.  and  Des  Cartess  Rules  concerning  the 
transferring  of  Motion  from  one  Body  in  Motion 
to  another  in  Motion,  or  in  Reft,  are  the  moft  of 
them  by  Experience  found  to  be  falfe  y  as  they 
affirm  who  have  made  Trial  of  them. 

The  Pulfe  of  the  Heart  Dr.  Cudworth  would 
have  to  be  no  Mechanical,  but  a  Vital  Motion, 
which  to  me  feems  probable,  becaufe  it  is  not 
under  the  Command  of  the  Will;  nor  are  we 
confcious  of  any  power  to  caufe^  or  to  reftrain  it, 
but  it  is  carried  on  and  continued  without  our 

Know- 


Part  L       in  /^^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  47 

Knowledge,  or  Notice ;  neither  can  it  be  caufed 
by  the  Impulfe  of  any  external  Movent,  unlefs  it 
be  Heat.  But  how  can  the  Spirit,  agitated  by 
Heat,  unguided  by  a  vital  Principle^  produce  fuch 
a  regular  reciprocal  Motion?  If  that  Site  which 
the  Heart  and  its  Fibres  have  in  the  Diajiole  be 
moft  natural  to  them,  (as  it  feems  to  be)  why 
doth  it  again  contrad:  it  felf,  and  not  reft  in  that 
Pojfture  ?  If  it  be  once  contracted  in  a  Syjiole  by 
the  Influx  of  the  Spirits,  why,  the  Spirits  conti- 
nually flowing  in  without  Let,  doth  it  not  al- 
ways remain  fo  ?  [for  the  Syjiole  feems  to  refemble 
the  forcible  Bending  of  a  Spring,  and  the  Dia/lole 
its  flying  out  again  to  its  natural  Site.]  What 
is  the  Spring  and  principal  Efficient  of  this  Re- 
ciprocation ?  What  diredts  and  moderates  the 
Motions  of  the  Spirits  ?  They  being  but  ftupid 
and  fenfelefs  Matter,  cannot  of  themfelves  con- 
tinue any  regular  and  conftant  Motion,  without 
the  Guidance  and  Regulation  of  fome  intelligent 
Being.  You  will  fay.  What  Agent  is  it  which 
you  would  have  to  eflfed:  this?  The  fenfitive 
Soul  it  cannot  be,  becaufe  that  is  indivifible ; 
but  the  Heart  when  feparated  wholly  from  the 
Body  .  in  fome  Animals ^  continues  ftill  to  pulfe 
for  a  confiderable  Time:  Nay,  when  it  hath  quite 
ceas'd,  it  may  be  brought  to  beat  a-new  by  the 
Application  of  warm  Spittle,  or  by  pricking  it 
gently  with  a  Pin,  or  Needle.  I  anfwer,  it  may 
be  in  thefe  Inftances,  the  fcattering  Spirits  re- 
maining in  the  Heart,  may  for  a  Time,  being 
agitated  by  the  Heat,  caufe  thefe  faint  Pulfations> 
tho'  I  fhould  ratloer  attribute  them  to  a  plajiick 

^    Nature^ 


48         The  Wisdom  of  GOD  .  Parti. 

Nature^    or  vital  Princple,    as  the  Vegetation  of 
Plants  muft  alfo  be. 

But,  to  proceed,  neither  can  I  wholly  ac- 
quiefce  in  the  Hypothefis  of  that  Honourable  and 
defervedly  Famous  Author,  I  formerly  had  Occa- 
fion  to  mention,  which  I  find  in  ]i\s  free  Enquiry 
into  the  vulgar  Notion  of  Nature,  p.  77,  78.  de- 
livered in  thefe  Words.  " "  I  think  it  probable, 
"'  that  the  great  and  wife  Author  of  Things  did, 
"  when  he  firft  form'd  the  Univerfe  and  undi- 
"  ftinguifh'd  Matter  into  the  World,  put  its  Parts 
"  into  various  Motions,  whereby  they  were  ne- 
*'  cefiarily  divided  into  numberlefs  Portions  of 
"  differing  Bulks,  Figures,  and  Situations,  in  Re- 
''  fped;  of  each  other  :  And  that  by  his  infinite 
"  Wifdom  ftjfid  Power,  he  did  fo  guide  and  over- 
"  rule  the  Motions  of  thefe  Parts,  at  the  Begin- 
"  ning  of  Things,  as  that  (whether  in  a  fhorter 
''  or  a  longer  Time,  Reafon  cannot  determine) 
*'  they  Y^ere  finally  difpos'd  into  that  beautiful 
''  and  orderly  Frame  that  we  call  the  IVorld; 
*'  among  whofe  Parts  fome  were  fo  curioufly^ 
"  contrived,  as  to  be  fit  to  become  the  Seed,  or 
''  feminal  Principles,  of  Plants  and  .Animals. 
''  And,  I  further  conceive,  that  he  fettled  fuch 
"  Laws,  or  Rules,  of  local  Motion  among  the 
*'  Parts  of  the  Univerfal  Matter,  that  by  his  or- 
"  dinary  and  preferving  Concourfe,  the  feveral 
"  Parts  of  the  Univerfe  thus  once  com  pleated, 
"  fhould  be  able  to  maintain  the  .great  Con- 
''  ftrudion,  or  Syftem,  and  Oeconomy  of  the 
*'  Mundane  Bodies,  and  propagate  the  Species 
''  of  living  Creatures."    The  i'^mt  ■  Hypothejis  he 

repeats 


Part  I.         in  the  C?.-EATio n.  49 

repeats  again,  pag.  124,   125.  of  the  fame  Trea- 
tife. 

ThAsHypothefSy  I  fay,  I  cannot  fully  acquiefce 
in,  becaufc  an  intelligent  Being  feems  to  me 
requifire  to  execute  the  Laws  of  Motion  :  For 
firll,  Motion  being  a  fluent  Thing,  and  one  Part 
of  its  Duration  being  abfolutely  independent 
upon  another,  it  doth  not  follow,  that  becaufe 
ahy  thing  moves  this  Moment,  it  'muft  necef- 
farily  continue  to  do  fo  the  next,  unlefs  it 
were  aftually  polTefs'd  of  its  future  Motion, 
which  is  a  Contradidion ;  but  it  ftands  in  as 
much  Need  of  an  Efficient  to  preferve  and  con- 
tinue its  Motion,  as  it  did  at  firft  to  produce  it. 
Secondly,  Let  Matter  be  divided  into  the  fub- 
tileft  Parts  imaginable,  and  thefe  be  mov'd  as 
fwiftly  as  you  will,  it  is  but  a  fenfelefs  and  ftu- 
pid  Being  ftill,  and  makes  no  nearer  approach 
to  Senfe,  Perception,  or  vital  Energy,  than  it 
had  before ;  and  do  but  only  flop  the  internal 
Motion  of  its  Parts,  and  reduce  them  to  Reft, 
the  fineft  and  mofl  fubtile  Body  that  is,  may  be- 
come as  grofs'  and  heavy,  and  flifF,  as  Steel,  or 
Stone.  And,  as  for  any  external  Laws,  or  efla- 
blifh'd  Rules  of  Motion,  the  flupid  Matter  is 
not  capable  of  obferving,  or  taking  any  Notice  of 
them,  but  would  be  as  fuUen  as  the  Moun- 
tain was  that  MaJmnet  commanded  to  come 
down  to  him  \  neither  can  thofe  Laws  execute 
themfelves  :  Therefore  there  mufl,  befides' 
Matter  and  Law,  be  fome  Efficient,  and  that 
either  a  Quality,  or  Power,  inherent  in  the  Mat- 
ter it  felf,    v/hich   is  hard  to  conceive,    or  fome 

E  '       external 


50        77je  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

external  intelligent  Agent,  either  God  himfelf 
immediately,  or  fome  Plajlick  Nature^ 

Happening  lately  to  read  The  Chrijitan  Vir- 
ttiqfdy  written  by  the  fame  Author  of  the  Enquiry 
into  the  vulgar  Notiom  of  Nature^  (the  illuftri- 
ous  Mr.  Boyle)  I  find  therein  thefe  Words : 
*'  Nor  will  the  Force  of  all  that  has  been  faid 
"  for  God*s  fpecial  Providence  be  eluded,  by 
*'  faying,  w'ith  fome  Deifts,  That  after  the  firil 
*'  Formation  of  the  Univerfe,  all  Things  were 
"  brought  to  pafs  by  the  fettled  Laws  of  Nature. 
"  For  though  this  be  confidently,  and  not  with- 
*'  out  Colour,  pretended,  yet,  I  confefs,  it  doth 

"  not  fatisfie  me : For  I  look  upon  a  Law  as 

"  a  Moral,  not  Phyfical  Caufe,  as  being  indeed 
"  but  a  notional  Thing,  according  to  which  an 
'*  intelligent  and  free  Agent  is  bound  to  regukte 
"  its  Adtions.  But  inanimate  Bodies  are  utterly 
"  uncapable  of  underftanding  what  it  is,  or  what 
"  it  enjoins,  or  when  they  aft  conformably,  or 
*'  unconformably  to  it :  Therefore  the  Adions 
"  of  inanimate  Bodies,  which  cannot  incite,  or 
"  moderate  their  own  Adlions,  are  produced  by 
**  real  Power,  not  by  Laws. 

All  this  being  confonant  to  what  I  have  here 
written,  againft  what  I  took  to  be  this  Honour- 
able Perfon's  Hypothejis,  I  muft  needs,  to  do  him 
Right,  acknowledge  my  felf  miftaken  -,  perceiving 
now,  that  his  Opinion  was,  that  God  Ahnighty 
did  not  only  eftablifh  Laws  and  Rules  of  local 
Motion  among  the  Parts  of  the  univerfal  Mat- 
ter, but  did,  and  does  al fo  himfelf,  execute 
them,    or  move  the  Parts  of  Matter^   according 

to 


Part  I.  in  the  Cky.  AT  10"^.  51 

to  them :  So  that  we  are  in  the  main  agreed, 
differing  chiefly  about  the  Agent  that  executes 
thofe  Laws,  which  he  holds  to  be  God  himfelf 
immediately,  we  a  Plaftick  Nature  ;  for  the 
Reafons  aliedg'd  by  Dr.  Cudworthy  in  his  Sy- 
ftem,  pag.  149.  which  are,  Firft,  Becaufe  the 
former,  according  to  vulgar  Apprehenfion,  would 
render  the  Divine  Providence  operofe,  folicitous, 
and  diftraftious ;  and  thereby  make  the  Belief 
of  it  entertained  with  greater  Difficulty,  and 
give  Advantage  to  Atheifts.  Secondly,  It  is  not 
fo  decorous  in  Refpefl:  of  God,  that  he  £hould 
cLvrcvpyeiv  cvnxvroLy  fet  his  own  Hand,  as  it  were,  to 
every  Work,  and  immediately  do  all  the  mean- 
eft  and  trifling'ft  Things  himfelf  drudgingly, 
without  making  Ufe  of  any  inferior  or  fubordi- 
nate  Minifter.  Thefe  two  Reafons  are  plauflble, 
but  not  cogent  j  the  two  following  are  of 
greater  Force.  Thirdly,  The  flow  and  gradual 
Procefs  that  is  in  the  Generation  of  Things,  which 
would  feem  to  be  a  vain  and  idle  Pomp,  or  tri- 
fling pormality,  if  the  Agent  were  omnipotent. 
Fourthly,  Thcfe  aV^pT>i/>6ara,  as  Arijiotle  calls 
them,  thofe  Errors  and  Bungles  which  were  com- 
mitted when  the  Matter  is  inept,  or  contumacious, 
as  in  Monfters,  &c,  which  argue  the  Agent  not 
to  be  irreflftible  ;  and  that  Nature  is  fuch  a  Thing 
as  is  not  altogether  uncapable,  as  well  as  human 
Art,  of  being  fometimes  fruftrated.  and  difap- 
pointed  by  the  Indifpofition  of  the  Matter: 
Whereas  an  omnipotent  Agent  would  always  do 
its  Work  infallibly  and  irrefiftibly,  no  Inepti- 
tude, or  Stubbornefs  of  the  Matcer^  being  ever. 

E  2  able 


T2         neWisDouo/GOD     Parti. 

able  to  hinder  fuch  an  one,  or  make  him  bungle, 
or  fumble  in  any  thing.     So  far  the  Dodlor.    For 
my  Part,    I  flaould  make  no  Scruple  to  attribute 
the  Formation  of  Pla?2ts,  their  Growth  and  Nu- 
trition, to  the  vegetable  Soul  in  them ;  and  like- 
wife  the  Formation  of  Afzimalsy  to  the  Vegetative 
Power  of  their  Souls  5   but  that  the  Segments 
and  Cuttings   of  fome    Plants,    nay,    the  very 
Chips  and  fmalleft    Fragments  of  their  Body, 
Branches,    or  Roots,   will  grow  and  become  per- 
fect Plants  themfelves,  and  fo  the  vegetable  Soul, 
if  that  w^ere  the  Architedl,    would  be  divifible, 
and  confequently  no  fpiritual,   or  intelligent  Be- 
ing; which  the  Tlafiick  Principle  vnuG:  be,  as  we 
have  {hewn:    For  that  muft   prefide  over  the 
whole  Oeconomy  of  the  Plant,    and  be  one  fin- 
gle  Agent,    which  takes  Care  of  the  Bulk  and 
Figure  of  the  Whole,  and  the  Situation,  Figure, 
Texture  of  all  the  Parts,  Root,  Stalk,  Branches, 
Leaves,    Flowers,    Fruit,    and  all  their  VefTels* 
and  Juices.    I  therefore  incline  to  Dr.  Cudworth'% 
Opinion,  that  God  ufes  for  thefe  Eifefts  the  fub- 
ordinate  Miniftry  of  fome  inferior  Plajtick  Na- 
ture ;  as,  in  his  Works  of  Providence,  he  doth  of 
Angels.   .  For  the  Defcription  whereof  I  refer  the 
Reader  to  his  Syjiem. 

Secondly,  In  particular  I  am  difficult  to  be- 
lieve, that  the  Bodies  of  Ajiimah  can  be  form'd 
by  Matter  divided  and  mov'd  by  what  Laws 
you  will,  or  can  imagine,  without  the  immediate 
Preiidency,  Diredion,  and  Regulation  of  fome 
intelligent  Being.  In  the  Generation,,  or  firft  For- 
mation of,  fuppofe,  the  human  Body  out  of 
I  (tho' 


Part  I.        in  it/je  Cke ATio"^.  53 

(tlW   not  an  homogeneous  Liquor,    yet)  a  fluid 
Subflance,    the  only  material  Agent,    or  Mover, 
is  a  moderate  Heat.     Now  how  this,    by  pro- 
ducing an  inteftine  Motion  in  the  Particles  of  the 
Matter,    which  can  be  conceiv'd  to  differ  in  no- 
thing elfe  but  Figure,    Magnitude,  and  Gravity, 
fhould,    by  Vertue  thereof,    not  only  feparate 
the  Heterogeneous  Parts,    but  affemble  the  Ho- 
iiK)geneous  into  Mafles,    or  Syftems,    and  that 
not  each  Kind  into  one  Mafs,    but  into  many 
and  disjoined  Ones,    as  it  were  fo  many  Troops  5 
and   that   in    each  Troop   the    particular  Par- 
ticles fhould   take  their  Places,    and  caft  them- 
felves  into  fuch  a  Figure  ;    as  for  Example,    the 
Bones,    being  about  300,    are  form'd  of  various 
Sizes  and  Shapes,   fo  fituate  and  conneded,  as  to 
be  fubfervient  to  many  hundred  Intentions  and 
Ufes,  and  many  of  them  confpire  to  one  and  the 
fame  Adiion,   and  all  this  contrarily  to  the  Lawg 
of  Specifick  Gravity,    in  whatever  Pofture  the 
Body  be  formed  ;    for  the  Bones,  whofe  compo- 
nent Parts  are  the  heavier,    will  be  above  fome 
Part's  of  the  Flefh  which  are  the  lighter ;    how 
much  more  then,    feeing  it  is  form'd  with  the 
Head,    (which  for  its  Bignefs  is  the  heavieft  of 
all  the  Parts)  upperm.oft.     This,  I  fay,  I  cannot 
by  any  Means  conceive.      I  might  inftance  in 
all  the  Homogeneous  Parts  of  the  Body,    either 
Sites  and  Figures,    and  ask  by  what  imaginable 
Laws  of  ^Motion  their  Bulk,   Figure,    Situation, 
and  Connedion  can  be  made  out  ?  What  Ac- 
count can  be  given  of  the  Valves,    of  the  Veins 
and  Arteries  of  the  Heart,    and  of  the  Veins 

E  3  ^  elfe- 


54  ^^  Wisdom  of  GOD  Parti, 
elfewhere,  and  of  their  Situation ;  of  the  Fi- 
gure and  Confiftency  of  all  the  Humours  and 
Membranes  of  the  Eye,  all  confpiring  and  ex- 
adly  fitted  to  the  Ufe  of  Seeing  ?  But  I  have 
touched  upon  that  already,  and  fhall  difcourfe 
it  largely  afterward.  You  will  ask  me.  Who, 
or  what,  is  the  Operator  in  the  Formation  of  the 
Bodies  of  Man,-  and  other  Animals  ?  I  anfwer. 
The  fenfitive  Soul  it  felf,  if  it  be  a  fpiritual  and 
immaterial  Subftance,  as  I  am  inclinable  to  be- 
lieve ;  but  if  it  be  material,  and  confequent- 
ly  the  whole  Anunal  but  a  mere  Machine,  or 
Automaton^  as  I  can  hardly  admit,  then  muft  we 
have  recourfe  to  a  Plajiick  Nature, 

That  the  Soul  of  Brutes  is  material,  and  the 
whole  Animal,  Soul  and  Body,  but  a  mere  Ma- 
chine, is  the  Opinion,  publickly  own'd  and  de- 
clared, of  Des  Cartes^  Gajfendus,  Dr.  Willis^  and 
others.  The  fame  is  alfo  neceffarily  confequent 
upon  the  Dodlrine  of  the  Peripateticks,  viz. 
That  the  fenfitive  Soul  is  educed  out  of  the  Power 
of  the  Matter ;  for  nothing  can  be  educed  out 
of  the  Matter  but  what  was  there  before  ;  which 
mufl:  be  either  Matter,  or  fome  Modification 
of  it.  And  therefore  they  cannot  grant  it  to 
be  a  fpiritual  Subftance,  unlefs  they  will  affert 
it  to  be  educed  out  of  nothing.  This  Opinion, 
I  fay,  I  can  hardly  digeft  :  I  ihould  rather  think, 
Animals  to  be  endu'd  with  a  lower  Degree 
of  Reafon,  than  that  they  are  mere  Machines. 
I  could  inftance  in  many  Adions  of  Brutes, 
that  are  hardly  to  be  accounted  for  with- 
out Reafon  and  Argumentation  j  as  that  com- 
monly 


Part  I.        in  the  Ckv.  ATio n.  5 5 

monly  noted  of  Dogs,  that  running  before  their 
Mafters,  they  will  ilop  at  a  Divarication  of  the 
Way,  'till  they  fee  which  Hand  their  Mafters  will 
take ;  and  that  when  they  have  gotten  a  Prey, 
which  they  fear  their  Mafters  will  take  from  them, 
they  will  run  away  and  hide  ir,  and  afterwards 
return  to  it.  What  Account  can  be  given  why  a 
Dog,  being  to  leap  upon  a  Table  which  he  fees 
tp  be  too  high  for  him  to  reach  at  once,  if  a  Stool, 
or  Chair,  happens  to  ftand  near  it,  doth  firft 
mount  up  that,  and  from  thence  the  Table  ?  If 
he  was  a  Machine,  or  Piece  of  Clockwork,  and 
this  Motion  caused  by  the  ftriking  of  a  Spring, 
there  is  no  Reafon  imaginable  why  the  Spring 
being  fet  on  Work,  fhould  not  carry  the  Ma- 
chine in  a  right  Line  tov^^ard  the  Objedt  that 
put  it  in  Motion,  as  well  when  the  Table  is 
high  as  when  it  is  low  ;  whereas  I  have  often  ob- 
ferv'd  the  firft  Leap  the  Creature  hath  taken  up 
the  Stool,  not  to  be  diredly  toward  the  Table, 
but  in  a  Line  oblique,  and  much  declining  from 
the  Objed:  that  mov'd  it,  or  that  Part  of  the  Ta- 
ble on  which  it  ftood. 

Many  the  like  Adions  there  are,  which  I 
fhall  not  fpend  Time  to  relate.  Should  this  be 
true,  that  Beafts  were  Automata^  or  Machines, 
they  could  have  no  Senfe,  or  Perception  of  Plea- 
fure,  or  Pain,  and  confequently  no  Cruelty  could 
be  exercis'd  towards  them;  which  is  contrary 
to  the  doleful  Significations  they  make  when 
beaten,  or  tormented,  and  contrary  to  the  com- 
mon Senfe  of  Mankind,  all  Men  naturally  pity- 
ing them,    as  apprehending  them  to  have  fuch  a 

E  4  .  Senfe 


56      7%e  Wis-DOM,  of  GOD     Parti. 

« 

Senfe  and  Feeling  of  Pain  and  Mifery  as  thcm- 
felves  have ;  vv^hereas  no  Man  is  troubled  to 
fee  a  Plant  torn,  or  cut,  or  ftampt,  or  man- 
gled how  you  pleafe  ;  and  at  laft  feemingly  con- 
trary to  the  Scripture  too ;  for  it  is  faid,  Prov. 
xii.  lo.  ^  righteous  Man  regardeth  the  Life  of  his 
Beajiy  but  the  tender  Mercies  of  the  Wicked  are 
cruel.  The  former  Claufe  is  ufually  Englifli'd, 
A  good  Man  is  merciful  to  his  Beaji  ;  which  is 
the  true  Expofition  of  its  as  appears  by  the 
oppoiite  Claufe,.  that  the  Wicked  are  crueL  What 
lefs  then  can  be  inferred  from  this  Place,  than 
that  Cruelty  may  be  exercis'd  towards  Beafts, 
which,  were  they  mere  Machines,  it  could  not 
be  r  To  which  I  do  not  fee  what  can  be  anfwer'd, 
but  that  the  Scripture  accommodates  it  felf  to  the 
common,  tho'  falfe.  Opinion  of  Mankind,  who 
take  thefe  Animals  to  be  endued  with  Senfe  of 
Pain,  and  think  that  Cruelty  may  be  exercised 
towards  them  5  tho',  in  reality,  there  is  no  fuch 
thing :  Befides,  having  the  fame  Members  and 
Organs  of  Senfe  as  we  have,  it  is  very  probable 
they  have  the  fame  Senfations  and  Perceptions 
with  us.  To  this  Des  Cartes  anfwers,  or  in- 
deed faith,  he  hath  nothing  to  anfwer ;  but 
that  if  they  think  as  well  as  wcj  they  have  an 
immortal  Soul  as  v/eU  as  we:  Which  is  not 
at  all  likely,  bccaufe  there  is  no  Reafon  to  be- 
lieve it  of  fome  Animals  without  believing  it 
of  all ;  whereas  there  are  many  too  imperfedi  to 
believe  it  of  them,  fuch  as  are  OyJterSy  and 
SpongeSy  and  the  like.  To  which  I  anfwer,  That 
there  is  no  Ncceflity  they  (hould  be  immortal, 

be- 


Part  I.         in  //6^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  57 

becaufe  it  is  pdfTible  they  may  be  deflroy'd,  or 
annihilated.  But  I  fhall  not  wade  further  into 
this  Controverfy,  tecaufe  it  is  befide  my  Scope, 
and  there  hath  u^n  as  much  written  of  it 
already,  as  I  have  to  fay,  by  Dr.  Moore^  Dr. 
Ciidworth^  Des  Cartes^  Dr.  Willisy  and  others. 
Pro  and  Con. 

Of  the  njijible  Works  of  God ^  and  their  Divifon. 

I  come  now  to  take  a  View  of  the  Works  of 
the  Creation,  and  to  obferve  fomething  of  the 
Wifdom  of  God  difcernable  in  the  Formation  of 
them,  in  their  Order  and  Harmony,  aqd  in  their 
Ends  and  Ufes :  And  firft,  I  (hall  run  them 
over  (lightly,  remarking  chiefly  what  is  obvi- 
ous and  exposed  to  the  Eyes  and  Notice  of  the 
more  carelefs  and  incurious  Obferver.  Second- 
ly, I  (hall  feled:  one  or  two  particular  Pieces, 
and  take  a  more  exad:  Survey  of  them  ;  tho* 
even  in  thefe,  more  will  efcape  our  Notice  than 
can  be  difcover  d  by  the  moft  diligent  Scrutiny; 
for  our  Eyes  and  Senfes,  however  arm*d  or 
aflifted,  are  too  grofs  to  difcern  the  Curiofity 
of  the  Workman(hip  of  Nature,  or  thofe  mi- 
nute Parts  by  which  it  ad:s,  and  of  which  Bo- 
dies are  compos'd  y  and  our  Underftanding  too 
dark  and  infirm  to  difcover  and  comprehend  all 
the  Ends  and  Ufes  to  which  the  infinitely  wife 
Creator  did  defign  them. 

But  before  1  proceed,     being    put  in  Mind 
thereof  by  the  mention  of  the  A(ri (lance  of  our 
Eyes,    I   cannot  omi-t  one  general   Obfervation 
concerning  the  Curiofity  of  the  Works  of  Na- 
ture 


58         The  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  L 

ture  in  Comparifon  of  the  Works  of  Art,  which 
I  fhall  propofe  in  the  late  Bifliop  of  Chejlers 
Words,  \TreatiJe  of  Natural  Religion^  Lib.  i.  c.  6.) 
"  The  Obfervations  which  have  been  made  in 
"  thefe  latter  Times  by  the  Help  of  the  Micro- 
*'  J'cope^  fince  we  had  the  Ufe  and  Improvement 
*'  of  it,  difcover  a  vaft  Difference  between  Na- 
*^  tural  and  Artificial  Things.  Whatever  is  Na- 
''  tural,  beheld  thro'  that,  appears  exquifitely 
*'  formed,  and  adorn'd  with  all  imaginable  Ele- 
*'  gancy  and  Beauty.  There  are  fuch  inimita- 
«^  ble  Glidings  in  the  fmallefl  Seeds  of  Plants, 
"  but  efpecially  in  the  Parts  of  Animals,  in  the 
*'  Head,  or  Eye,  of  a  fmall  Fly  ;  fuch  Accu- 
*'  racy.  Order,  and  Symmetry  in  the  Frame  of 
**  the  utmoll  minute  Creatures,  a  Loufe^  for  Hx- 
*'  ample,  or  a  Mite^  as  no  Man  were  able  to  con- 
«'  ceive  without  feeing  of  them.  Whereas  the 
*'  moft  curious  Works  of  Art,  the  {liarpeft  and 
«'  fineft  Needle,  doth  appear  as  a  blunt  rough 
«'  Bar  of  Iron,  coming  from  the  Furnace,  or  the 
«'  Forge:  The  moft  accurate  Engravings,  orEm- 
<'  bofments,  feem  fuch  rude,  bungling,  and  de- 
«'  form'd  Work,  as  if  they  had  been  done  with  a 
«'  Mattock,  or  Trowel ;  fo  vaft  a  Difference  is 
<'  there  betwixt  the  Skill  of  Nature,  and  the 
«'  Rudenefs  and  Imperfection  of  Art.  I  might 
«'  add,  that  the  Works  of  Nature,  the  better 
'*  Lights  and  Glaffes  you  ufe,  the  more  clear 
"  and  exadtly  form'd  they  appear;  whereas  the 
"  Effedts  of  human  Art,  the  more  curioufly  they 
**  are  viewed  and  examin'd,  the  more  of  Defor- 
"  mity  they  difcover. 

This 


Part  I.  if;^  //>£?  C  R  E  AT  I  o  N.  59 

This  being  premifed,  for  our  more  clear  and 
diftind:  Proceeding  in  our  curfory  View  of  the 
Creation,  I  fhall  rank  the  Parts  of  this  material 
and  vifible  World' under  feveral  Heads.  Bodies 
are  either  inanimate  or  animate.  Inanimate  Bo- 
dies are  either  calejiial  or  terreftriaL  Ccelejlialy 
as  the  Sun^  Moon,  and  Stars ;  Terrejirial,  are  ei- 
ther fimple,  as  the  four  Elements,  Fire,  Water, 
Earth,  and  Air ;  or  mixt,  either  imperfedlly,  as 
the  Meteors,  or  more  perfedly,  as  Stones,  Metals, 
Minerals,  and  the  like.  Animate  Bodies  are  ei- 
ther fuch  as  are  endued  with  a  Vegetative  Soul, 
as  Plants ;  or  a  Senjitive  Soul,  as  the  Bodies  of 
Animals,  Birds,  Beajis,  Fijhes,  and  hije.5ls ;  or  a 
Rational  Soul,  as  the  Body  of  Man,  and  the  Ve- 
hicles of  Angels,  if  any  fuch  there  be. 

I  make  ufe  of  this  Divifion  to  comply  with 
the  common  and  receiv'd  Opinion,  and  for  ea- 
fier  Comprehenfion  and  Memory  ;  tho'  I  do  not 
think  it  agreeable  to  Philofophick  Verity  and 
Accuracy,  but  do  rather  incline  to  the  Atomick 
Hypothejis :  For  thefe  Bodies,  we  call  Elements, 
ate  only  the  Ingredients  of  mix'd  Bodies  ;  nei- 
ther are  they  abfolutely  fimple  themfelves,  as 
they  do  exift  in  the  World,  the  Sea  Water  con- 
taining a  copious  Salt  manifeft  to  Senfe ;  and 
both  Sea  and  Frefh-water  fufficing  to  nourifli 
many  Species  of  Fi{h,  and  confequently  con- 
taining the  various  Parts  of  which  their  Bodies 
are  compounded.  And  I  believe  there  are  many 
Species  of  Bodies  which  the  Peri'pateticks  call 
mix'd,  which  are  as  fimple  as  the  Elements  them- 
felyes,    as  Metals,     Salts,     and  fome  Sorts  of 

Stones. 


6o       "The  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

Stones.     I  fliould  therefore,  with  Dr.  Grew,  and 
others,    rather  attribute  the  various  Species  of 
inanimate  Bodies  to  the  divers  Figures  of  the 
minute  Particles  of  vs^hich  they  are  made  up  : 
And  the  Reafon  w^hy  there  is  a  Set,    and  con- 
ftant  Number,    of  them  in  the  World,  none  de- 
ftroy'd,  nor  any  new  ones  produc'd,  I  take  to  be, 
becaufe  the  Sum  of  the  Figures  of  thofe  minute 
Bodies  into  which  Matter  was  at  firft  divided, 
is  determinate  and  iix'd.   2.  Becaufe  thofe  mi- 
mute  Parts  are  indivifible,  not  abfolutely,  but  by 
any  natural  Force ;    fo  that  there  neither  is,  nor 
can  be,  more  or  fewer  of  them :  For  were  they 
divifible  into  fmall  and  diverfly-figur*d  Parts  by 
Fire,    or  any  other  natural  Agent,   the  Species  of 
Nature  muft  be  confounded,   fome  might  be  loft 
and   deftroy'd,    but  new  ones  would  certainly 
be  produc'd  ;    unlefs  we  could  fuppofe  thefe  new 
diminutive  Particles  fliould  again  aflemble  and 
marfhal    themfelves  into  Corpufcles    of   fuch 
Figures  as  they  compounded  before ;    which  I 
fee  no  Poffibility  for  them  to  do,    without  fome 
©«c^  dirh  iJinyJia;  to  dired:  them  :  Not  that  I  think 
thefe  inanimate  Bodies  to  confift  wholly  of  one 
Sort  o?  Atoms,  but  that4:heir  Bulk  confifts  main- 
ly or  chiefly  of  one  Sort.     But  whereas  it  may 
be  objedled    that  Metals  (which    of  all  others 
feem  to  be  moft  fimple)  may  be  tranfmuted  one 
into  another,    and  fo  the  Species  doth  not  de- 
pend upon  the  being  compounded  of  Atoms  of 
one  Figure  ;    I  anfwer,    I  am  not  fully  fatisfied 
of  the  Matter  of  Fad::  But  if  any  fuch  Tranf- 
mutation  be,    poflibly  all  Metals  may  be  of  one 

Species, 


Part  I.       in  />6^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  6 1 

Species,  and  the  Diverfity  may  proceed  from  the 
Admixture  of  difierent  Bodies  with  the  Princi- 
ples of  the  Metal  If  it  be  ask'd,  Why  may  not 
Atoms  of  different  Species  concur  to  the  Com- 
polition  of  Bodies  ?  And  fo,  tho'  there  be  but 
a  few '  Sorts  of  original  Principles,  may  there 
not  be  produced  infinite  Species  of  compound 
Bodies,  as  by  the  various  Difpoiitions  and  Com- 
binations of  Twenty-four  Letters  innumerable 
Words  may  be  made  up?  I  anfwer,  hecaufe 
the  Heterogeneous  Atoms  or  Principles  are  not 
naturally  apt  to  cohere  and  ftick  together  when 
they  are  mingled  in  the  fame  Liquor,  as  the 
Homogeneous  readily  do. 

I  do  not  believe  that  the  Species  of  Princi- 
ples, or  indivifible  Particles,  are  exceeding  nu- 
merous ;  but  poffibly  the  immediate  component 
Particles  of  the  Bodies  of  Plants  and  Animals 
may  be  themfelves  compounded. 

Of  the  Heavenly  Bodies, 

Before  I  come  to  treat  of  the  Heavenly  Bo- 
dies in  particular,  I  fhall  premife  in  general, 
that  the  whole  Univerfe  is  divided  into  two 
Sorts  of.  Bodies,  the  one  very  thin  and  fluid, 
the  other  more  denfe,  folid  and  confiftent.  The 
thin  and  fluid  is  the  Ether^  comprehending  the 
Air  or  Atmofphere  encompafling  the  particu- 
lar Stars  'and  Planets.  Now,  for  the  Stability 
and  Perpetuity  of  the  whole  Univerfe,  the 
Divine  Wifdom  and  Providence  hath  given  to 
the  folid  and  ftable  Pares  a  two-fold  Power,    one 

of 


62        77)e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

of  Gravity,  and  the  other  of  Circular  Motion. 
By  the  firft  they  are  preferv'd  from  Diffolution 
and  DifTipation,  which  the  fecond  would  other- 
wife  infer :  For  it  being  by  the  Confent  of 
Philofophers,  an  innate  Property  of  every  Body 
mov'd  circularly  about  any  Centre,  to  recede, 
or  endeavour  to  recede,  from  that  Centre  of  its 
Motion,  and  the  more  ftrongly  the  fvvifter  it  is 
mov'd,  the  Stars  and  Planets  being  whirl'd  about 
with  g^at  Velocity,  would  fuddenly,  did  no- 
thing inhibit  it,  at  leaft  in  a  ihort  Time,  be 
fhatter'd  in  Pieces,  and  fcatter'd  every  Way  thro' 
the  Ether.  But  now  their  Gravity  unites  and 
binds  them  up  faft,  hindring  the  Difperfion  of 
their  Parts.  I  will  not  difpute  what  Gravity 
is  s  only  I  will  add,  that,  for  ought  I  have  heard, 
or  read,  the  Mechanical  Philofophers  have  not 
as  yet  given  a  clear  and  fatisfadiory  Account  of 
it. 

The  fecond  Thing  is  a  circular  Motion  upon 
their  own  AxeSy  and  in  fome  of  them  alfo,  it's 
probable,  about  other  Points,  if  we  admit  the 
Hypothefis  of  every  fix'd  Stars  being  a  'Sun  or 
Sun-like  Body,  and  having  a  Choir  of  JPla- 
nets  in  like  Manner  moving  about  him.  Thefe 
Revolutions,  we  have  Reafon  to  believe,  are 
as  exad:ly  equal  and  uniform  as  the  Earth's  are  ; 
which  could  not  be,  were  there  any  Place  for 
Chance,  and  did  not  a  Providence  continually 
over-fee  and  fecurc  them  from  all  Alteration  or 
Imminuation,  which  either  internal  Changes  in 
their  own  Part,  or  external  Accidents  and  Oc- 
currences, would  at  one  Time  or  other  nece^arily 

induce. 


Part  I.        i?t  the  Cke AT  10^.  63 

induce.  Wldiouc  this  circular  Motion  of  the 
Earth,  here  could  be  no  living :  One  Hemi- 
fphere  would  be  condemned  to  perpetual  Cold 
and  Darknefs,  the  other  continually  roafted  and 
parch'd  by  the  Sun- beams.  And  it  is  reafona- 
ble  to  think,  that  this  circular  Motion  is  as 
neceflary  to  moft  other  Planetary  Bodies,  as  it 
is  to  the  Earth.  As  for  the  fix'd  Stars,  if  they  be 
Suft-like  Bodies,  it  is  probable  alfo  each  of  them 
moves'  circularly  upon  its  own  Axis^  as  ^e  Sun 
doth :  But  what  Neceffity  there  is  of  fuch  a 
Motion,  for  want  of  underftanding  the  Nature 
of  thofe  Bodies,  I  muft  confefs  my  felf  not  yet 
to  comprehend  ;  tho'  that  it  is  very  great,  I 
doubt  not,  both  for  themfelves,  and  for  the  Bo- 
dies about  them. 

Firft,  for  the  Celeftlal,  or  Heavenly  Bodies, 
the  Equability  and  Conftancy  of  their  Motions, 
the  Certainly  of  their  Periods  and  Revolu- 
tions, the  Conveniency  of  their  Order  and  Situ- 
ations, argue  them  to  be  ordain'd  and  govern'd 
by  Wifdom  and  Underftanding ;  yea,  fo  much 
Wifdom  as  Man  cannot  eafiiy  fathom  or  com- 
prehend :  For  we  fee,  by  how  much  the  Hy- 
potbejes  of  Aft.ronomers  are  more  fimple  and 
conformable  to  Reafon,  by  fo  much  do  they  give 
a  better  Account  of  the  Heavenly  Motions.  It 
is  reported  oi  Alphonfm  King  of  Arragon^  (I  know 
not  whether  truly)  that  when  he  law  and  con- 
fider'd  the  many  Eccentricks^  Epicycles^  Epi- 
cycles upon  Epicycles,  Lihrations,  and  Contra- 
riety of  Motions,  which  were  requifite  in  the 
old  Hypothejis  to  give  an  Account  of  the  Cele- 
1  ^  Jlial 


64        Tl^e  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

Jlial  Phanome7ta,  he  fhauld  prefume  blafphemouf- 
ly  to  fay,  that  the  Univerfe  was  a  bungling 
Piece  5  and  that  if  he  had  been  of  God's  Coun- 
fel,  he  could  have  diredled  him  to  have  made  it 
better.  A  Speech  as  ra{h  and  ignorant,  as  daring 
and  prophane. 

For  it  w^as  nothing  but  Ignorance  of  the  true 
Procefs  of  Nature,  that  induced  the  Contrivers 
of  that  Hjpothefis  to  invent  fuch  abfurd  Sup- 
politiofts,  and  him  to  accept  them  for  .true,  and 
attribute  them  to  the  great  Author  of  the 
Heavenly  Motions :  For  in  the  New  Hypothefis 
of  the  Modern  Aflronomers,  we  fee  moft  of 
thofe  Abfurdities  and  Irregularities  re<5Vify'd 
and  removed  ;.  and  I  doubt ,  not  but  they  would 
all  vanifh,  could  we  certainly  difcover  the  true 
Method  and  Procefs  of  Nature  in  thbfe  Revo- 
lutions :  For  feeing  in  thofe  Works  of  Nature 
which  we  converfe  with,  we  conftantly  find 
thofe  Axioms  true,  Natiira  no?i  facit  circuituSy 
Nature  doth  not  fetch  a  Compafs  when  it  may 
proceed  in  a  ftraight  Line ;  and  Natura  nee  abim- 
dat  in  fuperfluisy  nee  deficit  in  neeejfariisy  Nature 
abounds  not  in  what  is  fuperfluous,  neither  is 
deficient  in  what  is  necefiTary :  We  may  alfo 
rationally  conclude  concerning  the  Heavenly 
Bodies,  feeing  there  is  fo  much  Exadnefs  ob- 
ferv'd  in  the  Time  of  their  Motions,  that  they 
punctually  come  about  in  the  fame  Periods  to 
the  Hundredth  Part  of  a  Minute,  as  may,  be- 
yond Exception,  be  demonftrated  by  comparing 
their  Revolutions ;  furcly  there  is  alfo  us'd  the 
rpoft  fimple,    facile,    and  convenient  Way  for 

the 


Part  I.         in  the  C^-Ei  ATI o n.  6^ 

the  Performance  of  them.     Among  thefc  Hea- 
venly Bodies, 

Firft,  the  Sun^  a  vaft  Globe  of  Fire,  efteem^d 
by  the  ancienter  and  moft  modeft  Computatioa 
above    160  Times  bigger  than  the  Earth;  the 
very    Life     of  this    inferior     World,    without 
vsrhole  falutary  and  vivifick  Beams  all  Motion^ 
both  Animal,  Vital  and  Natural,  would  fpeedi- 
\y  ceafe,    and  nothing  be  left    here  below  btit 
Darknefs  and  Death.     All  Plants  and  Animals 
muft  needs  in  a  very  fliort  Time  be  not  only 
mortified,  but,  together  with  the  Surface  of  Land 
and  Water,    frozen  as  hard  as  a  Flint  01  rida- 
mant :  So  that  of  all  the  Creatures  of  the  World, 
the  ancient  Heathens  had  moft  Reafon  to  worfhip 
him  as  a  Godj  tho'  no  true  Reafon ,  becaufe  he 
was  but  a  GreaturCj  and   not   God:  And    we 
Chriftians    do   think,   that    the  Service   of  the 
Animals  that  live  upon  the  Earth,  and  prin- 
cipally  Man,    was  one   End    of  his  Creation; 
feeing  without  him  there  could  no  fuch  Things 
have  been.     This  Sim,  I  fay,  according  to  the 
old  Hypothefis,   whirl'd  round  aboiit  the  Earth 
daily  with   incredible  Celerity,     making  Night 
and  Day  by  his  rifing  and  fetting ;  Winter  and 
Summer,  by  his  Accefs  to  the  feveral  Tropicks, 
creating  fuch  a  grateful  Variety  of  Seafons^  en- 
lightning  all  Parts  of  the  Earth  by  his  Beams^ 
and  cherifhing  them  by  his  Heat,  fituate  and 
mov*d  fo»in   refpedt  of    this  fublunary   Worlds 
(and  it's  likely  alfo  in  refpedt  of  all  the  Planets 
about   him)  that    Art  and    Council  could    not 
have  delign'd  either  to  have  placed  him  better, 

F  ^  or 


66    ^   7l)e  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

or  mov'd  him  more  conveniently  for  the  Ser- 
vice thereof,  as  I  could  eafily  make  appear  by  the 
Inconveniences  that  v^ould  follow  upon  the 
Suppofition  of  any  other  Situation  and  Motion, 
fhew  forth  the  great  Wifdom  of  him  who  fo 
difpos'd  and  mov'd  him. 

Secondly,  The  Moon,  a  Body  in  all  Probabi- 
lity fomewhat  Hke  the  Earth  we  live  upon,  by 
its  conftant  and  regular  Motion,  helps  us  to  di- 
vide our  Time,  reflects  the  Sun-beams  to  us,  and 
fo  by  illuminating  the  Air,  takes  away  in  fome 
Meafure  the  difconfolate  Darknefs  of  our  Winter- 
Nights;  procures,  or  at  leaft  regulates,  the  Fluxes 
and  Refluxes  of  the  Sea,  whereby  the  Water  is 
kept  in  conftant  Motion,  and  preferv'd  from  Pu- 
trefaction, and  fo  render'd  more  falutary  for  the 
Maintenance  of  its  Breed,  and  ufeful  and  fervice- 
able  for  Man's  Convenience  of  Fifliing  and  Na- 
vigation ',  not  to  mention  the  great  Influence  it 
is  fuppos'd  to  have  upon  all  moift  Bodies,  and 
the  Growth  and  Increafe  of  Vegetables  and  Ani- 
mals :  Men  generally  obferving  the  Age  of  the 
Moon  in  the  planting  of  all  Kinds  of  Trees, 
fowing  of  Grain,  grafting  and  inoculating,  '  and 
pruning  of  Fruit-Trees,  gathering  of  Fruit, 
cutting  of  Corn  or  Grafs  -,  and  thence  alfo  ma- 
king Prognofticks  of  Weather,  becaufe  fuch  Ob- 
fervations  feem  to  me  uncertahi.  Did  this  Lu- 
tninavj  ferve  to  no  other  Ends  and  Ufes,  as  1  am^ 
perfuaded  it  doth  many,  efpecially  to  maintain 
the  Creatures  which  in  all  likelihood  breed  and 
inhabit  there,  for  which  I  refer  you  to  the  inge- 
nious Treatifcs  written  by  Bifbop  Wilkins,   and 

Monfieur 


Part  I.         in  tie  Creatio n.  67 

Monfieur  Fontenelle^  on  that  Subjed ;  yet  thefe 
were  enough  to  evince  it  to  be  the  Effed;  an4 
Produdt  of  Divine  Wifdom  and  Power. 

Thirdly,  As  for  the  reft  of  the  PlaneU^  be- 
fides  their  particular  Ufes,  which  are  to  us  un- 
known, or  merely  conjedlural,  their  Courfes  and 
Revolutions,  their  Stations  and  Retrogradations, 
obferv'd  conftantly  fo  many  Ages  together  in 
moft  certain  and  determinate  Periods  of  Time, 
do  fufficiently  demonftrate,  that  their  Motions 
are  inftituted  and  governed  by  Counfel,  Wifdom 
and  Underftanding. 

Fourthly,  The  like  may  be  faid  of  the  jixd 
Stars^  whofe  Motions  are  regular,  equal  and 
conftant :  So  that  we  fee  nothing  in  the  Hea- 
vens which  argues  Chance,  Vanity,  or  Error  ; 
but  on  the  contrary,  Rule,  Order,  and  Con- 
ftancy ;  the  EfFefts  and  Arguments  of  Wifdom: 
Wherefore,  as  Cicero  excellently  concludes,  Ca- 
lejiem  ergo  admirabilem  ordinem^  incredibilemque 
conjiantianiy  ex  qua  converfatio  &  falus  omnium 
omnis  oritur^  qui  vacare  mente  putat,  nee  ipji 
mentis  expers  habendus  ejt :  "  Wherefore  who- 
"  foever  thinketh  that  the  admirable  Order,  and 
**  incredible  Conftancy,  of  the  Heavenly  Bodies, 
^'  and  their  Motions,  whereupon  the  Preferva*- 
"  tion  and  Welfare  of  all  Things  doth  depend,  is 
"  not  govern  d  by  Mind  and  Underftanding,  he 
"  himfelf  is  to  be  accounted  void  thereof.'^  And 
again,  "  Shall  we  (faith  he)  when  we  fee  aa 
*'  Artificial  Engine,  as  a  Sphere  or  Dyal,  or 
"  the  like,  at  firft  ^ight  acknowledge,  that  it  is 
*<  a  Work  of  Reafon  and  Art  ?  Cum  autcra  impe^ 

F  2  turn 


68        77)eWisDouofGOD      Parti. 

turn  cceli^    admirabili  cum  celeritate  moveri  ver^ 
tique  videamm    conjiantijjime   conjicientetn  vicijji" 
tudiiies  anniverfarias^    cum  fummd  Salute  &  Con- 
fervatione  rerum  omnium^    dubitare  quin    ea  non 
folum  ratione  jimit^  Jed  excellenti  quddam  Divind- 
que  ratione:    "  And  can  we,    when  we  fee  the 
Force  of  the  Heavens  mov*d  and  whirled  about 
with    admirable    Celerity,     moft    conftantly 
finifhing  its  anniverfary  Viciffitudes,    to  the 
eminent  Welfare     and    Prefervation    of   all 
Things,    doubt  at  all  that  thefe  Things  are 
performed  not  only  by  Reafon,    but  by  a  cer- 
tain excellent  and  divine  Reafon  ? 
To  thefe  Things  I  fhall  add  an  Obfervation, 
which  I  muft  confefs  my  felf  to  have  borrowed 
of   the    honourable    Perfon    more    than    once 
mentioned    already,     that  even  the  Eclipfes  of 
the    Sun    and  Moon,     tho*  they    be    frightful 
Things  to  the  Superftitious  Vulgar,    and  of  ill 
Influence  on  Mankind,    if  we  may  believe  the 
no  lefs  fuperftitious  Aftrologers,    yet  to  know- 
ing Men,    that  can  skilfully  apply  them,    they 
are  of  great  Ufe,    and  fuch  as  common  Heads 
could  never  have  imagined  :    Since  not  only  they 
may  on  divers  Occafions,    help  to  fettle  Cbro^ 
nology^    and  redifie  the  Miftakes  of  Hijiorians 
that  writ  many  Ages  ago;    but  which  is  the* 
a  lefs  Wonder,    yet  of  greater  Utility,    they  are 
(as  Things  yet  ftand^  neceifary  to  define  with 
competent  Certainty,    the  Longitude  of  Places 
or  Points  on  the  Terraqueous  Globe,    which  is 
a  Thing  of   very    great   Moment  not  only   to 
Geography^    but  to  the  moft  ufeful  and  impor- 
2  tant 


Part  T.        in  the  C  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  69 

tant  Art  of  Navigation,  To  which  may  be  ad- 
ded, which  I  fhall  hereafter  mention,  that  they 
ferve  to  demonftrate  the  fpherical  Roundnefs  of 
the  Earth :  So  that  I  may  well  conclude  with 
the  Pfalmift,  Fjal  xix.  i.  T!he  Heavens  declare 
the  Glory  of  Gody  and  the  Firmament  peweth  his 
Handy-work, 

Of  Terrejlrial  and  Inanimate  Simple  Bodies, 

I  come  now  to  confider  the  Terreftrial  Bo- 
dies. I  fhall  fay  nothing  of  the  whole  Body  of 
the  Earth  in  general,  becaufe  I  referve  that  as 
one  of  the  Particulars  I  Ihall  more  carefully  and 
curioufly  examine. 

Terreftrial  Bodies,    according  to  our  Method 
before  propounded,  are  either  ina^iifnatey  or  ani-- 
mate ;  and  the  inanimate  either  fvnple^    or  mixt ; 
Simple,     as    the  four  Elements,    Fire,    Water^ 
Earth  and  Air :    I  call  thefe  Elements  in  Com- 
pliance (as  I  faid  before)  with  the  vulgarly-re- 
ceiv'd  Opinion  ;    not  that  I  think  them   to  be 
the  Principles  or  component  Ingredients  of  all 
other  fublunary  Bodies :    I  might  call  them  the 
four    great  Aggregates  of  Bodies   of  the  fame 
Species,    or  four  Sort  of  Bodies,  of  which  there 
are  great  Aggregates.     Thefe,    notwithftanding 
they  are  endued  with  contrary  Qualities,  and  are 
continually  encroaching  one  upon  another,   yet 
they  are  fo  balanced,    and  kept  in  fuch  an.  Equi- 
libriiim,^  that  neither  prevaileth  over  other,    but 
what  one  gets  in  one  Place  it  lofeth  in  another. 

Firft,    Fire    cheriflieth    and  reviveth    by  its 
Heat,  without  which  all  Things  would  be  tor- 

F  3  .  pid. 


yo        T:be  Wisdom  of  GOD      PattL 

Did,  and  without  Motion,  nay,  without  Fife,  no 
Life,  it  being  the  vital  Flame  refiding  in  the 
Blood  that  keeps  the  bodily  Machine  in  Mo- 
tion, and  renders  it  a  fit  Organ  for  the  Soul  tq 
work  by.  The  Ufes  of  Fire  (I  do  not  here 
fpeak  of  the  Peripateticks  Elementary  Fire  in  the 
Concave  of  the  Moon,  which  is  but  a  mere 
Figment,  but  our  ordinary  Culinary)  are  in  a 
Manner  infinite  for  dreffing  and  preparing  of 
Viftuals,  bak'd,  boil'd  and  roaft  -,  for  melting 
and  refining  of  Metals  and  Minerals  -,  for  the 
Fufion  of  Glafs,  [a  Material  whofe  Ufes  are  fo 
many,  that  it  is  not  eafy  to  enumerate  them, 
it  ferving  us  to  make  Windows  for  our  Hou- 
fes,  Drinking- Veffels,  Veffels  to  diftil  and  pre- 
ferve  all  Sorts  of  fermented  Liquors,  diftiU'd 
Water,  Spirits,  Oils,  Extrads,  and  other  Chy- 
mical  Preparations,  as  alfo  Veffels  to  diftil  and 
prepare  them  in  ;  for  Looking-Glaffes,  Speda- 
cles,  Microfcopes  and  Telefcopes,  whereby  our 
Sight  is  not  only  relieved,  but  wonderfully 
affifted  to  make  rare  Difcoveries]  for  making 
all  Sorts  of  Inftrumcnts  for  Husbandry,  mecha- 
nick  Arts  and  Trades,  all  Sorts  of  Arms  or  Wea- 
pons of  War  defenfive  and  offenfive ;  for  ful- 
minating Engines;  for  burning  of  Lime,  ba- 
king of  Bricks,  Tiles,  and  all  Sorts  of  Potters 
Veffels,  or  earthen  Ware ;  for  cafting  and 
forging  Metaline  Veffels  and  Utenfils;  for 
Diftillations,  and  all  Chymical  Operations  hin- 
ted before  in  the  Ufe  of  Glafs  ;  for  affording 
us  Lights  for  any  Work  or  Exercife  in  Winter- 
Nights  j  for  digging  in  Mines  and  dark  Ca- 
verns ;    and  finally,    by  its  comfortable  Warmth 

fecu- 


Part  I.       f;^  //6^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  71 

fecuring  us  from  the  Injuries  of  Cold,  or  re- 
lieving us  when  we  have  been  bitten  and  be- 
num'd  with  it.  A  Subjedl  or  Utenlil  of  fo  va- 
rious and  inexplicable  Ufe,  who  could  have  in- 
vented and  formed,  but  an  infinitely  wife  and 
powerful  Efficient? 

Secondly,  The  Air  ferves  us,  and  all  Ani- 
mals, to  breathe  in,  containing  the  Fewel  of  that 
yital  Flame  we  fpeak  of,  without  which  it 
would  fpeedily  languifh  and  go  out  5  fo  ne- 
ceifary  it  is  for  us,  and  other  Land-Animals, 
that  without  the  Ufe  of  it  we  could  live  but 
very  few  Minutes :  Nay,  FiQ>es  and  other 
Water-Animals  cannot  abide  without  the  Ufe 
of  it  'y  for  if  you  put  Fifh  into  a  VelTel  of  a 
narrow  Mouth  full  of  Water,  they  will  live 
and  fwim  there,  not  only  Days  and  Months, 
but  even  Years;  but  if  with  your  Hand,  or 
any  other  Cover,  you  flop  the  Veffel  fo  as  wholly 
to  exclude  the  Air,  or  interrupt  its  Commu- 
nication with  the  Water,  they  will  fuddenly 
be  fufFocatedj  as  Rondeletiiis  affirms  he  often 
experimented.  If  you  fill  not  the  Vefll^l  up 
to  the  Top,  but  leave  fome  Space  empty  for  the 
Air  to  take  up,  and  then  clap  your  Hand  up-r 
on  the  Mouth  of  the  VeiTel,  the  Fiffies  will 
prefently  contend  which  fhall  get  uppermoft  in 
the  Water,  that  fo  they  may  enjoy  the  open 
Air;  which  I  have  alfo  obferv'd  them  to  do 
in  a  Pool  of  Water  that  hath  been  almofi:  dry 
in  the*Summer-Time,  becaufe  the  Air  that  in- 
finuated  it  felf  into  the  Water  did  not  fuffice 
them  for  Refpiration.      Neither   is  it  lefs  ne- 

F  4  ccflary 


72      He  Wisdom  of  GOD      Parti, 

ceffary  for  InfeGs  than  it  is  for  other  Animalsj, 
but  rather  more,  thefe  having  more  Air-Vef- 
fels  for  their  Bulk  by  far  than  they,  there  be- 
ing many  Orifices  on  each  Side  their  Bodies  for 
the  Admiflion  of  Air,  which  if  you  flop  with 
Oil  or  Honey,  the  Infedl  prefently  dies,  and 
revives  no  more.  This  was  an  Obfervation 
of  the  Ancients,  though  the  Reafon  of  it  they 
did  not  underftand  j  (Oleo  illito  InJeBa  omnia  ex- 
animantur.  Plin.)  which  was  nothing  but  the 
intercluding  of  the  Air ;  for  tho'  you  put  Oil 
upon  them,  if  you  put  it  not  upon,  or  obftrucft 
thofe  Orifices  therewith,  whereby  they  draw 
the  Air,  they  fuffer  nothing  :  If  you  obftrudt 
only  fome,  and  not  others,  the  Parts  which  are 
near  and.fupplied  with  Air,  from  thence  are 
by  and  by  convulfed,  and  fhortly  relaxed  and 
deprived  of  Motion,  the  reft  that  were  un- 
touched ftill  retaining  it.  Nay,  more  than  all 
this.  Plants  themfelves  have  a  Kind  of  Refpi- 
ration,  being  furnifh'd  with  Plenty  of  Veffels 
for  the  Derivation  of  Air  to  all  their  Parts; 
as  huth  been  obferv'd,  nay,  firft  difcover'd,  by 
that  great  and  curious  Naturalift  Malpighius, 
Another  Ufe  of  the  Air  is  to  fuftain  the  Flight 
of  Birds  and  Infefts.  Moreover,  by  its  Gravity 
it  raifes  the  Water  in  Pumps,  Siphons,  and  other 
Engines,  and  performs  all  thofe  Feats  which 
former  Philofophers,  through  Ignorance  of  the 
Efficient  Caufe,  attributed  to  a  Final,  namely 
Nature's  Abhorrence  of  a  Vacuity  or  empty  Space. 
The  elaftick  or  expanfive  Faculty  of  the  Air, 
whereby    it    dilates  it  felf,     when  comprefTed, 

(indeed 


Part  I.         in  /^^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  73 

(Indeed  this  lower  Region  of  it,  by  Reafon  of 
the  Weight  of  the  Superincumbent,  is  always 
in  a  compreffed  State)  hath,  been  made  Ufe  of 
in  the  common  Weather-Glafles,  in  Wind-Guns, 
and  in  feveral  ingenious  Water- Works,  and 
doubtlefs  hath  a  great  Intereft  in  many  natural 
EfFedts  and  Operations. 

Againft  what  we  have  faid  of  the  Neceffity  of 
tha  Air  for  the  Maintenance  of  the  Vital  Flame, 
it  may  be  objeded,  That  the  Foetus  in  the 
Womb  lives,  its  Heart  pulfes,  and  its  Blood 
circulates  \  and  yet  it  draws  in  no  Air,  neither 
hath  the  Air  any  Accefs  to  it.  To  which  I  an- 
fwer.  That  it  doth  receive  Air,  fo  much  as  is 
fufRcient  for  it  in  its  prefent  State,  from  the 
maternal  Blood  by  the  Placenta  Uterina^  or  the 
Cotyledons,  This  Opinion  generally  propounded, 
viz.  That  the  Refpiration  of  the  Dam  did 
ferve  the  Fcetus  alfo,  or  fupply  fufficient  Air  to 
it,  I  have  met  with  in  Books ;  but  the  explicit 
Notion  of  it  I  owe  to  my  Learned  and  Worthy 
Friend  Dr.  Edward  Hulfe,  which,  comparing 
with  -mine  own  Anatomical  Obfervations,  I 
found  fo  confonant  to  Reafon,  and  highly  pro- 
bable, that  I  could  not  but  yield  a  firm  Aflent 
to  it.  I  fay  then,  That  the  chief  Ufe  of  the 
Circulation  of  the  Blood  through  the  Cotyledons 
of  a  Calf  in  the  Womb,  (which  I  have  often 
diffefted)  and  by  Analogy  thro'  the  Placenta  Ute^ 
r/;^^  in  an  ^u  man  Fcetus,  feems  to  be  the  Im- 
pregnation of  the  Blood  with  Air,  for  the  Y^^A- 
ing  of  the  Fital  Flame :  For  if  it  were  only  for 
Nutrition,  what  Need  of  two  fuch  great  Arte- 
ries 


74        TI)e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

ries  to  convey  the  Blood  thither  ?  It  would  (one 
might  rationally  think)  be  more  likely,  that  as 
in  the  Abdomen  of  every  Animal,  fo  here,  there 
fhould  have  been  fome  ladleal  Veins  form'd, 
beginning  from  the  Placenta^  or  Cotyledons^  v^hich 
concurring  in  one  common  DuBus^  fhould  at 
laft  empty  themfelves  into  the  Vena  Cava,  Se- 
condly, I  have  obferved  in  a  Calf,  the  Umbilical 
Veffels  to  terminate  in  certain  Bodies  divided 
into  a  Multitude  of  carneous  Fapillce^  (as  I  may 
fo  call  them)  which  are  receiv'd  into  fo  many 
Sockets  of  the  Cotyledons  growing  on  the  Womb ; 
which  carneous  Papillca  may  without  Force,  or 
Laceration,  be  drawn  out  of  thofe  Sockets.  Now 
tliefe  Paptllcz  do  well  refemble  xh^AriJla^  or  Radii ^ 
of  a  Fifh's  Gills,  and  very  probably  have  the 
iame  Ufe  to  take  in  the  Air  j  fo  that  the  ma- 
ternal Blood  which  flows  to  the  CotyledonSy  and 
encircles  thefe  Papillce^  communicates  by  them 
to  the  Blood  of  the  Fatus^  the  Air  wherewith 
it  felf  is  impregnate  i  as  the  Water  flowing 
about  the  carneous  Radii  of  the  Fifh's  Gills  doth 
the  Air  that  is  lodg'd  therein  to  them.  Third- 
ly, That  the  maternal  Blood  flows  moil  co- 
fioufly  to  the  Placenta  Vterina  in  Women,  is 
manifefl  from  the  great  Hemorrhagy  that  fucceeds 
the  Separation  thereof  at  the  Birth.  Fourthly, 
After  the  Stomach  and  Inteftines  are  form'd^ 
the  E^tus  feems  to  take  in  its  whole  Nou- 
rilhment  by  the  Mouth,  there  being  always 
found  in  the  Stomach  of  a  Calf,  Plenty  of  the 
Liquor  contain'd  in  the  Amnios  wherein  he 
fwims,  -and  F^ca  in  bis  Inteftines,  and  abun- 
dance 


Part  L       in  /^  C  r e  at  i  on.  jf 

dance  of  Urine  in  the  Allantoides ;  fo  that  the 
Fcetus  in  the  Womb  doth  live,  as  it  were,  the 
Life  of  a  Fifh.  Laftly,  Why  clfe  fhould  there 
be  fuch  an  inftant  Neceffity  of  Refpiration  fo 
foon  as  ever  the  Fatus  is  fallen  off  from  the 
Womb. 

I  know  that  if  the  Fcetm  be  taken  out  of  the 
Womb  inclos'd  in  the  Secundines,  it  will  con- 
tiniji^  to  Hve,  and  the  Blood  to  circulate  for  a 
considerable  Time,  as  Dr.  Harvey  obferves. 
The  Reafon  whereof  I  conceive  to  be,  becaufc 
the  Blood  ftill  circulates  through  the  Cotyledons^ 
or  Place72ta^  which  are  now  exposed  to  the  open 
Air,  and  fo  from  thence  receives  fufHcient  Sup- 
plies thereof,  to  continue  its  gentle  Motion, 
arKi  feed  the  vital  Flame.  But  when,  upon  Ex- 
clulion  of  the  Young,  the  Umbilical  Veffels  are 
broken,  and  no  more  Air  is  receiv'd  that  Way, 
the  Plaftick  Nature,  to  preferve  the  Life  of 
the  Animal,  fpeedily  raifes  the  Lungs,  and 
draws  into  them  Air  in  great  abundance,  which 
caufes  a  fudden  and  mighty  Accenfion  in  the 
Blood*  ^  to  the  Maintenance  whereof  a  far 
greater  Quantity  of  Air  is  requifite,  than  would 
fervc  to  feed  the  mild  and  languid  Flame  be- 
fore. 

This  Way  we  may  give  a  facile  and  very 
probable  Account  of  it,  to  wit,  becaufe  recei- 
ving no  more  Communications  of  Air  from  its 
Dam,  or  Mother,  it  muft  needs  have  a  fpeedy 
Supply  from  without,  or  elfe  extinguifh  and 
die  for  Want  of  it  j  being  not  able  to  live  longer 

without 


76       The  WisBOM  of  GOD     PartL 

without  Air  at  its  .firft  Birth,    than  it  can  do 
afterward. 

Upon  this  Occafion,  give  me  leave  to  dif- 
courfe  a  little  concerning  the  Air's  infinuating 
it  felf  into  the  Water.  I  fay  therefore ,  That 
the  Air,  at  leaft  that  Part  of  it  which  is  the 
Aliment  of  Fire,  and  Fewel  of  the  Vital  Flame 
in  Animals,  eafily  penetrates  the  Body  of  Wa- 
ter exposed  to  it,  and  diffufeth  it  felf  through 
every  Part  of  it.  Hence  it  is  that  we  find  Fifli 
in  fubterraneous  Rivers,  and  foffil  Fifli  in  the 
Earth  it  felf;  which  can  no  more  live  without 
Air  there  than  in  the  open  Waters :  Hence 
the  Miners,  when  they  come  once  at  Water, 
are  out  of  all  Dangers  and  Damps.  You'll  fay. 
How  gets  the  Air  into  the  Water  in  Subter- 
raneous Rivers,  and  into  the  Earth  to  the  foffil 
Fiihes  ?  I  anfwer.  The  fame  Way  that  tne  Water 
doth :  Which  I  fuppofe  to  be  by  its  upper 
Superficies ;  the  Water  defcending  by  Pores  and 
PaiTages  that  there  it  finds  into  Chinks  and 
Veins,  and  by  Confluence  of  many  of  them 
by  Degrees  fwelling  into, a  Stream,  the  Air  ac- 
companies and  follows  it  by  a  conftant  Succef- 
fion.  As  for  foffil  Fiflies,  fome  make  their 
Way  into  the  Earth  up  the  Veins  of  Water, 
opening  into  the  Banks  of  Rivers,  where  they 
lie  till  they  grow  fo  great  that  they  cannot  re- 
turn: In  which  Veins  they  find  Air  enough  to 
ferve  their  Turn,  needing  not  much  by  reafon 
that  they  lie  ftill,  and  move  but  little.  O- 
thers  in  Times  of  Floods  are  left  in  the  Mea- 
dows,   and  with  the  Water  fink  into  the  Earth 

at 


Parti.        Z;^ /i&^  Creation.  "jj 

at  fome  Holes  and  Pores  that  the  Water  finds, 
or  makes,  by  which  alfo  they  are  fupplied  with 
Air.  The  Reafon  why  the  Miners  are  out  of 
Danger  of  Damps  when  they  come  to  Water,  I 
conceive  is,  becaufe  then  presently  the  Air  that 
ftagnated  in  the  Shaft  finks  into  the  Water,  and 
frefh  Air  defcends  and  fucceeds,  and  fo  there  is 
a  Circulation ;  in  the  fame  Manner  as  by  the 
finking  of  an  Air-Shaft  the  Air  hath  Liberty  to 
circulate,  and  carry  out  the  Steams  both  of  the 
Miners  Breath  and  the  Damps,  which  would 
otherwife  fi:agnate  there.  Indeed,  though  there 
were  no  Damps,  yet  the  nitrous  Part  of  the  Air 
being  fpent  and  confum'd  by  the  Breathing  of 
the  Miners,  the  remaining  Part  fhould  be  ren- 
dered altogether  unfit  for  Refpiration,  unlefs 
new  and  frefli  Air  could  fucceed. 

And  here,  methinks,  appears  a  Neceflity  of 
bringing  in  the  Agency  of  fome  fuperinten- 
dent  intelligent  Being,  be  it  a  Plajiick  Nature^ 
or  what  you  will:  For  what  elfe  fliould  put 
the  Diaphragm,  and  all  the  Mufcles  ferving  to 
Refpiration,  in  Motion  all  of  a  fudden  fo  foon 
as  ever  the  Fcetus  is  brought  forth  ?  Why  could 
they  not  have  refl:ed  as  well  as  they  did  in  the 
Womb  ?  What  aileth  them  that  they  muft  needs 
beftir  themfelves  to  get  in  Air  to  maintain  the 
Creature's  Life  ?  Why  could  they  not  patiently 
fuflfer  it  to  die  ?  That  the  Air  of  it  felf  could 
not  rufli  in,  is  clear  j  for  that,  on  the  contrary, 
there  is  requir'd  fome  Force  to  remove  the  in- 
cumbent Air,  and  make  room  for  the  External 
to  enter.     You  will  fay,    the  Spirits  do  at  this 

Time 


^8       T^^e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  L 

Time  flow  to  the  Organs  of  Refpiration,  the 
Diaphragm,  and  other  Mufcles  which  concur  to 
that  Adion,  and  move  them.  But  what  roufes 
the  Spirits,  which  were  quiefcent  during  the 
Continuance  of  tlje  Foetus  in  the  Womb  ?  Here 
is  no  appearing  Impellent  but  the  External  Air^ 
the  Body  fuffering  no  Change  but  of  Place,  out 
of  its  clofe  and  warm  Prifon  into  the  open  and 
cool  Air :  But  how,  or  why,  that  fliould  have 
fuch  an  Influence  upon  the  Spirits,  as  to  drive 
them  into  thofe  Mufcles  cleftively,  I  am  not 
fubtil  enough  to  difcern.  As  for  the  Refpira- 
tion of  the  Chick  in  the  Egg,  I  fuppofe  the  Air 
not  only  to  be  included  in  the  White,  but  alfo 
to  be  fupply'd  through  the  Shell  and  Mem- 
branes. 

Thirdly,  Water  is  one  Part,  and  that  not  the 
leaft  of  our  Suftenance,  and  that  affords  the 
greatefl  Share  of  Matter  in  all  Productions; 
being  not  (as  it  exifts  in  the  World)  a  fimple 
and  unmix'd  Body,  but  containing  in  it  the  Prin- 
ciples, or  minute  component  Particles  of  all 
Bodies :  To  fpeak  nothing  of  thofe  inferiour  Ufes 
of  Wafhing  and  Bathing,  drefling  and  preparing 
Viftuals.  But  if  we  fhall  confider  the  great 
Concepticiila  and  Congregations  of  Water,  and 
the  Diflnbution  of  it  all  over  the  dry  Land  ia 
Springs  and  Rivers,  there  will  occur  abundant 
Arguments  of  Wifdom  and  Underftanding.  The 
Sea,  what  infinite  Variety  of  Fifhes  doth  it 
nourifli !  FfaL  civ.  25.  In  the  Verfe  next  to 
my  Text,  T'fo  Earth  is  full  of  thy  Riches ; 
So  is  this  great  and  wde  Sea,  wherein  are  Things 

creeping 


Part  I.       in  /;6^  C  r  e  at  i  o n.  79. 

creeping  innumerable^   both  [mall  and  great  BeaJiSy 

&c.     How  doth  it  exa<5]:ly  compofe  it  lelf  to  a 

Level,    or  equal  Superficies,    and  in  the  Earth 

make  up  one  Spherical  Roundnefs?    How  doth 

it  conftantly  obferve   its  Ebbs  and  Flows,    its 

Spring  and  Nepe-tides,    and  ftiU  retains  its  Salt- 

nefs^    fo  convenient  for  the  Maintenance  of  its 

Inhabitants,    ferving  alfo  the  Ufes  of  Man  for 

Navigation,    and  the  Convenience  of  Carriage  ? 

That  it  (hould  be  confined  by  Shores,  and  Strands^ 

and  Limits,  I  mean  at  firft,  when  it  was  natural 

to  it  to  overflow  and  ftand  above  the   Earth. 

All  thefe  Particulars  declare  abundance  of  Wif- 

dom  in  their  Primitive  Conftitution.     This  lafl 

the  Pfalmift  takes  Notice  of  in   the  6th,    7th, 

8th,    and  9th  Verfes  of  this  Pfalm :    Speaking 

of  the  Earth  at  the  firft  Creation,   he  faith,  Thou 

coverdyi  it  with  the  Deep  as  with  a  Garment^  the 

Waters  Jiood  above  the  Mount ai?is:  At  thy  Re-- 

buke  they  fled^    at  the  Voice  of  thy  Thunder  they 

hajied  away  (the  Mountains  afcend^     the  Valleys 

dejcend)  unto  the  Place  thou  haji   prepared  for 

them.  '  Thou  haji  fet  a  Bound  that  they  may  not 

pafs  over:    That   they  turn  not  again  to  cover 

the  Earth,     But  what  Need  was  there  (may  fome 

fay)  that  the  Sea  fhould  be  made  fo  large,    that 

its  Superficies  fhould  equal,  if  not  exceed,  that  of 

the  dry  Land  ?    Where  is  the  Wifdom  of  the 

Creator  in  making  fo  much  ufelefs  Sea,    and  fo 

little  dry  Xand,    which  would  have  been  far 

more    beneficial  and   ferviceable  to  Mankind? 

Might  not  at  leaft  half  the  Sea  have  been  fpar'd, 

and  added  to  the  Land,    for  the  Entertainment 

2  .  and 


8o        T:he  Wisdom  of  GOD     Partf. 

and  Maintenance  of  Men,  who  by  the  continual 
Striving  and  Fighting  to  enlarge  their  Bounds, 
and  encroaching  upon  one  another,  feem  to  be 
ftraitned  for  want  of  Room. 

To  this  Objection  againft  the  Wifdom  of 
God  in  thus  dividing  Sea  and  Land^  Mn  Keill^ 
in  his  Examination  of  Dr,  Burnet'j  Theory  of 
the  Earthy  p.  92,  93.  thus  anfwers  ;  "this,  as 
moji  other  of  the  Athetfis  Argument s^^  proceeds  from 
a  deep  Ignorance  of  Natural  Philofophy ;  for  if  there 
were  but  half  the  Sea  that  now  is,  there  would  be 
^Ifobut  half  the  ^antity  of  Vapours,  and  confequent- 
ly  we  could  have  but  half  fo  many  Rivers  as  now 
there  are  to  fupply  all  the  dry  La?id  we  have  at 
prefenty  and  half  as  much  more  ,  for  the  ^antity 
of  Vapours  which  are  raisd,  bears  a  Proportion  to 
the  Surface  whence  they  are  raisd,  as  well  as  to 
the  Heat  which  raisd  them.  The  Wife  Creator 
therefore  did  fo  prudently  order  it^  that  the  Sea 
fhould  be  large  enough  to  fupply  Vapours  fufficient 
for  all  the  Land,  which  it  would  not  do  if  it  were 
lefs  than  now  it  is. 

But  againft  this  it  may  be  objedted,  Why 
fliould  not  all  the  Vapours  which  are  rais'd  out 
of  the  Sea  fall  down  again  into  it  by  Rain  ?  Is 
there  not  as  much  Reafon  that  the  Vapours 
which  are  exhaled  out  of  the  Earth  fliould  be 
carried  down  to  the  Sea,  as  that  thofe  raifed 
out  of  the  Sea  be  brought  up  upon  the  dry 
Land  ?  If  fome  by  Winds  be  driven  from  the 
Sea  up  Land,  others  by  the  fame  Caufe  will  be 
blown  down  from  Land  to  Sea,  and  fo  ba- 
lancing one    another,     they   will  in  Sum  fall 

equally 


Part  I.         //^  //6^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  8 1 

equally  upon  Sea  and  Land  ;  and  confequenily 
the  Sea  contribute  nothing  to  the  Watering  of 
the  Earth,  or  the  Maintenance  of  Rivers. 

To  which  I  anfwer,  That  as  to  the  Watering 
of  the  Earth  there  needs  no  Supply  from  the 
Sea,  there  being  fufficient  Water  exhaled  out 
of  it  felf  to  do  that ;  there  is  no  more  returned 
upon  it  by  Rain,  fo  as  to  reft  upon  it,  than  an 
equivalent  Quantity  to  what  was  rais'd  out  of 
it. 

But  the  Rivers  muft  be  fupply'd  other  ways. 
Our  Opinion  is,  that  they  have  their  Supply 
from  Rain  and  Vapours.  The  Queftion  is , 
Whence  thcfe  Vapours  are  brought  ^  We  an- 
fwer, From  the  Sea.  But  what  brings  them  up 
from  the  Sea  ?  I  anfwer.  The  Winds ;  And  fo 
I  am  arrived  at  the  main  Difficulty,  Why  fhould 
not  the  Winds  carry  them  that  are  exhaled  out 
of  the  £^r/A  down  to  the  Sea,  as  well  as  bring 
them  up  upon  the  Earth,  which  are  rais'd  from 
the  Sea  ?  Or,  which  is  all  one,  why  (hould  not 
the  Wind  blow  inditferently  from  Sea  and 
Land  ?  To  which  I  anfwer,  That  I  muft  needs 
acknowledge  my  felf  not  to  comprehend  the 
Reafon  hereof  God  is  truly  faid,  Pja!,  cxxxv.  j- 
'To  Sring  the  Wind  out  of  his  T^reajures,  But  the 
Matter  of  Fa6t  is  moll:  certain,  viz.  That  the 
Winds  do  bring  abundantly  more  Vapours  up 
from  the  Sea  than  they  carry  down  thither.  . 

Firft,  Becaufe  otherwife  there  can  no  Ac- 
count be  given  of  Floods.  It  is  clear.  That 
Floods  with  us  proceed  from  Rain  j  and  it  is 
often  a  vail  Quantity  of  Water  they  carry  down 

G  .  to 


8x        The  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  L 

10  thie  Sea.  Whence  come  thofe  Vapours  which 
fupply  all  this  Water  ?  I  hope  thole  who  bring 
up  Springs  and  Rivers  from  the  great  ^i?y/s,  will 
not  bring  thofe  Vapours,  which  unite  into  Drops, 
and  defcend  in  Rain  from  thence  too.  Should 
they  rife  from  the  dry  Land  only,  they  would 
foon  render  it  dry  indeed ;  more  parch'd  than 
the  Defarts  of  Libya,  We  fhould  quickly  come 
to  an  End  of  Floods,  and  of  Rain  too,  if  nothing 
were  return'd  from  the  Sea  again 5  not  to  mention, 
that  the  Sea  muft  needs  in  fuch  a  Cafe  overflow 
its  Shores,  and  enlarge  its  Bounds. 

But  this  Way  there  is  an  eafy  Account  to  be 
given.  It  is  clear,  that  the  Sun  doth  exhale  Va- 
pours both  from  Sea  and  Land;  and  that  the 
Superficies  of  Sea  and  Land  is  fufficient  to  yield 
Vapours  for  Rain,  Rivers  and  Floods,  when  heat- 
ed to  fuch  a  Degree  as  the  Sun  heats  it :  So  that 
there  wants  only  Wind  to  bring  up  fo  great  a  Pro- 
portion of  Vapours  from  the  Sea  as  may  afford 
Water  for  the  Floods ;  that  is,  fo  much  as  is  re- 
turn'd back  again  to  the  Sea. 

Some  may  perchance  demand,  To  what  Pur- 
pofe  ferve  the  Floods?  What  Ufe  is  there  of 
tijiem'  ?  I  anfv^er.  To  return  back  to  the  Sea  the 
Surpiufage  of  Water  after  the  Earth  is  fated 
with  Rain.  It  may  be  further  ask'd,  What  need 
more  Rain  be  poured  upon  the  Earth  than  is 
fufficient  to  water  it?  I  reply,  That  the  Rain 
brings  down  from  the  Mountains  and  higher 
Grounds  a  great  Quantity  of  Earth,  and  in  Times 
of  Floods  fpreads  it  upon  the  Meadows  and 
Levels,  rendering  them  thereby  fo  fruitful  as  to 
I  -  fland 


Part  I.  in  the  Cke  ATio n.  83 

ftand  in  need  of  no  Culture,  or  Manuring.  So 
we  fee  the  Land  of  Egypt  owes  its  great  'Fer- 
tility to  the  annual  Overflowing  of  the  River 
Nilus:  And  it's  likely  the  Countries  bordering 
upon  the  River  of  Ganges  may  receive  the  like 
Benefit  by  the  Overflowing  thereof.  Moreover 
all  Rain-Water  contains  in  it  a  copious  Sediment 
of  Terreftrial  Matter,  which  by  {landing  it  pre- 
q^itates,  and  is  not  a  fimple  Elementary  Water. 
This  Terreftrial  Matter  ferves  for  the  Nourifh- 
ment  of  Plants,  and  net  the  Water  it  felf,  which 
is  but  a  Vehicle  to  derive  this  Nutriment  to  all 
the  Parts  of  the  Plants:  And  therefore  the  more 
Rain,  the  more  of  this  Nutricious  Matter  may 
be  precipitated  upon  the  Earth,  and  fo  the  Earth 
rendered  more  fruitful.  Befides  all  this,  it's  not 
unlikely,  that  the  P.ain- Water  may  be  endued 
with  fome  Vegetating  or  Prolifick  Virtue,  de- 
rived fromfome  Saline  or  Oleofe  Particles  it  con- 
tains: For  we  fee,  that  Aquatick  Plants,  which 
grow  in  the  very  Water,  do  not  thrive  andflou- 
riili  in  dry  Summers,  when  they  are  not  alfo  wa- 
ter'd  with  the  Dew  of  Heaven. 

Secondly,  Another  Argument  to  prove.  That 
the  Winds  bring  up  more  Vapours  from  the  Sea 
than  they  carry  down  thither,  is,  Becaufe  the 
Winds  do  more  frequently  blow  from  the  Sea 
than  to  the  Sea.  This  appears  from  the  Trees 
which  grow  on  and  near  the  .Sea-(hores  all  along 
the  Weftern  Coaft  of  Eng/and,  whofe  Heads  and 
Bougli^  I  have  obferv'd  to  run  out  far  to  Land- 
ward J  but  toward  the  Sea  to  be  fo  fnub'd  by  the 

G  2  Wind^, 


84        neV^isDouof  GOD      Parti. 

Winds,    as  if  their  Boughs  and  Leaves  had  been 
pared  or  fhaven  off  on  that  Side. 

It  is  alio  obferv'd,  that  the  Weftern  Wind, 
which  is  the  moft  violent  and  boifterous  of  all 
with  us  in  Englafid,  v^hich  comes  from  off  the 
great  Atlantick  Ocean,  is  of  longeft  Continuance. 
Julius  Cajar^  in  his  5th  Book  oi  Commentaries  de 
Bello  Galileo^  faith  of  it,  Magnam  partejiz  omnis 
temporis  fn  bis  locis  JJuere  cofifuevit  -,  it  is  wont  to 
blow  in  thefe  Quarters  a  great  Part  of  the  whole 
Year :  Which  Obfervation  holds  true  at  this  Day, 
the  Wind  lying  in  that  Corner  at  leafl  three  Quar- 
ters of  the  Year. 

Since  this  Motion  of  the  Winds  is  conflant, 
there  is  doubtlefs  a  conftant  and  fettled  Caufe 
of  it,  which  defer ves  to  be  enquired  into,  and 
fearch'd  out,  by  the  Study  and  Endeavours  of  the 
moft  fagaclous  Naturalifts.  But  however  the 
Wind  be  raised,  it  may  more  eafily  blow  from 
Sea  to  Land,  than  from  Land  to  Sea,  becaufe  the 
Superficies  of  the  Sea  being  even,  or  level,  there 
is  nothing  to  flop  its  Courfe  5  but  on  the  Land 
there  are  not  only  Woods,  but  Mountains  to  hin- 
der and  divert  it, 

Having  my  felf  ittn  fo  much  of  the  Bottom 
of  the  Sea  round  about  the  Coafts  o'i  England^ 
and  a  great  Part  of  the  Low  Countries^  of  Italy 
and  Sicihs  I  mull:  needs  adhere  to  what  I  de- 
liver'd,  That  where  the  Bottom  of  the  Sea  is  not 
Rocky,  hut  Earth,  Owze,  or  Sand,  and  that  is 
incomparably  the  greateft  Part  of  it,  it  is  by  the 
Motion  of  the  Waters,  fo  far  as  the  Recipro- 
cation of  the  Sea  extends  to  the  Bottom,  brought 


to 


Part  I.         in  the  Creation.  85 

to  a  Level;  and  if  it  fliould  be  now  unequal^ 
would  in  Time  be  level'd  again.  By  Level  I  do 
not  mean  fo  as  to  have  no  Declivity  (for  the  " 
Reciprocation  preferves  that,  the  Flood  hindering 
the  conflant  carrying  down  of  the  Bottom)  but 
only  to  have  an  equal  and  uniform  Defcent  from 
the  Shores  to  the  Deeps.  Now  all  thofe  Rela- 
tions of  Urinators  belong  only  to  thofe  Places 
where  they  have  dived,  which  are  always  rocky;. 
for  there  is  no  Reafon  why  they  (liould  dive 
where  the  Bottom  is  level  and  fandy.  That  the 
Motion  of  the  Water  defcends  to  a  good  Depth, 
I  prove  from  thofe  Plants  that  grow  deepeft  in 
the  Sea,  becaufe  they  all  generally  grow  flat,  in 
Manner  of  a  Fan,  and  not  with  Branches  on  all 
Sides  like  Trees,  which  is  fo  contrived  by  the 
Providence  of  Nature ;  for  that  the  Edges  of 
them  do  in  that  Poflure  with  moft  Eafe  cur  the 
Water  flowing  to  and  fro  ;  and  fliould  the  flat 
Side  be  objeded  to  the  Stream,  it  would  foon  be 
turn'd  Edge-wife  by  the  Force  of  it,  becaufe  in 
that  Site  it  doth  leafl:  refifl:  the  Motion  of  the 
Water  :  Whereas,  did  the  Branches  of  thefe 
Plants  grow  round,  they  would  be  thrown  back- 
ward and  forward  every  Tide.  Nay,  not  only 
the  Herbaceous  and  Woody  Submarine 
Plants,  b'Jt  alfo  the  -  Lithophytaxhitm-  Vams".^' 
felves,  affecS  this  manner  of  growing,  as 
I  have  obrferv'd  in  various  Kinds  of  Ccrals  and 
Fori,  Hence  I  fufped  alL  thofe  Relations  con- 
cerning Trees  growing  at  the  Bottom  of  the  Sea, 
and  bringing  forth  Fruit  there:  And  as  for  the 
Mafdiva  Nut,    till  better  information,    I  adliere 

G  3  .  to 


86        r^^  Wisdom  of  GOD      Patt  I. 

to  Garcias's  Opinion,  which  may  be  feen  in  Ciu-^ 
Jjus.  Farther,  I  do  believe,  that  in  the  great 
Depths  of  the  Sea,  there  grow  no  Plants  at  all, 
the  Bottom  being  too  remote  from  the  External 
Air,  which  though  it  may  pierce  the  Water  fo 
low,  yet  I  doubt  whether  in  Quantity  fufficient 
for  the  Vegetation  of  Plants:  Nay,  we  are  told. 
That  in  thofe  deep  and  bottomlefs  Seas  there  are 
BO  Fifh  at  alh  yet,  not  becaufe  there  are  no 
Plants,  or  Infeds,  to  feed  them,  for  that  they 
can  live  upon  Water  alone,  Rojtdeletiuss  Expe- 
riment about  keeping  them  in  a  Glafs  doth  un- 
deniably prove,  but  becaufe  their  Spawn  would 
be  loft  in  thofe  Seas,  the  Bottom  being  too  cold 
for  it  to  quicken  there,  or  rather  becaufe  being 
lighter  than  the  Water  there,  it  would  not  fmk 
to  the  Bottom,  but  be  buoy'd  up  by  it,  and  car- 
ried away  to  the  Shallows. 

Again,  The  great  Ufe  and  Convenience,  the 
Beauty  and  Variety  of  fo  many  Springs  and 
Fountains,  fo  many  Brooks  and  Rivers,  fo  many 
Lakes  and  ftanding  Pools  of  Water,  and  thefe 
fo  fcatter'd  and  difpers'd  all  the  Earth  over,  that 
BO  great  Part  of  it  is  deftitute  of  them,  without 
which  it  muft,  without  a  Supply  otherways,  be 
defolate  and  void  of  Inhabitants,  afford  abun- 
dant Arguments  of  Wifdom  and  Council:  That 
Springs  fnould  break  forth  on  the  Sides  of  Moun- 
tains moft  remote  from  the  Sea  :  That  there 
fhould  Way  be  made  for  Rivers  thro'  Straits 
and  Rocks,  and  fubterraneous  Vaults,  fo  that 
one  would  think  that  Nature  had  cut  a  Way 
on  Purpofe  to  derive  the  Water,     which  elfe 

would 


Part  I.        in  the  Cke  kTiom  87 

would  overflow  and  drown  whole  Countries : 
That  the  Water  pafling  thro'  the  Veins  of  the 
Earth,  fliould  be  rendred  fre{h  and  potable, 
which  it  cannot  be  by  any  Percolations  we  can 
make,  but  the  Saline  Particles  will  pafs  through 
a  tenfold Filtre:  That  infome  Places  there  fhould 
fpring  forth  Metalick  and  Mineral  Waters,*  and 
hot  Baths,  and  thefe  fo  conftant  and  permanent 
for  many  Ages;  fo  convenient  for  divers  Medici- 
nal Intentions  and  Ufes,  the  Caufes  of  which 
Things,  or  the  Means  and  Methods  by  which 
they  are  perform'd,  have  not  been  as  yet  certainly 
difcover'd;  only  in  General,  PAV^y's  Remark  may 
be  true,  "l^ales  funt  aqu/e^  qiialis  terra  per  quam 
fuunt.  Hence  they  are  Cold,  Hot,  Sweet,  Stink- 
ing, Purgative,  Diuretick,  or  Ferrugincous,  Sa- 
line, Petrefying,  Bituminofe,  Venenofe,  ai:d  of 
other  Qualities. 

Laftly,  The  Earth,  which  is  the  Bafis  and 
Support  of  all  Animals  and  Plants,  and  affords 
them  the  hard  and  folid  Part  of  their  Bodies, 
yielding  us  Food  and  Suftenance,  and  partly  alfo 
Cloathing ;  for  I  do  not  think  that  Water  fupplies 
Man,  and  other  Animals,  or  even  Plants  them- 
felves,  with  their  Nouri(hment,  but  ferves  chiefly 
for  a  Vehicle  to  the  Alimentary  Particles,  to  con- 
vey and  diftribute  them  to  the  feveral  Parts  of  the 
Body.  Water,  as  it  exifts  in  the  World,  is  not 
a  fimple  unmix'd  Body,  but  contains  the  Ter- 
rellrial  component  Parts  of  the  Bodies  of  Animals 
and  Plants :  Simple  Elementary  Water  nouriflies 
iK)t  at  all.  How  varioully  is  the  Surface  of  this 
G  4'  Earth 


88      He  Wisdom  of  GOD      Part! 

Earth  diftinguifh'd  into  Hills,  and  Valleys,  and 
Plains,  and  high  Mountains,  affording  pleafant 
Profpedts  ?  How  curioufly  cloath'd  and  adorn'd 
with  the  grateful  Verdure  of  Herbs  and  ftately 
Trees,  either  difpers'd  and  fcatter'd  fmgly,  or  as 
it  were  affembled  in  Woods  and  Groves,  and  all 
thefef  beautified  and  illuflrated  with  Elegant 
Flowers  and  Fruits,  qiwriim  omnium  incredibilis 
tnultitudo^  injatiabili  varietate  dijlinguitur^  as  T«/- 
ly  faith.  This  alfo  fhews  forth  to  them  that  con- 
fiderit,  both  the  Power  and  Wifdom  of  God:  So 
that  we  may  conclude  with  Solomon^  Prov.  iii.  19. 
*Ihe  Lord  by  Wijdom  hath  founded  the  Earthy  by 
Under jlmiding  hath  he  eJiabUpfd  the  Heavens. 

But  now,  if  we  pafs  from  Simple  to  Mix'd 
Bodies,  we  (hall  ftill  find  more  Matter  of  Admi- 
ration, and  Argument  of  Wifdom.  Of  thefe  we 
{hall  firft  confider  thofe  they  call  imperfedly 
Mix'd,  ox  Meteors. 

0/ Meteors. 

As  firft  of  all,  Rain^  which  is  nothing  elfe 
but  Water,  by  the  Heat  of  the  Sun  divided  into 
very  fmall  invifible  Parts,  afccnding  in  the  Air, 
till  encountring  the  Cold,  it  be  by  Degrees  con- 
densed into  Clouds,  and  defcends  in  Drops  j  this 
though  it  be  exhaled  from  the  Salt  Sea,  yet  by 
this  Natural  Diftillation  is  render'd  frefh  and 
potable,  which  our  Artificial  Diftillations  have 
hitherto  been  hardly  able  to  effed,  notwith-? 
ftanding  the  eminent  Ufe  it  would  be  of  to  Na- 
vigators, and  the  Rewards  promis'd  to  thofe  that 

fhould 


Parti.         Z;^ //6^  Cr  E  ATioN.  89 

fhoLild  refolve  that  Problem  of  diftilling  frefh 
Water  out  of  Salt.  That  the  Clouds  fhould  be 
fo  carried  about  by  the  Winds,  as  to  be  almofl 
equally  difperfed  and  diftributed,  no  Part  of  the 
Earth  wanting  convenient  Showers,  unlefs  when 
it  pleafeth  God,  for  the  Punifhment  of  a  Nation, 
to  with-hold  Rain  by  a  fpecial  Interpofition  of 
his  Providence;  or,  if  any  Land  wants  Rain,  they 
ha\ie  a  Supply  fome  other  way  -,  as  the  Land  of 
Egypfy  tho'  there  feldom  falls  any  Rain  there, 
yet  hath  abundant  Recompence  made  it  by  the 
annual  overflowing  of  the  River.  This  Diftri- 
bution  of  the  Clouds  and  Rain  is  to  me  (I  fay)  a 
great  Argument  of  Providence  and  divine  Difpo- 
fition  ;  for  elfe  I  do  not  fee  but  why  there  might 
be  in  fome  Lands  continual  fucceflive  Droughts 
for  many  Years,  till  they  were  quite  depopula- 
ted;  in  others  as  lafting  Rains,  till  they  were 
overflown  and  drown'd  5  and  thefe,  if  the  Clouds 
mov'd  cafually,  often  happening  ;  whereas,  iincc 
the  ancienteft  Records  of  Hiftory,  we  do  not 
read  or  hear  of  any  fuch  Droughts  or  Liunda- 
tions,'  unlefs  perhaps  that  of  Cyprus,  wherein 
there  fell  no  Rain  there  for  Thirty-fix  Years,  till 
the  Ifland  was  almoft  quite  deferted,  in  the  Reign 
of  Co?jJia?itine  5  which  doubtlefs  fell  not  out 
without  the  wife  Difpofition  of  Providence,  for 
great  and  weighty  Reafons. 

Again,  If  we  confider  the  manner  of  the  Rain's 
Defcent ,  .  difl:illing    down    gradually ,    and  by 
Drops,  which  is  moft  convenient  for  the  water- 
ing of  the  Earth  j  whereas  if  it  fhould  fall  down 
•  in 


90         T/)e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

in  a  continual  Stream  like  a  River,  it  would  gall 
the  Ground,  wafh  away  Plants  by  the  Roots, 
overthrow  Houfes,  and  greatly  incommode,  if 
not  fufFocate  Animals:  If,  I  fay,  we  confider 
thefe  Things,  and  many  more  that  might  be  ad- 
ded, we  might  in  this  refped:  alfo  cry  out  with 
the  Apoftle,  O  the  Depth  of  the  Riches  both  of  the 
Wifdom  and  Knowledge  of  God ! 

Secondly ,  Another  Meteor  is  the  Wind ; 
which  how  many  Ufes  it  doch  ferve  to,  is  not 
eafy  to  enumerate,  but  many  it  doth,  viz,  to 
ventilate  and  break  the  Air,  and  diffipate  noifom 
and  contagious  Vapours,  which  otherwife  ftag- 
nating,  might  occafion  many  Difeafes  in  Ani- 
mals ',  and  therefore  it  is  an  Obfervation  concern- 
ing our  native  Country,  Anglia  ventofa ,  fi  no?t 
ventofdy  venenofa:  To  transfer  the  Clouds  from 
Place  to  Place,  for  the  more  commodious  water- 
ing of  the  Earth :  To  temper  the  Exceffes  of  the 
Heat,  as  they  find  who  in  Brafl^  New  Spain^  the 
neighbouring  Iflands,  and  other  the  like  Coun- 
tries near  the  Equator,  reap  the  Benefit  of  the 
Breezes:  To  fill  the  Sails  of  Ships,  and  carry 
them  on  their  Voyages  to  remote  Countries ; 
which,  of  what  eminent  Advantage  it  is  to  Man- 
kind, for  the  procuring  and  continuing  of  Trade 
and  mutual  Commerce  between  the  moft  diftant 
Nations ,  the  illuftrating  every  Corner  of  the 
Earth,  and  the  perfecting  Geography  and  Natu- 
ral Hiftory,  is  apparent  to  every  Man.  That  the 
Monfoons  and  Trade- Winds  fhould  be  fo  con- 
flant  and  periodical,  even  to  the  30th  Degree  of 
Latitude  all  round  the  Globe,    and  that  they 

Ihould 


Parti.       //^ /^^  Cre  ATioN.  91. 

fhould  lb  feldom  tranfgrefs  or  fall  fhort  of  thofe 
Bounds,  is  a  Subjed:  worthy  of  the  Thoughts  of 
the  greateft  Philofophers.  To  this  may  be  ad- 
ded the  driving  about  of  Windmills  for  grinding 
of  Corn,  making  of  Oil,  draining  of  Pools,  rai- 
fmg  of  Water,  fawing  of  Wood,  fulling  of  Cloth, 
Gf^.  That  it  fhould  feldom  or  never  be  fo  violent 
and  boifterous  as  to  overturn  Houfes,  yea,  whole 
Citi^ ;  to  tear  up  Trees  by  the  Roots,  and  pro- 
ftrate  Woods ;  to  drive  the  Sea  over  the  lower 
Countries;  as,  were  it  the  EfFed:  of  Chance,  or 
mere  natural  Caufes,  not  moderated  by  a  fupe- 
rior  Power,  it  would  in  all  likelihood  often  do. 
Hurricanes,  Spouts,  and  Inundations,  would  be 
more  frequent  than  they  are.  All  thefe  Things 
declare  the  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs  of  him  who 
bringeth  the  Wind  out  of  his  '\treajures. 

Of  inanimate  mixd  Bodies. 

I  proceed  now  to  fuch  inanimate  Bodies  as  are 
Qz}\td,  perfect e  mixta,  perfectly  mix'd,  improperly 
enough,  they  being  many  of  them  (for  ought  I 
know)  as  fimple  as  thofe  they  call  Elements. 
Thefe  are  Stones,  Metals,  Minerals,  and  Salts. 

In  Stones,  which  one  would  think  were  a  neg- 
lefted  Genus,  what  Variety?  what  Beauty  and 
Elegancy  ?  what  Conftancy  in  their  Temper,  and 
Confiftency  in  their  Figures  and  Colours  ?  I  (hall 
fpeak  of  fiiA  fome  notable  Qualities  wherewith 
fome  of  them  are  endued:  Secondly,  The  re- 
markable Ufes  they  are  of  to  us.     The  Qualities 

liliall 


92       The  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

1  fhall  inftance  in  are:  Firft,  Colour^  which  in 
fome  of  them  is  moft  lively,  fparkling,  and  beau- 
tiful ;  the  Carbuncle^  or  Riibine  fhining  with  Red, 
the  Sapphire  with  Blue,  the  Emerald  with  Green, 
the  Topaz y  or  Chrjfolite  of  the  Ancients^  with  a 
Yellow,  or  Gold  Colour,  the  Amethiji  as  it  were 
tinftur'd  with  Wine,  the  Opal  varying  its  Colours 
like  changeable  TafFata,  as  it  is  diverfly  exposed 
to  the  Light.  Secondly,  Hardnefs^  wherein  fome 
Stones  exceed  all  other  Bodies,  and  among  them 
the  Adamant  all  other  Stones,  being  exalted  to 
that  degree  thereof,  that  Art  in  vain  endeavours 
to  counterfeit  it,  the  fidlitious  Stones  of  Chymifts 
in  Imitation  being  eafily  detefted  by  an  ordinary 
Lapidift.  Thirdly,  F/^^/r^ :  Many  of  them  fhoot 
into  regular  Figures,  as  Cryjial  and  Bajiard 
Diamonds  into  hexagonal ;  others  into  thofe  that 
are  more  elegant  and  compounded,  as  thofe  for- 
med in  Imitation  of  the  Shells  of  Teftaceous 
Filhes  of  all  Sorts ,  Sharks  Teeth  and  Vertebres, 
&c,  if  thefe  be  originally  Stones,  or  primary  Pro- 
dudlions  of  Nature  in  Imitation  of  Shells,  and 
Fifhes  Bones,  and  not  the  Shells  and  Bones  them- 
felves  petrify'd,  as  we  have  fometimes  thought. 
Some  have  a  kind  of  Vegetation  and  Refem- 
blance  of  Plants ,  as  Corals,  Fori,  and  Fimgites , 
which  grow  upon  the  Rocks  like  Shrubs:  To 
which  I  might  add  our  ordinary  Star-Stones  and 
Trochites^  which  I  look  upon  as  a  Sort  of  Rock- 
Plants. 

Secondly, 


Part  I.        in  /Z'^  C  r  e  at  i  o  N.  93 

Secondly,  For  the  Ufes ;  fome  ferve  for  Build- 
ing, and  many  Sorts  of  VeiTels  and  Utenfils ;  for 
Pillars  and  Statues,  and  other  carv'd  Works  in 
relievo^  for  the  Temples,  Ornament  of  Palaces, 
Portico's,  Piazza's,  Conduits,  G?r.  as  Freeftone 
and  Marble  -,  fome  to  burn  into  Lime ,  as  Chalk 
and  Lime-ftone ;    fome ,  with  the  Mixture  of 
Beriglia  or  Kelp^  to  make  Glafs,  as  that  the  Ve- 
netians call  Cuogiilo,  and  common  Flints,  which 
ferve  alfo  to  ftrike  Fire  5  fome  to  cover  Houfes, 
as  Slates,  fome  for  marking,  as  MorochthuSy  and 
the  fore-mention'd  Chalk,  which  is  a  7nX6^py\^QVy 
ferving  moreover  for  manuring  Land,  and  fome 
medicinal  Ufes ;  fome  to  make  VeiTels  of  which 
w^ill  endure  the  Fire,  as  that  found  in  the  Coun- 
try of  Chiavenna  near  Plurs,     To  thefe  ufeful 
Stones  I  might  add  the  Warming-Jlone^  digg'd  in 
Cornwall^  which  being  once  well  heated  at  the 
Fire,  retains  its  Warmth  a  great  while,  and  hath 
been  found  to  give  Eafe  and  Relief  in  feveral 
Pains  and  Difeafes,  particularly  in  that  of  the  in- 
ternal Haemorrhoids.     I  might  alfo  take  notice, 
that. fome  Stones  are  endu'd  with  an  eleSrical 
or  attradical  Virtue.     "  My  honoured  Friend, 
"  Dr.  Tancred  Robin/on,  in  his  Manufcript  ///- 
"  nerary  of  Italy ^  relates  the  many  various  Fi- 
*'  gures  he    obferv'd    naturally  delineated    and 
"  drawn  on  feveral  Sorts  of  Stones  digg'd  up  in 
**  the  Quarries,  Caverns  and  Rocks  about  Flo- 
"  rence,  and  other  Parts  of  Italy ,  not  only  repre- 
"  fenting  Cities,    Mountains,    Ruins,    Clouds, 
"  oriental  Charaftera,  Rivers,  Woods,  Animals, 

"  but 


94  77)e  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  L 
"  but  alfo  fome  Plants  (as  Ivy,  MolTes,  Maiden- 
**  hair,  Ferns,  and  fuch  Vegetables  as  grow  in 
"  thofe  Places)  fo  exadlly  defign'd  and  imprefs'd 
"  upon  feveral  Kinds  of  Stones,  as  though  fome 
"  fkilful  Painters  or  Sculptors  had  been  working 
"  upon  them.  The  DoBor  obferves  alfo  the 
"  wonderful  Diverfity  of  Shapes  and  Colours 
"  that  Oars  and  other  Fofiils  fhoot  into,  refem- 
"  bling  almoft  every  thing  in  Nature,  for  which 
"  it  feems  very  difficult  to  him  to  affign  any 
"  Caufe  or  Principle.  In  the  Pyrites  alone  he 
"  believes  he  himfelf  may  have  feen  at  Home 
*'  and  Abroad  above  a  Hundred  Varieties,  and 
"  yet  he  confejflTes  he  has  been  but  a  rude  Obfer- 
"  ver  of  them.  In  the  diaphanous  Foffils  (as 
'*  Ambers,  Cryftals,  Agates,  &c.)  preferv'd  in 
"  the  Cabinets  of  the  Great  Duke  of  T^ufcany^ 
^'  Cardinal:  Chigi^  Settali  ^  Mofcardi^  and  other 
*'  Repoiitories  or  Mufaeums  of  that  curious 
''  Country,  he  takes  notice  of  the  admirable  Di- 
"  verfity  of  Bodies  included  and  naturally  im- 
"  prifon'd  within  them,  as  Flies,  Spiders,  Frogs, 
"  Locufts,  Bees,  Pifmires,  Gnats,  Gralhoppers, 
*'  Drops  of  Liquor,  Hair,  Leaver,  Rufhes,  Mofs, 
"  Seeds ,  and  other  Herbage ;  which  feem  to 
*'  prove  them  to  have  been  once  in  a  State  of 
"  Fluidity.  The  Bononia  Stone  digg'd  up  in  the 
"  Appenines  is  remarkable  for  its  Ihining  Quali- 
"  ty.  The  Af?iianthus  for  its  Incumbufiibility. 
"  The  Oculus  Mu7idi  for  its  Motion  and  Change 
"  of  Colour.  The  Lapis  Nephrkiciis^'  Calamina- 
"  ris^  OJliocolla,  /Etitcs^  &€.  for  their  medicinal 
"  Ufes;'  , 

I  might 


Part  I.       in  tl)e  Creation.  95 

I  might  fpend  much  Time  in  the  difcourfing 
of  the  mofl  ftrange  and  unaccountable  Nature 
and  Power  of  the  Loadftone,  a  Subjed:  which 
hath  exercised  the  Wits  and  Pens  of  the  mofl 
acute  and  ingenious  Philofophers ;  and  yet  the 
Hypothefes  which  they  have  invented  to  give  an 
Account  of  its  admirable  Phanomena  feem  to 
me  lame  and  unfatisfadory.  What  can  we  fay 
of  the  Subtilty,  Adivity,  and  Penetrancy  of  its 
mfluvia^  which  no  Obftacle  can  flop  or  repel, 
but  they  will  nlake  their  w^ay  thro'  all  Sorts  of 
Bodies,  firm  and  fluid,  denfe  and  rare,  heavy  and 
light,  pellucid  and  opake  ?  nay,  they  will  pafs 
thro'  a  Vacuity  or  empty  Space,  at  leafl  devoid 
of  Air  and  any  other  fenfible  Body.  Its  attractive 
Power  of  Iron  was  known  to  the  Ancients :  It& 
Verticity  and  Diredion  to  the  Poles  of  the  Earth 
is  of  later  Invention ;  which,  of  how  infinite  Ad- 
vantage it  hath  been  to  thefe  two  or  three  kft 
Ages,  the  great  Improvement  of  Navigation,  and 
Advancement  of  Trade  and  Commerce,  by  ren- 
dring  the  remotefl  Countries  eafily  acceffible; 
the  noble  Difcovery  of  a  vaft  Continent  or  new 
World,  befides  a  Multitude  of  unknown  King- 
doms and  Iflands  3  the  refolving  experimentally 
thofe  ancient  Problems  of  the  fpherical  Round- 
nefs  of  the  Earth  3  of  the  Being  of  Antipodes^  or 
the  Habitablenefs  of  the  Torrid  Zone\  and  the 
rendring  the  whole  terraqueous  Globe  circum- 
navigable,  do  abundantly  demonflrate :  whereas 
formerly  they  were  w^ont  to  Coafl  it,  and  creep 
along  the  Shores,  fcarce  daring  to  venture  out  of 

the 


96        T6eWisD0M  of  GOD     Parti. 

the  Ken  of  Land;  when  they  did,having  no  other 
Guide  but  the  Cynofura^  or  Pole-Star,  and  thofe 
near  it,  and  in  cloudy  Weather  none  at  all. 

As  for  Metals^  they  are  fo  many  ways  ufeful 
to  Mankind,  and  thofe  Ufes  fo  well  known  to 
all,  that  it  would  be  loft  Labour  to  fay  any  thing 
of  them :  Without  the  Ufe  of  thefe  we  could 
have  nothing  of  Cultule  or  Civility  ;  no  Tillage 
or  Agriculture ;  no  Reaping  or  Mowing ;  no 
Ploughing  or  Digging  ;  no  Pruning  or  Lopping, 
Grafting,  or  Incifion ;  no  mec*hanical  Arts  or 
Trades  5  no  Veflels  or  Uteniils  of  Houfhold-ftufF; 
no  convenient  Houfes  or  Edifices  ;  no  Shipping 
or  Navigation.  What  a  kind  of  barbarous  and 
fordid  Life  we  muft  neceflarily  have  liv'd,  the 
Indians  in  the  northern  Part  of  America  are  a 
clear  Demonftration.  Only  it  is  remarkable, 
that  thofe  which  are  of  moft  frequent  and  ne- 
ceflary  Ufe,  as  Iron,  Brafs,  and  Lead,  are  the 
moft  common  and  plentiful :  Others  that  are 
more  rare,  may  better  be  fpar'd,  yet  are  they 
thereby  qualified  to  be  made  the  common  Mea- 
fure  and  Standard  of  the  Value  of  all  other  Com- 
modities, and  fo  ferve  for  Coin  or  Money,  to 
which  Ufe  they  have  been  employed  by  all  Civil 
Nations  in  all  Ages. 

'  Now  of  what  mighty  Importance  the  Ufe  of 
Money  is  to  Mankind,  the  learned  and  ingeni- 
ous Dr.  Cockbiirn  (hews  us,  in  the  Second  Part 
of  his  Ejjdy  concerning  the  Nature  of  Chrijiian 
Faith,  ^.88.  Whenever,  faith  he,  the  Ufe  of 
Money  began ,  it  was  an  admirable  Contri- 
vance for  rewarding  and  encouragnig  Induftry, 

for 


Part  L         in  the  Creation.  97 

for  carrying  on  Trade  and  Commerce  certainly, 
eafily,  and  fpeedily  ;    for  obliging  all  to  employ 
their  various  Parts  and  feveral  Capacities  for  the 
common  Good,  and  engaging  every  one  to  com- 
municate the  Benefit  of  his. particular  Labour, 
without  any  Prejudice  to  himfelf     Covetoufnefs 
indeed,    or  an  inordinate  Love  of  Money,  is  vi- 
cious, and  the  Root  of  much  EviJ,  and  ought  to 
be  remedied  ;  but  the  Ufe  of  Money  is  necelfary, 
ai^d  attended  with  manifold  Advantages.     Where 
Money  has  not  yet  taken  Place,  where  the  Ufe  of 
it  hath  not  yet  been  introduc'd,  Arts  and  Sciences 
are  not  cultivated,    nor  any  of  thofe  Exercifes 
ply'd,    which  polite  Men's  Spirits,    and  which 
abate  the  Uneafmefs  of  Life.     Men  there  are  bru- 
tifli  and  favage,    none  mind  any  Thing  but  Eat- 
ing and  Drinking,    and  the  other  Adts  of  brutal 
Nature ;    their  Thoughts  afpire  no  higher  than 
merely  to  maintain  their  Life  and  Breath  :   Like 
the  Beafts  they  walk  abroad  ail  the  Day  long, 
and   range  about  from  Place  to  Place,    only  to 
feek  their  Food.     Whatever  may  be  fuppos'd  to 
follow  if  all   were  ad:ed  with  great  Generofity 
and  true  Charity,    yet,  according  to  the  prefenc 
Temper  of  Mankind,    it  is  abfolutely  neceffary 
that  there  be  fome  Method  and  Means  of  Com- 
mutation, as  that  of  Money,  forrenderingall  and 
every  one  mutually  ufeful  and  ferviceable. 

Now  Gold  and  Silver  by  their  Rarity  are 
wonderfully  fitted  and  acconntmodared  for  this 
Ufe  of  Permutation  for  all  Sorts  of  Commodi- 
ties,   or  making  Money  of:    Whereas  were  they 

H  as 


98        Tie  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  L 

as  common  and  eafy  to  come  by  as  Straw  or  Stub- 
ble, Sand  or  Stones,  they  would  be  of  no  more 
Ufe  for  Bartering  and  Commerce  than  they. 

And  here  he  goes  on  to  ihew  the  wonderful- 
Providence  of  God,  in  keeping  up  the  Value  of 
Gold  and  Silver,  notwithftanding  the  vafh  Quan- 
tities which  have  been  digg'd  out  of  the  Earth 
in  all  Ages,  an^  fo  continuing  them  a  fit  Mate- 
rial to  make  Money  of  For  which  I  refer  to  the 
Book. 

Of  thefe,  Gold  is  rerharkable  for  its  admirable 
Dudtility  and  Ponderofity,  wherein  it  excels  all 
other  Bodies  hitherto  known.  I  fhall  only  add,, 
concerning  Metals,  that  they  do  pertinacioufly 
refift  all  Tranfmutation  -,  and  tho'  one  would 
fometimes  think  they  were  turn'd  into  a  different 
Subftance,  yet  do  they  but  as  it  were  lurk  under 
a  Larva  or  Vizard,  and  may  be  reduced  again 
into  their  natural  Form  and  Complexions,  in 
Dcfpite  of  all  the  Tortures  of  Vulcaji  or  corrofive 
Waters.  Note,  "That  this  ivas  written  above  T'hir^ 
ty  Tears  fjice^  when  I  thought  I  had  Reafon  to  dif- 
trujl  whatever  had  then  been  reported  or  written  to 
ajfirm  the  Transmutation  of  Metals  one  into  ano- 
ther, 

I  fhall  omit  the  Confideration  of  other  Mi- 
nerals, and  of  Salts  and  Earths,  becaufe  I  have 
nothing  to  fay  of  their  Ufes,  but  only  fuch  as 
refer  to  Man,  which  I  cannot  affirm  to  have 
been  the  fole  or  primary  End  of  the  Formation 
of  them.  Indeed,  to  fpeak  in  general  of  thefe 
Terreftrial  Inanimate  Bodies,  they  having  no 
fuch  Organization  of  Parts  as  the  Bodies  of  Ani- 
2  mals,. 


t^art  t.  in  the  Ckeatio n.  99 

mals,  nor  any  fo  intricate  Variety  of  Texture,  but 
that  iheir  Production  may  plaufibly  be  account- 
ed for  by  an  Hypotkcjis  of  Matter  divided  into  mi- 
nute Particles  or  Atoms  naturally  indivifible,    of 
various   but  a  determinate  Number  of  Figures, 
and  perhaps  alfo  differing  in  Magnitudcj    and 
thefe  mov'd,  and  continually  kept  in  Motion  ac- 
cording to  certain  eftablifli'd  Law^  or  Rules;  we 
cannot  fo   clearly  difcover  the  Ufes   for  which 
rfiey  were  created,    but  may  probably  conclude, 
that  among  other  Ends  they  were  made  for  thofe 
for  v/hich  they  ferve  us  and  other  Animals  5   as  I 
fliall  more  fully  make  out  hereafter.     It  is  here 
to  be  noted,    That,  according  to  out  Hypothejis^ 
the  Number  of  the  Atoms  of  each  feveral  Kind 
that  is  of  the  fame  Figure  and  Magnitude  is  not 
nearly  equals  but  there  be  infinitely  more  of  fome 
Species  than  of  others,  as  of  thofe  that  compound 
thofe  vaft  Aggregates  of  ^/r,  Water,  and  Earthy 
more  abundantly  than  of  fuch  as  make  up  Metals 
and  Minerali :  The  Reafon  whereof  may  proba- 
bly be,    becaufe  thofe  are  neceflary  to  the  Life 
and  Being  of  Man  and  all  other  Animals,    and 
therefore  muft  be  always  at  Hand^  thefe  only  ufe- 
ful  to  Man,   and  ferving  rather  his  Conveniences 
than  NeceiTities.     The  Reafon  why  I  affirm  the 
minute  component  Particles  of  Bodies  to  be  na- 
ttirally  indivifible  by  any  Agent  we  can  employ^ 
(even    Fire  it  felf)  which   is  the   only  Catho- 
lick  DiiTolvent,    other  Menjlruiinn  h^m%  i2x\\d: 
Inllrunlents  than  Efficients  in  all  Solutions,   apt 
by  Reafon  of  the  Figure  and  Smalinefs  of  their 

H  2  Parts 


ICO       Tie  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  L 

Parts  to  cut  and  divide  other  Bodies  (as  Wedges 
cleave  Wood)  v^hen  actuated  by  Fire  or  its  Heat> 
which  elfe  would  have  no  Efficacy  at  all  (as 
Wedges  have  not,  unlefs  driven  by  a  Beetle:) 
The  Reafon,  I  fliy,  I  have  already  given  ;  I  fhall 
now  inftance  in  a  Body  whofe  minute. Parts  ap- 
pear to  be  indiffoluble  by  the  Force  of  Fire,  and 
that  is  comnQon  Water,  which  diftil,  boil,  cir- 
culate, work  upon  how  you  will  by  Fire,  you 
can  only  diflblve  it  into  Vapour,  which  when 
the  Motion  ceafes,  eafily  returns  into  Water  a- 
gain  ;  Vapour  being  nothing  elfe  but  the  minute 
Parts  thereof,  by  Heat  agitated  and  feparated 
one  from  another.  For  another  inftance,  fome 
of  the  moft  learned  and  experienced  Chymifts  do 
affirm  Quickfilver  to  be  intranfmutable,  and 
therefore  call  it  Liquor  at  emus.  And  I  am  of 
Opinion,  that  the  fame  holds  of  all  fimple  Bo- 
dies, that  their  component  Particles  are  indiffo- 
luble by  any  natural  Agent. 

We  may  here  note  the  Order  and  Method  that 
Metals  and  Minerals  obferve  in  their  Growth, 
how  regularly  they  ftioot,  ferment,  and  as  it  were 
vegetate  and  regenerate;  Salts  in  their  proper 
and  conftant  Figures,  as  our  ingenious  Country- 
man Dr.  Jordan  obferves  at  large  in  his  Difcourfe 
of  Baths  and  Mineral  Waters. 

Of  Vegetables  or  Plants, 

I  have  how  done  with  inanimate  Bodies  both 
fimple  and  mix'd.     The  Animate  are, 

Firft, 


Part  I.         in  the  C'B.Y.  AT  lo  n.  i  P  i 

Firft,  Such  as  are  endued  only  with  a  Vegeta- 
tive Soul,  and  therefore  commonly  called  Vegeta- 
bles or  Plants ;  of  which,  if  we  confider  either 
their  Stature  and  Shape,  or  their  Age  and  Dura- 
tion, we  (hall  find  it  wonderful ;  for  why  (hould 
fome  Plants  rife  up  to  a  great  Height,  others 
creep  upon  the  Ground,  which  perhaps  may 
have  equal  Seeds  ?  nay,  the  leffer  Plant  many 
tjmes  the  greater  Seed.  Why  {hould  each  Parti- 
cular fo  obferve  its  Kind,  as  conflantly  to  produce 
the  fame  Leaf  for  Confiftency,  Figure,  Divifion 
and  Edging,  and  bring  forth  the  fame  Kind  of 
Flower,  and  Fruit,  and  Seed  ?  and  that  tho'  ycu 
tranflate  it  into  a  Soil  which  naturally  puts 
forth  no  fuch  Kind  of  Plant,  fo  that 
it  is  fome  *  A^o^  ainpjuLctriKk^  which  p^^^^^J^"^^ 
doth  effedl  this,  or  rather  fome  intelli-  virtue. 
gent plajlick  Nature ;  as  we  have  before 
intimated:  For  what  Account  can  be  given  of 
the  Determination  of  the  Growth  and  Magnitude 
of  Plants  from  Mechanical  Principles,  of  Mat- 
ter movd  without  the  Prefidency  and  Guidance 
of  fome  fuperior  Agent  ?  Why  may  not  Trees 
grow  up  as  high  as  the  Clouds  or  Vapours  af- 
cend  ?  Or  if  you  fay  the  Cold  of  the  fuperior 
Air  checks  them,  Why  may  they  not  fpread  and 
extend  their  lateral  Branches  fo  far  till  their  Di- 
ftance  from  the  Centre  of  Gravity  deprefs  them 
to  the  Earth,  be  the  Tree  never  fo  high  ?  ^  How 
comes  it  to  pafs  that  tho'  by  Culture  and  Manure 
they  may  be  highly  improv'd,  and  augmented  to 
a  double,  treble,  nay,  fome  a  much  greater  Propor- 
tion in  Magnitude  of  all  their  Parts,  yet  is  this  Ad- 

H  3  vance 


102      The  Wisdom  of  GOD      Parti, 

vance  reftrain'd  within  certain  Limits  ?  There  is 
maximum  quod  fic  which  they  cannot  exceed.  You 
can  by  no  Culture  or  Art  extend  a  Fennel-Stalk 
to  the  Stature  and  Bignefs  of  an  Oak:  Then  why 
iliould  fonie  be  very  long-liv'd,  others  only  An- 
nua! or  Biennial  ?  How  can  we  imagine  that  any 
Laws  of  Motion  can  determine  the  Situation  of 
the  Leaves^  to  come  forth  by  Pairs,  or  alternate- 
ly, or  circling  the  Stalk  ;  xht  Flowers  to  grow 
fingly,  or  in  Company  and  Tufts,  to  come  forth 
the  Bofoms  of  the  Leaves  and  Branches,  or  on  the 
Tops  of  Branches  and  Stalks ;  the  Figure  of  the 
Leaves,  that  they  fhould  be  divided  into  fo  many 
Jags  or  Efcallops,  and  cBrioully  indented  round 
the  Edges  ;  as  alfo  of  the  Flower>leaves,  their 
Number  and  Site,  the  Figure  and  Number  of  the 
Stamina  and  their  Jpices^  the  Figure  of  the  Stile 
and  Seed-Veffel,  and  the  Number  of  Cells  into 
which  it  is  divided?  That  all  this  be  done,  and 
all  thefe  Parts  duly  proportioned  one  to  another, 
there  feems  to  be  necelTary  fome  intelligent 
plajiick  Nature^  which  may  underftand  and  re- 
gulate the  whole  Oeconomy  of  the  Plants :  For 
this  cannot  be  the  Vegetative  Soul,  becaufe  that 
is  material  and  divifible  together  with  the  Bo- 
dy ;  which  appears,  in  that  a  Branch  cut  off  of 
a  Plant  will  take  Root,  and  grow,  and  become 
a  perfe£t  Plant  it  felf,  as  we  have  already  ob- 
ferv'd.  I  had  almoft  forgotten  the  Complication 
of  the  Seed-leaves  of  fome  Plants  in  the  Seed, 
which  is  fo  ftrange,  that  one  cannot  believe  it  to 
be  done  by  Matter,  however  mov'd  by  any  Laws 
or  Rules  imaginable.     Some  of  them  being  fo 

clofe- 


Parti.        in  the  Creation.  103 

clofe-plaited,  and  ftraitly  folded  up  and  thruft 
together  within  the  Membranes  of  the  Seed,  that 
it  would  puzzle  a  Man  to  imitate  it,  and  yet  none 
of  the  Folds  flicking  or  growing  together;  fo 
that  they  may  eafily  be  taken  out  of  their  Ca- 
fes, and  fprcad  and  extended  even  with  one's 
Fingers. 

Secondly,  If  we  confider  each  particular  Part 
of  a  Plant,  we  fhall  find  it  not  without  its  End 
or  Ufe ;  the  Root^  for  its  Stability  and  drawing 
Nourifliment  from  the  Earth;  th^  Fibres ^  to  con- 
tain and  convey  the  Sap  ;  befides  which,  there  is 
a  large  Sort  of  VefTels  to  contain  the  proper  and 
fpecifick  Juice  of  the  Plant,  and  others  to  carry 
Air  for  fuch  a  Kind  of  Refpiration  as  it  needeth; 
of  which  we  have  already  fpoken.  The  outer 
and  inner  Bark  in  Trees  ferve  to  defend  the  trunk 
and  Boughs  from  the  ExcefTes  of  Heat  and  Cold, 
and  Drought,  and  to  convey  the  Sap  for  the  an- 
nual Augmentation  of  the  Tree ;  for  in  Truth, 
every  Tree  may  in  fome  Senfe  be  faid  to  be  an 
annual  Plant,  both  Leaf,  Flower  and  Fruit 
proceeding  from  the  Coat  that  was  fuperin- 
duced  over  the  Wood  the  lafl  Year,  which  Coat 
alfo  never  beareth  any  more,  but  together  with 
the  old  Wood  ferves  as  a  Form  or  Block  to  fu- 
llain  the  fucceeding  annual  Coat.  The  Leaves 
before  the  Gemma  or  Bud  be  explicated  to  em- 
brace and  defend  the  Flower  and  Fruit,  .which 
is  even  then  perfedly  form'd  3  afterwards  to 
preferve  the  Branches,  Flowers  and  Fruit  from 
the  Injuries  of  the.  Summer-Sun,    which  would 

H  4  too 


104      ^^  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

too  much  parch  and  dry  them,  if  they  lay  open 
and  expos'd  to  its  Beams  without  any  Shelter : 
The  Leaves,  I  lay,  qualify  and  contemper  the 
Heat,  aiidferve  aifo  to  hinder- the  too  hafty  Eva- 
poration of  the  Moifture  about  the  Root :  But 
the  principal  Ufe  of  the  Leaves  (as  we  learn  of 
Signior  Malpbigii^  Monfieur  Perault^  and  Mon-. 
fieur  Mariotte)  is  to  con  cod:  and  prepare  the  Sap 
for  the  INouriihment  of  the  Fruit,  and  the  whole 
Plants  not  only  that  which  afcends  from  the 
Root,  but  what  they  take  in  from  without,  from 
the  Dew,  moift  Air  and  Rain.  This  they  prove, 
becaufe  many  Trees,  if  defpoil'd  of  their  Leaves, 
will  die ;  as  it  happens  fometimes  in  Mulberry- 
Trees^  when  they  are  pluck'd  off  to  feed  Silk- 
*worms.  And  becaufe  if  in  Summer-Time  you 
denude  a  Vine-Branch  of  its  Leaves,  the  Grapes 
will  never  come  to  Maturity :  But  tho'  you  ex- 
pofe  the  Grapes  to  the  Sun-Beams,  if  you  pluck 
not  off  the  Leaves,  they  will  ripen  notwithiland- 
ing.  That  there  is  a  Regrefs  of  the  Sap  in  Plants, 
from  above  downwards,  and  that  this  defcen- 
dent  Juice  is  that  which  principally  nouri{heth 
both  Fruit  and  Plant,  is  clearly  prov'd  by  the 
Experiments    of  Signior   Malp^higii^    and   thofe 

late  ones  of  an  Ingenious  Country- 
*  Phnofop.  Man  of  our  own,  ^  "Thomas  Brother^ 
Num.\87.      '^^^^  Efquire,  of  which  I  (hall  mention 

only  one,  that  is,  If  you  cut  off  a 
Ring  of  Bark  from  the  Trunk  of  any  Tree,  that 
Part  of  the  Tree  above  the  Barked  Ring  fhall 
grow  and  increafe  in  Bignefs,  but  not  that  be- 
neath. 

But 


Part  I.         in  the  Cke  at  loi^.  105 

But  whether  there  be  fuch  a  conftant  Cir- 
culation of  the  Sap  in  Plants  as  there  is  of  the 
Blood  in  Animals,  as  they  would  from  hence 
infer,  there  is  fome  Reafon  to  doubt.  I  might 
add  hereto  the  pleafant  and  deledable  cooling 
and  refrefhing  Shade  they  afford  in  the  Sum- 
mer-Time  ;  which  was  very  much  efleem'd  by 
the  Inhabitants  of  hot  Countries,  who  always 
took  great  Delight  and  Pleafure  to  fit  in  the 
(?pen  Air,  under  iliady  Trees.  Hence  that  Ex- 
preiTion  fo  often  repeated  in  Scripture,  of  every 
Man's  Jitting  under  his  own  Vijie^  a?id  under 
his  own  Fig-'T'ree^  where  alfo  they  us'd  to  eat ; 
as  appears  by  Abrahams  entertaining  the  Angels 
under  a  Tree,  and  {landing  by  them  when  they 
did  eat,  Gen.  xviii.  8.  Moreover,  the  Leaves 
of  Plants  are  very  beautiful  and  ornamental. 
That  there  is  great  Pulchritude  and  Comeli- 
nefs  of  Proportion  in  the  Leaves,  Flowers  and 
Fruits  of  Plants,  is  attefted  by  the  general  Ver- 
did:  of  Mankind,  as  Dr.  Moore  and  others  well 
obferve.  The  adorning  and  beautifying  the 
Temples  and  Buildings  in  all  Ages,  is  an  evi- 
dent and  undeniable  Teftimony  of  this;  for 
what  is  more  ordinary  with  ArchitcBs  than  the 
taking  in  Leaves  and  Flowers  and  Fruitage  for 
the  garnifliing  of  their  Work  ;  as  the  Roman 
the  Leaves  oi  Achanthiis  fat,  and  the  y^ic^z/Z?  of 
Palm-1'rees  and  Pomegranats?  And  thefe.more 
frequently  than  any  of  the  five  regular  Solids,  as 
being  rhore  comely  and  pleafant  to  behold.  If 
any  Man  (hall  obje(5t,  that  Comelinefs  of  Propor- 
tion 


io6      The  Wis  DOM  of  GOD    Part  I. 

tion  and  Beauty  is  but  a  mere  Conceit,  and  that 
all  Things  are  alike  handfome  to  fome  Men  who 
have  as  good  Eyes  as  others  ^  and  that  this  ap- 
pears by  the  Variation  of  Fafhions,  which  doth 
fo  alter  Men's  Fancies,  and  what  e're-while 
fcem'd  very  handfome  and  comely,  when  it  is 
once  worn  out  of  fafhion  appears  very  abfurd, 
uncouth  and  ridiculous.  To  this  I  anfwer,  That 
Cuftom  and  Ufe  doth  much  in  thofe  Things 
where  little  of  Proportion  and  Symmetry  {hew 
themfelves,  or  which  are  alike  comely  and  beau- 
tiful,   to  difpararge  the  one,  and  commend  the 

other  :  But  there  are  Degrees  of 
*  Antidote  Things ;  for  (that  I  may  ufe  ^  Dr. 
Sm,/t  Af'^^^'s  Vv^ords)  I  dare  appeal  to  any 
€.  5.  Man  that  is  not  funk  into  fo  forlorn  a 

Pitch  of  Degeneracy,  that  he  is  as  ftu- 
pid  to  thefe  Things  as  the  bafeft  Beafts,  whe-^ 
ther,  for  Example,  .  a  rightly-cut  Tetraedromy 
Cube  or  Icofaedrom  have  no  more  Pulchritude  in 
them  than  any  rude  broken  Stone  lying  in  the 
Field  or  High- ways ;  or,  *  to  name  other  folid 
Figures,  which  tho'  they  be  not  regular,  proper- 
ly fo  caird,  yet  have  a  fettled  Idea  and  Nature, 
as  a  Co7ie^  Sphere  or  Cy Under ^  whether  the  Sight 
of  thofe  do  not  more  gratify  the  Minds  of  Men, 
and  pretend  to  more  Elegancy  of  Shape,  than 
thofe  rude  Cuttings  or  Chippings  of  Free-ilone 
that  fall  from  the  Mafon's  Hands,  and  ferve  for 
nothing  but  to  fill  up  the  Middle  of  the  Wall, 
as  fit  to  be  hid  from  the  Eyes  of  Men  for  their 
Uglinefs  ?  And  therefore  it  is  obfervable,  that 
if  Nature  fhape  any  Thing  but  near  to  this  Geo- 
metrical 


Parti.       ^';^ //^^  Creation.  107 

rnetrical  Accuracy^  that  we  take  Notice  of  it 
with  much  Content  and  Plealure,  and  greedily 
gather  and  treafure  it  up.  As  if  it  be  but  ex- 
ad:ly  round,  as  thofe  fpherical  Stones  found  in 
Cubdy  and  fome  ahb  in  our  own  Land ;  or  have 
but  its  Sides  parallel,  as  thofe  rhomboideal  Sele^ 
nites  found  near  St.  Ives  in  Huntingtonpire^  and 
many  other  Places  in  England,  Whereas  ordina- 
ry Stones  of  rude  and  uncertain  Figures  we  pafs 
By,  and  take  no  notice  of  at  all.  But  tho*  the  Fi- 
gures of  thefe  Bodies  be  pleafing  and  agreeable  to 
our  Minds,  yet  (as  we  have  already  obferv'd)  thofe 
of  the  Leaves,  Flowers  and  Fruits  of  Trees,  more. 
And  it  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  Circumfcri- 
ption  and  Complication  of  many  Leaves,  Flow- 
ers, Fruits,  and  Seeds,  Nature  affeds  a  regular 
Figure.  Of  a  Pentagonal  or  Quincunial  Difpo- 
fition.  Sir  T'homas' Brown  oi  Norwich  produces 
feveral  Examples  in  his  Difcourfe  about  the  .%/- 
cunx.  And  doubtlefs  Inftanccs  might  be  given  in 
other  regular  Figures,  were  Men  but  obfervant. 

The  Flowers  ferve  to  cheriih  and  defend  the 
firft  and  tender  Rudiments  of  the  Fruit ;  I  might 
alfo  add  the  mafculine  or  prolifick  Seed  contained 
in  the  Chives  or  Apices  of  the  Stamina,  Thefe, 
befides  the  Elegancy  of  their  Figures,  are  many 
of  them  endued  with  fplendid  and  lovely  Co- 
lours, *  and  likewife  moft  grateful  and  fragrant 
Odours.  Indeed  fuch  is  the  Beauty  and  Luftre 
of  fome  Flowers,  that  our  Saviour  faith  of  the 
Lillies'of  the  Fields  (which  fome,  not  without 
Reafon,  fuppofe  to  have  been  'T'ulips)  that  Solo- 
mon  in  all  his  Glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of 

theje.. 


io8      The  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

*  ^^-^^  tbefe.  And  it  is  obferv'd  by  *  Spi^ 
7iam.  ^^  ^  geliiis.  That  the  Art  of  the  moft  skil- 
ful Painter  cannot  io  mingle  and  tem- 
per his  Colours,  as  exactly  to  imitate  or  coun- 
terfeit the  native  ones  of  the  Flowers  of  Vegeta- 
bles. 

As,  for  the  Seeds  oiPlmits^  \  Dr. 
f  Antidote  More  efteems  it  an  evident  Sign  of 
^^m^L  2.  r.  2.  Divine  Providence,  that  every  Kind 
hath  its  Seed:  For  it  being  no  necef- 
fary  Refult  of  the  Motion  of  the  Matter,  fas  the 
whole  Contrivance  of  the  Plant  indeed  is  not) 
and  it  being  of  fo  great  Confequence  that  they 
have  Seed  for  the  Continuance  and  Propagation 
of  their  own  Species,  and  alfo  for  the  gratifying 
Man's  Art,  Induftry  and  Neceffities,  (for  much 
of  Husbandry  and  Gardening  lies  in  this)  it  can- 
not but  be  an  hOt  of  Counfcl  to  furnifli  the  fe- 
veral  Kinds  of  Plants  with  their  Seeds. 

Now  the  Seed  being  fo  neceffary  for  the  Main- 
tenance and  Increafe  of  the  feveral  Species^  it  is 
worthy  the  Obfervation,  what  Care  is  taken  to 
fecure  and  preferve  it,  being  in  fome  doubly 
and  trebly  defended.  As  for  Inflance,  in  the 
Walnut^  Almond,  and  Plumbs  of  all  Sorts ;  we 
have  firft  a  thick  pulpy  Covering,  then  a  hard 
Shell,  within  which  is  the  Seed  enclosed  in  a 
double  Membrane.  In  the  Nutmeg  another  Te- 
gument is  added  befides  all  thefe,  viz,  the  Mace 
between  the  green  Pericarpium  and  the  hard 
Shell,  immediately  inclofing  the  Kernel.  Nei- 
ther yet  doth  the  exterior  Pulp  of  the  Fruit 
or  Pericavhium  ferve  only  for  the  Defence  and 

Secu- 


Part  I.        in  the  Cre  at  ion.  109 

Security  of  the  Seed  whilft  it  hangs  upon  the 
Plant,  but  after  it  is  mature  and  fallen  upon  the 
Earth,  for  the  Stercoration  of  the  Soil  and  Pro- 
motion of  the  Growth,  tho'  not  the  firfl  Germi- 
nation of  the  feminal  Plant.  Hence 
(as  *  Petrus  de  Crefcentiis  tells  us)  *  ^s^^^-  ^-  2- 
Hufbandmen,  to  make  their  Vines 
bear,  manure  them  with  Vine  Leaves,  or  the 
Hulks  of  expreffed  Grapes  5  and  they  obferve 
fhofe  to  be  mofl  fruitful  which  are  fo  manured 
with  their  own  ^  which  Obfervation  holds  true 
alfo  in  all  other  Trees  and  Plerbs.  But  befides 
this  Ufe  of  the  Pulp  or  Pericarphim  for  the  Guard 
and  Benefit  of  the  Seed,  it  ferves  alfo  by  a  fecon- 
dary  Intention  of  Nature  in  many  Fruits  for  the 
Food  and  Suftenance  of  Man  and  other  Animals. 

Another  thing  worthy  the  noting  in  Seeds,  and 
argumentative  of  Providence  and  Defign,  is  that 
papofe  Plumage  growing  upon  the  Tops  of  fome 
of  them,  whereby  they  are  capable  of  being  waft- 
ed with  the  Wind,  and  by  that  means  fcattered 
and  diffeminated  far  and  wide. 

Furthermore,  moft  Seeds  having  in  them  a 
ferhinal  Plant  perfedly  form'd,  as  the  Young  is 
in  the  Womb  of  Animals,  the  elegant  Compli- 
cation thereof  in  fome  Species  is  a  very  pleafant 
and  admirable  Spedacle ;  fo  that  no  Man  that 
hath  a  Soul  in  him  can  imagine  or  believe  it  was 
fo  form'd  and  folded  up  without  Wifdorn  and 
Providence.     But  of  this  I  have  fpoken  already. 


Laftly, 


iio     "The  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti 

Laftly,  the  immenfe  Smallnefs  of  fome  Sceds^ 
not  to  be  feen  by  the  naked  Eye,  fo  that  the 
Number  of  Seeds  produced  at  once  in  fome  one 
Plant,  as  for  Example,  Reedmace  [Tipba  Palu^ 
Jiris]  Hartjlongiiey  and  many  Sorts  of  Ferns,  may 
amount  to  a  Million,  is  a  convincing  Argument 
of  the  infinite  Underftanding  and  Art  of  the 
Former  of  them. 

And  it  is  remarkable  that  fuch  Moffes  as  grow 
upon  Walls,  the  Roofs  of  Houfes,  and  other 
high  Places,  have  Seeds  fo  exceffively  fmall,  that 
when  fliaken  out  of  their  Veffels  they  appear  like 
Vapour  or  Smoke,  fo  that  they  may  either  afcend 
of  themfelves,  or  by  an  eafy  Impulfe  of  the  Wind 
be  rais'd  up  to  the  Tops  of  Houfes,  Walls  or 
Rocks ;  and  we  need  not  wonder  how  the  Moffes 
got  thither,  or  imagine  they  fprung  up  fponta-^ 
neoufly  there. 

I  might  aifo  take  notice  of  many  other  Parti- 
culars concerning  Vegetables,  as,  Firft,  that  be- 
caufe  they  are  defign'd  for  the  Food  of  Animals,, 
therefore  Nature  hath  taken  more  extraordi- 
nary Care,  and  made  more  abundant  Provifion 
for  their  Propagation  and  Increafe ;  fo  that 
they  are  multiplied  and  propagated  not  only  by 
the  Seed,  but  many  alfo  by  the  Root,  producing 
OfF-fets,  or  creeping  under  Ground;  many  by 
Strings  or  Wyres  running  above  Ground,  as 
Strawberry^  and  the  like,  fome  by  Slips  or  Cut^ 
tings,  and  fome  by  feveral  of  thefe  ways.  And 
for  the  Security  of  fuch  Species  as  are  produc'd 
only  by  Seed,  it  hath  endu'd  all  Seed  with  a  laft^ 
ing  Vitality,  that  fo  if  by  reafon  of  exceffive 

Cold 


Part  I.       in  the  Creation.  hi 

Cold  or  Drought,  or  any  other  Accident,  it  hap- 
pen not  to  germinate  the  firft  Year,  it  will  con- 
tinue its  Foecundity^  I  do  not  fay  two  or  three, 
nor  fix  or  feven,  but  even  twenty  or  thirty  Years; 
and  when  the  Impediment  is  removed,  the  Earth 
in  fit  Gafe,  and  the  Seafon  proper,  fpring  up,  bear 
Fruit,  and  continue  its  Species.  Hence  it  is  that 
Plants  are  fometimgs  loft  for  a  while  in  Places 
where  they  formerly  abounded,  and  again  after 
f6me  Years  appear  new ;  loft,  either  becaufe  the 
Springs  were  not  proper  for  their  Germination, 
or  becaufe  the  Land  was  fallow'd,  or  becaufe 
plenty  of  Weeds  or  other  Herbs  prevented  their 
coming  up,  and  the  like,  and  appearing  again 
when  thefe  Impediments  are  remov'd.  Secondly, 
That  fome  Sorts  of  Plants,  as  Vines^  all  Sorts  of 
Fiilfe^  HopSy  Briony,  all  pomiferous  Herbs,  Pum- 
pio?2Sy  MelonSy  Gourds,  Cucumbers  y  and  divers  o- 
ther  SpecieSy  that  are  weak  and  unable  to  raife  or 
fupport  themfelves,  are  either  endu'd  with  a  Fa- 
culty of  twining  about  others  that  are  near,  or 
elfe  furnifh'd  with  Clafpers  and  Tendrils,  where- 
by, as  it  were  with  Hands,^  they  catch  hold  of 
them,  and  fo  ramping  upon  Trees,  Shrubs, 
Hedges  or  Poles,  they  mount  up  to  a  great 
height,  and  fecure  themfelves  and  their  Fruit. 
Thirdly,  that  others  are  arm'd  with  Prickles  and 
Thorns,  to  fecure  them  from  the  browfmg  of 
Beafts,  as  alfo  to  ftielter  others  that  grow  under 
them  y  moreover,  they  are  hereby  render'd  very 
ufeful  to  Man,  as  if  defign*d  by  Nature  to  make 
both  quick  and  dead  Hedges  and  Fences.     The. 

great 


112      TI)e  Wisdom  of  GO D     Parti. 

great  Naturalift  Pliny  hath  given  an  ingenious 
Account  of  the  Providence  and  Deiign  of  Nature 
in  thus  arming  and  fencing  them  in  thefe  Words : 
Ijide  (fpeaking  of  Nature)  excogitavit  aliquas 
aJpeBu  hifpidas^  taBu  truces^  ut  tantum  mn  vocem 
ipjius  Naturce  fingenth  illas^  rationemque  reddentis 
exaudtre  videamur^  nefe  depafcat  avida  quadrupeSy 
7je  procaces  manus  rapiant^  n»  negleBa  vejitgia  ob- 
terant  y  ne  i?ijidens  ales  ififringat ;  his  7nuniendo 
aciileis  telifque  armandoy  remediis  ut  Jdha  ac  tut  a 
fint,  Ita  hoc  qiioqiie  quod  in  iis  odimus  hominum 
causa  excogitatum  eft. 

It  is  worthy  the  noting, .  that  Wheats  which  is 
the  beft  Sort  of  Grain,  of  which  the  purefl:,  moft 
favoury  and  wholfome  Bread  is  made,  is  patient 
of  both  Extremes,  Heat  and  Cold,  growing  and 
bringing  its  Seed  to  Maturity  not  only  in  tempe- 
rate Countries,  but  alfo  on  one  hand  in  the  cold 
and  northern,  viz.  Scotland ^  Denmark  ^  &c.  on 
the  other,  in  the  hotteft  and  moft  foutherly,  as 
Egypt  y  Barhary  y  Mauritania  ^  the  Eajl-hzdies^ 
Guiney,  Madagafcar ,  &c.  fcarce  refufing  any 
Climate. 

Nor  is  it  lefs  obfervable,  and  not-to  be  com- 
memorated without  Acknowledgment  of  the 
divine  Benignity  to  us,  that  (as  Fliny  rightly 
notes)  nothing  is  more  fruitful  than  Wheat  ^ 
^od  ei  natura  (faith  he)  \t^e5lius  nature  Fa- 
rens\  tribuit  ^  quid  eo  maxime  ko?ninem  alit^  ut- 
pote  cim  e  modio^  fi  &  aptum  folum,  quale  in  By-- 
zacio  Africa  campo  centcni  quinquaginta  modit 
reddentur.  Mifit  ex  eo  loco  Divo  Augujlo  procu- 
rator 


Parti.        in  the  C^EATioH.  113 

rator  ejus  ex  uno  grano  (vix  credibile  diBu)  400 
paucis  77iinus  germina  :  Mifit  &  Neroni  fimiliter 
360  Jiipidas  ex  uno  grano,  "  Which  Fertility 
*'  Nature,  (he  fliou'd  have  faid,  ^  the  Author  of 
"  Nature)  hath  conferred  upon  it,  becaufe  it 
"  feeds  Man  chiefly  with  it.  One  Bufhel,  if 
*'  fown  in  a  fit  and  proper  Soil,  fuch  as  is  Byza- 
*'  dim,  a  Field  of  Ajricdy  yielding  150  of  an- 
l'  nual  lucreaie.  Augujlus^^  Procurator  fent  him 
"  from  that  Place  400  within  a  few  Blades 
""  fpringing  from  the  fame  Grain :  And  to  Ne^ 
*'  ro  were  fent  thence  360."  If  PU?iy,  a  Hea- 
then, could  make  this  Fertility  of  Wheat  argu- 
mentative of  the  Bounty  of  Godto  Man,  ma- 
king fuch  plentiful  Provifion  for  him  of  that 
which  is  of  mod  pleafant  Tafte  and  wholefome 
Nourifliment,  furely  it  ought  not  to  be  palTed 
•over  by  us  Qhrijliam  without  Notice  taking  and 
Thankfgiving, 

As  for  the  Signatures  of  Plants,    or  the  Notes 
impre/Ted  upon  them,    as  Lidices  of 
their    Virtues,     though    ^"  fome    lay     *  ^^-  ^'^^^ 
great  Strefs  upon  them,    accounting     c.  6. 
them  ftrong  Arguments  to  prove,  that 
fome  under ftanding  Principle  is  the  highefl:  Ori^ 
ginal  of  the  Works  of  Nature,    as  indeed  they 
were,    could  it  certainly  be  made  appear,    that 
there  were  fuch  Marks  defignedly  fet  upon  them ; 
becaufe  all  that  I  find  mention'd  and  colJedted 
by  Authors,    feem  to  me  to  be  rather  fancied  by 
Men,  than  defign'd  by  Nature  to  fignify  or  point 
out  any  fuch  Virtues  or  Qualities  as  they  would 
make  us  believp.      I  have  elfewhere,    Inhink 

.  I  V  upon 


ii4      75^^  Wisdom  of  GOD      Parti. 

upon  good  Grounds,  rejefted  them  :  and  finding 
no  Reafon,  as  yet,  to  alter  my  Opinion,  I  (hall 
not  further  infift  on  them :  Howbeit,  I  will  not 
deny,  but  that.the  noxious  and  malignant  Plants 
do  many  of  them  difcover  fomething  of  their 
Nature  by  the  fad  and  melancholick  Vifage  of 
their  Leaves,  Flowers  and  Fruit.  And  that  I 
may  not  leave  that  Head  wholly  untouched,  one 
Obfervation  I  (hall  add  relating  to  the  Virtues  of 
Plants,  in  which  I  think  there  is  fomething  of 
Truth  5  that  is,  that  there  are,  by  the  wife  Dif- 
pofition  of  Providence,  fuch  Species  of  Plants 
produc'd  in  every  Country,  as  are  moft  proper 
and  convenient  for  the  Meat  and  Medicine  of 
the  Men  and  Animals  that  are  bred  and  inhabit 
there :  Infomuch  that  Sole?2ander  writes,  that 
from  the  Frequency  of  the  Plants  that  fprung  up 
naturally  in  any  Region,  he  could  eafily  gather 
what  Endemial  Difcafes  the  Inhabitants  thereof 
were  fubjedl  to :  So  in  Denmark,  Friezland^  and 
Holland,  where  the  Scurvy  ufually  reigns,  the 
proper  Remedy  thereof,  Scurvy-Grafs,  doth  plen- 
tifully grow. 

Of  Bodies  endued  with  a  fenfttive  Soul,    or  Ani- 
mals. 

I  proceed  now  to  the  Confideration  of  Animate 
Bodies  endu'd  with  a  fenfitive  Soul,  call'd  Ani- 
mals, Of  thefe  I  {hall  only  make  fome  general 
Obfervations,  not  curioufly  confider  the  Parts  of 
each  particular  Species,  fave  only  as  they  ferve 
for  Inftances  or  Examples. 

I  Firft 


Part  !•        /;?  //6^^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  115 

Firil  of  alj,  becaufe  it  is  the  great  Defign  of 
Providence  to  maintain  and  continue  every  Spe- 
cies, I  fhall  take  Notice  of  the  great  Care  and 
abundant  Provifion  that  is  made  for  the  fecuring 
this  End.  ^aiita  ad  earn  rem  vis,  ut  injuo  quce- 
que  ge?2ere  perrnaneat'i  Gc,  Why  can  we  ima- 
gine all  Creatures  fliould  be  made  Male  and  Fe- 
male but  to  this  Purpofe  ?  Why  fliould  there  be 
^implanted  in  each  Sex  fuch  a  vehement  and  inex- 
pugnable Appetite  of  Copulation  ?  Why  in  vivi- 
parous Animals,  in  the  Time  of  Geftation,  fliould 
the  Nourishment  be  carried  to  the  Emhryon  in 
the  Womb,  which  at  other  Times  goeth  not 
that  Way  ?  When  the  Young  is  brought  forth, 
how  comes  all  the  Nourilliment  then  to  be  trans- 
ferr'd  from  the  Womb  to  the  Breafh  or  Paps, 
leaving  its  former  Chanel,  the  Dam  at  fuch  Time 
being  for  the  moft  Part  lean  and  ill-favour'-d  ? 
To  all  this  I  might  add,  as  a  great  Proof  and  In- 
fiance  of  the  Care  that  is  taken,  and  Provifion 
made  for  the  Prefervation  and  Continuance  of 
the  S:pecies,  the  lafting  Foecundity  of  the  Ani- 
mal Seed  or  Egg  in  the  Females  of  Man,  Beafts 
and  Birds.  I  fay,  the  Animal  Seed,  becaufe  it 
is  t?)  me  highly  probable,  that  the  Females,  as 
wdl  of  Bealls  as  Birds,  have  in  them  from  their 
firft  Formation  the  Seeds  of  all  the  Young  they 
will  afterwards  bring  forth,  which  when  they 
are  all  fpent  and  exhauiled  by  what  Meansfoever, 
the  Animal  becomes  barren  and  effete.  Thefe 
Seeds  in  fome  Species  of  Animals  continue  Fruit- 
ful, and  apt  to  take  Life  by  the  Admixture  of* 
the  Male-feed  fifty  Years  or  more,    and  in  Tome 

I  2  ^  Birds 


il6  The  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  I. 
Birds  fourfcore  or  an  hundred.  I^re  I  cannot 
omit  one  very  remarkable  Obfervation  I  find  in 
Cicero :  Ataue  ut  intelligamiis  (faith  he)  nihil  ho- 
rum  ejfe  fortiiitum^  fed  h(zc  omnia  provida  Jblert if- 
que  naturce^  qua  multiplices  fcetm  procreant^  ut 
fues^  ut  canes^  his  mammarum  data  eft  multitudOy 
quas  eafdem  paucas  hahent  ece  befiice  qu£  pauca  gig- 
nunt,  That  we  may  underfiand  that  none  of  thefe 
Things  (he  had  been  fpeaking  of)  is  fortuitous^ 
but  that  all  are  the  EjfeBs  of  provident  and  faga- 
cious  Nature  -,  multiparous  ^adrupeds^  as  Swine ^ 
and  Dogs  ^  are  furnijloed  with  a  Multitude  of  Paps: 
Whereas  thofe  Beafis  which  bring  forth  feWy  have 
but  a  few* 

That  flying  Creatures  of  the  greater  Sort,  that 
is,  Birdsy  fhould  all  lay  Eggs,  and  none  bring 
forth  live  Young,  is  a  manifeft  Argument  of 
Divine  Providence,  defigning  thereby  their  Pfe- 
fervation  and  Security,  that  there  might  be  the 
more  Plenty  of  them ;  and  that  neither  the 
Birds  of  Prey,  the  Serpent,  nor  the  Fov/ler/ 
fhould  ftraiten  their  Generation  too  much:  For 
if  they  had  been  viviparous,  the  Burden  of  their 
Womb,  if  they  had  brought  forth  any  compe- 
tent Number  at  a  time,  had  been  fo  gr^at  and 
heavy,  that  their  Wings  would  have  fail%4:hem, 
and  they  become  an  eafy  Prey  to  their  Enemies : 
Or,  if  they  had  brought  but  one  or  two  at  a 
time,  they  would  have  been  troubled  all  the  Year 
long  with  feeding  their  Young,  or  bearing  them 
in  their  Womb.     Dr.  More  Antid,  Atheifm,  I  2. 

This 


Parti.        Z;^  //6^  Creation.  117 

This  Mention  of  feeding  their  Young  puts 
me  in  mind  of  two  or  three  confiderable  Obfer- 
vations  referring  thereto. 

Firft,  feeing  it  would  be  for  many  Reafons 
inconvenient  for  Birds  to  give  fuck,  and  yet  no 
lefs  inconvenient,  if  not  deftrudtive,  to  the 
Chicken  upon  Exclufion,  all  of  a  fudden,  to 
make  fo  great  a  Change  in  its  Diet,  as  to  pafs 
^from  liquid  to  hard  Food,  before  the  Stomach  be 
gradually  confolidated,  and  by  Ufe  ftrengthen'd 
and  habituated  to  grind  and  concodt  it,  and  its 
tender  and  pappy  Flefli  fitted  to  be  nouriih'd  by 
fuch  ftrong  and  folid  Diet,  and  before  the  Bird 
be  by  little  and  little  accuftom'd  to  ufe  its  Bill, 
and  gather  it  up,  which  at  firft  it  doth  but  very 
flowly  and  imperfectly  ;  therefore  Nature  hath 
provided  a  large  Yolk  in  every  Egg,  a  great  Part 
whereof  remaineth  after  the  Chicken  is  hatch'd, 
and  is  taken  up  and  enclos'd  in  its  Belly,  and  by 
a  Chanel  made  on  purpofe,  receiv'd  by  degrees 
into  the  Guts,  and  ferves  inftead  of  Milk  to  nou- 
rifh  the  Chick  for  a  confiderable  time  5  which 
neverthelefs  mean  while  feeds  it  felf  by  the 
Mouth  a  little  at  a  time,  and  gradually  more  and 
more,  as  it  gets  a  perfeder  Ability  and  Habit  of. 
gathering  up  its  Meat,  and  its  Stomach  is 
ftrengthen'd  to  macerate  and  concod  it,  and  its 
Flefli  harden'd  and  fitted  to  be  nourifli'd  by  it. 

Secondly,  That  Birds  which  feed  their  Young 
in  the  Neft,  tho'  in  all  likelihood  they  have 
no  Ability  of  counting  the  Number  of  them, 
fliould  yet  (tho'  they  bring  but  one  Morfel  of 
Meat  at  a  time,    and  have  not  fewer  (it  may  be) 

I   3  ^  than 


1 1 8      rhe\N ui>oM  of  GOD     Part  L 

than  feven  or  eight  Young  in  the  Neft  together, 
which  at  the  Return  of  their  Dams,  do  all  at  once 
with  equal  Greedinels,  hold  up  their  Heads  and 
gape)  not  omit  or  forget  one  of  them,  but  feed 
them  all ;  which,  unlefs  they  did  carefully  ob- 
ferve  and  retain  in  Memory  which  they  had  fed, 
which  not,  were  impoffible  to  be  done  :  This,  I 
fay,  feems  to  me  moft  ft  range  and  admirable,, 
and  beyond  the  Poffibiliry  of  a  mere  Machine  to 
perform. 

Another  Experiment  I  fhall  add,  to  prove, 
that  tho'  Birds  have  not  an  exadl  Power  of  num- 
bring,  yet  have  they  of  diftinguifliing  many  from 
few,  and  knowing  when  they  come  near  to  a 
certain  Number :  And  that  is,  that  when  they 
have  laid  fuch  a  Number- of  £g-^j,  as  they  can 
conveniently  cover  and  hatch,  they  give  over 
and  begin  to  lit ;  not  becaufe  they  are  neceffarily 
determined  to  fuch  a  Number  ;  for  that  they  are 
not,  as  is  clear,  becaufe  they  are  in  Ability  to  go 
on  and  lay  more  at  their  Pleafure.,  Hens,  for 
Example,  if  you  let  their  Eggs  alone,  when 
they  have  laid  fourteen  or  fifteen,  will  give  over 
and  begin  to  fit  j  whereas,  if  you  daily  with- 
draw their  Eggs^  they  will  go  on  to  lay  five  Times 
that  Number :  [Yetfome  of  them  are  fo  cunning, 
that  if  you  leave  them  but  one  Egg^  they  will 
not  lay  to  it,  but  forfake  their  Neft,]  This  holds 
not  only  in  domeftick  and  manfuete  Birds,  for 
then  it  might  bethought  the  Effed  of  Cicuration 
or  Inftitution,  but  alfo  in  the  wild  ;  for  my  ho- 
nour'd  Friend  Dr.  Martin  Lijier  inform'd  me, 

that 


Part  I.       in  the  Ck^atio-^.  119 

that  of  his  owu  Knowledge  one  and  the  fame 
Swallow,  by  the  fubftrading  daily  of  her  Eggs 
proceeded  to  lay  nineteen  fucceflively,  and  then 
gave  over ;  as  I  have  *  elfevvhere 
noted.  Now  that  I  am  upon  this  ^J  Pj^face  to 
Subject  of  the  Number  of  £^^i,  give  ^y^  ornfthoi. 
.  me  leave  to  add  a  remarkable  Obfer- 
vation  referring  thereto,  viz.  That  Birds,  and 
fuch  oviparous  Creatures,  as  are  long-liv'd,  have 
*Eggs  enough  at  firft  conceived  in  them  to  ferve 
them  for  many  Years  laying,  probably  for  as  ma- 
ny as  they  are  to  live,  allowing  fuch  a  Propor- 
tion for  every  Year,  as  will  ferve  for  one  or  two 
Incubations  -,  whereas  Infed:s,  which  are  to  breed 
but  once,  lay  all  their  Eggs  at  once,  have  they 
never  fo  many.  Now,  had  thefe  Things  been 
govern'd  by  Chance,  I  fee  no  Reafon  why  it 
fhould  conftantly  fall  out  fo. 

Thirdly,  The  marvellous  fpeedy  Growth  of  / 
Birds  that  are  hatch'd  in  Nefts,  and  fed  by  the 
Old  ones  there,  'till  they  are  fledg'd,  and  come 
almoft  to  their  full  Bignefs,  at  which  Perfedion 
they  arrive  within  the  fhort  Term  of  about  one 
Fortnight,  feems  to  me  an  Argument  of  Provi- 
dence, defigning  thereby  their  Prefervation,  that 
they  might  not  lie  long  in  a  Condition  exposed  to 
the  Ravine  of  any  Vermine  that  may  find  them, 
being  utterly  unable  to  efcape  or  fliift  for  them- 
felves. 

Another  and  no  lefs  efFedlual  Argument  may 
be  taken  from  the  Care  and  Providence  us*d  for 
the  Hatching  and  Rearing  their  Young :  And 
fixft,    they  fearch  out  a  fecret  and  quiet  Place 

I  4  where 


.120      1136  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  L 

where  they  may  be  fecure   and  undifturb'd  in 
their  Incubation ;    then  they  make  themfelves 
Nefts  every  one  after  his  Kind,    that  io  their 
Eggs  and  I^oung  may  he  foft  and   warm,    and 
their  Exclufion  and  Growth  be  promoted.  Thefe 
Nefts  are  fome  of  them  (o  elegant  and  artificial, 
that  it  is  hard  for  Man  to  imitate  them  and  make 
the  like.     I  have  feen  Nefts  of  an  hidian  Bird 
fo  artificially  composed  of  the  Fibres,    I  think, 
of  fome  Roots,  fo  curioufly  interwoven  and  plat- 
ted together,   as  is  admirable  to  behold:  Which 
Nefts  they  hang  on  the  Ends  of  the  Twigs  of 
Trees  over  the  Water,  to  fecure  their  Eggs  and 
Young  from  the  Ravage  of  Apes  and  Monkeys^  and 
other  Beafts,   that  might  elfe  prey  upon  them. 
After  they  have  laid  their  Eggs^    how  diligently 
and  patiently  do  they  fit  upon  them  'till  they  be 
hatch'd,  fcarce  affording  themfelves  time  to  go 
off"  to  get  them  Meat  ?    Nay,  with  fuch  an  ar- 
dent and  impetuous   Defire  of  fitting  are  they 
infpired,    that  if  you  take  away  all  their  Eggs:,- 
they  will  fit  upon  an  empty  Neft  :  And  yet  one 
would  think  that  fitting  were  none  of  the  moft 
pleafant  Works.     After  their  Young  are  hatch'd, 
for  fome  time  they  do  almoft  conftantly  brood 
them  under  their  Wings,  left  the  Cold  and  fome- 
times  perhaps  the  Heat  ftiouid  harm  them.     All 
this  while  alfo  they  labour  hard  to  get  them 
Food,    fparing  it  out  of  their  own  Bellies,    and 
pining  themfelves  almoft  to  Death  rather  than 
they  Ihould  want.     Moreover,  it  is  admirable  to 
obferve  with  what  Courage  they  are  at  that  time 
infpir'd,    that  they  wull  even  venture  their  own 

Lives 


Parti.         in  ibe  Creation.  121 

Lives  in  Defence  of  them.  The  moft  timorous, 
as  Hens  and  Geefe,  become  then  fo  couragious, 
as  to  dare  to  fly  in  the  Face  of  a  Man  that  fhall 
moleft  or  difquiet  their  Young,  which  would 
never  do  fo  much  in  their  own  Defence.  Thefe 
things  being  contrary  to  any  Motions  of  Senfe, 
or  Inftin6l  of  Self-prefervation,  and  fo  eminent 
pieces  of  Self-denial,  mud  needs  be  the  Works 
of  Providence,  for  the  Continuation  of  the  Spe- 
cies, and  upholding  of  the  World :  Efpecially 
if  we  confider  that  all  thefe  Pains  is  beftow'd 
upon  a  Thing  which  takes  no  Notice  of  it,  will 
render  them  no  Thanks  for  it,  nor  make  them 
any  Requital,  or  Amends ;  as  alfo,  that  after 
the  Tou77g  is  come  to  fome  Growth,  and  able 
to  (hift  for  it  felf,  the  old  One  retains  no  fuch 
crop^J)  to  it,  takes  no  further  Care  of  it,  but  will 
fall  upon  it,  and  beat  it  indifferently  with  others. 
To  thefe  I  fhall  add  three  Obfervations  more 
relating  to  this  Head.  The  firft  borrow'd  of 
Dr.  Ciidworth,  Syftem,  pag.  69.  One  thing  ne- 
ceflary  to  the  Confervation  of  the  Species  of  Ani- 
mals, that  is,  the  keeping  up  conftantly  in  the 
World  a  due  numerical  Proportion  between  the 
Sexes  of  Male  and  Female,  doth  necelTarily  in- 
fer a  fuperintending  Providence.  For  did  this 
depend  only  upon  Mechanifm,  it  cannot  well 
be  conceived,  but  that  in  fome  Ages  or  other 
there  {hou'd  happen  to  be  all  MaleSy  or  all  Fe^ 
males  J  ^  and  fo  the  Species  fail.  Nay,  it  cannot 
well  be  thought  otherwife,  but  that  there  is  in 
thijs  a  Providence,    fuperior  to  that  of  the  Pla- 

Jlick 


122     "The  Wisdom  of  COD    Parti. 

Jiick  or  Spermatick  Nature^  which  hath  not  fo 
much  of  Knowledge  and  Difcretion  allowed 
to  it,  as  whereby  to  be  able  to  govern  this  Af- 
fair. 

•  The  Second  of  Mr.  Boyle  in  his  Treatife  of 
the  high  Veneration  Man's  IntelleB  owes  to  Gody 
p.  32.  that  is,  the  Conveniency  of  the  Seafon 
(or  Time  of  Year)  of  the  Produ&on  of  Animals, 
when  there  is  proper  Food  and  Entertainment 
ready  for  them.  So  we  fee^  thaty  according  to 
the  ufual  Coiirfe  of  Nature^  Lamhs,  Kids^,  and 
many  other  living  Creatures^  are  brought  into  the 
World  at  the  Spring  of  the  Tear ;  when  tender 
GrafSy  and  other  Nutritive  Plants^  are  provided 
for  their  Food,  And  the  like  may  be  obfervd  in 
the  FroduBion  of  Silk-worms^  (yea,  all  other 
Eruca  s,  and  many  Infeds  more)  whofe  Eggs^ 
accordi?ig  to  Nature  s  Injiitiition^  are  hatched  when 
Mulberry-Threes  begin  to  bud^  and  put  forth  thofe 
Leaves y  whereon  thofe  precious  InfeBs  are  to  feed% 
the  Aliments  being  tender y  whiljl  the  Worms  themr 
Jelves  arefoy  and  growing  more  jirong  and  fubftan-^ 
tialy  as  the  InfeBs  increafe  in  Vigor  and  Bulk, 
To  thefe  I  {hall  add  another  Inftance,  that  is,  of 
the  Wafpy  whofe  Breeding  is  deferr'd  till  after 
the  Summer-Solftice,  few  of  them  appearing  be- 
fore July :  Whereas  one  would  be  apt  to  think 
the  vigorous  and  quickning  Heat  of  the  Sun  in 
the  Youth  of  the  Year  (hould  provoke  them  to 
generate  much  fooner :  [Provoke  them,  I  fay, 
becaufe  every  Wafp's-Neft  is  begun  by  one  great 
Mother-Wafp,  which  over-lives  the  Winter,  ly- 
ing 


Part  I.       in  /y6^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  123 

ing  hid  in  feme  hollow  Tree  or  other  Latibu- 
/urn-,]  becaufe  then,  and  not  till  then,  Pears, 
Plumbs,  and  other  Fruit,  defign'd  principally 
for  their  Food,  begin  to  ripen. 

The  Third  is  mine  own,  That  all  Infedts 
which  do  not  themfelves  feed  their  Young,  nor 
treafure  up  Provifion  in  Store  for  their  Sufte- 
nance,  lay  their  Eggs  in  fuch  Places  as  are  moft 
convenient  for  their  Exclufion,  and  where,  when 
hatch'd,  their  proper  Food  is  ready  for  them: 
So,  for  Example,  we  fee  two  Sorts  of  white 
Butterfies  -  faftening  their  Eggs  to  Cabbage- 
Leaves,  becaufe  they  are  fit  Aliment  for  the  Cat- 
terpillers  that  come  of  them  ;  whereas  fhould 
they  affix  them  to  the  Leaves  of  a  Plant  impro- 
per for  their  Food,  fuch  Catterpillers  mull  needs 
be  loft,  they  chuling  rather  to  die  than  to  tafte 
of  fuch  Plants ;  for  that  Kind  of  Infc6l  (I  mean 
Catterpillers)  hath  a  nice  and  delicate  Palate, 
fome  of  them  feeding  only  upon  one  particular 
Species  of  Plant,  others  on  divers  indeed,  but 
thofe  of  the  fame  Nature  and  Quality ;  utterly 
refufing  them  of  a  contrary.  Like  Inftances 
might  be  produced  in  the  other  Tribes  of  In- 
fed:s  y  it  being  perpetual  in  all,  if  not  hindered 
or  imprifon'd,  eledlively  to  lay  their  Eggs  in 
Places  where  they  are  feldom  loft  or  mifcarry, 
and  where  they  have  a  Supply  of  Nourifhment 
for  their  Young  fo  foon  as  they  are  hatch'd,  and 
need  it  :  Whereas  fhould  they  fcatter  them  care- 
lefly  and  indifferently  in  any  Place,  the  greatcft 
Part  of  the  Young  would  in  all  likelihood  perifli 

foon 


124      ^^^  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

foon  after  their  Exclufion  for  want  of  Food,  and 
fo  their  Numbers  continually  decreafing,  the 
whole  Species  ina  few  Years  would  be  in  Danger 
to  be  loit :  Whereas  no  fuch  thing,  I  dare  fay, 
hath  happened  fince  the  firft  Creation. 

It  is  here  very  remarkable,  that  thofe  Infeds, 
for  whofe  Young  Nature  hath  not  made  Provi- 
vilion  of  fufficient  Suftenance,  do  themfelves  ga- 
ther and  lay  up  in  ftore  for  them.  So  for  Ex- 
ample: The  Bee,  the  proper  Food  of  whofe 
*  Eulas  is  Honey,  or  perchance  £r/- 
^»  Bee-Mag-     ^j^^^^^  ^^j^j^j^  we  englifh  B^^-£r^^^) 

neither  of  which  Viands  being  any 
where  to  be  found  amafs'd  by  Nature  in  Quan- 
tity fufficient  for  their  Maintenance,  doth  her- 
felf  with  unwearied  Diligence  and  Induftry,  fly- 
ing from  Flower  to  Flower,  colled:  and  treafure 
them  up. 

To  thefe  I  fhall  now  add  an  Obfervation  of 
Mr.  Lewenhoeck's,  concerning  the  fudden  Growth 
of  fome  forts  of  Infeds,  and  the  Reafon  of  it.    - 

It  is  (faith  he)  a  wonderful  Thing,  and  wor- 
thy the  Obfervation,  in  Flefh-Flies,  that  a  Fly- 
Maggot,  in  five  Days  fpace  after  it  is  hatch'd, 
arrives  at  its  full  Growth  and  perfed  Magni- 
tude. For  if  to  the  perfeding  of  it  there  were 
required,  fuppofe  a  Month's  time  or  more,  (as 
in  fome  other  Maggots  is  needful)  it  is  impof- 
fible  that  about  the  Summer-Solftice  any  fuch 
Flies  fhou'd  be  produced,  becaufe  the  Fly-Mag- 
gots have  no  Ability  to  fearch  out  any  other 
Food  than  that  wherein  they  are  placed  by  their 
Dams.  Now  this  Food,  fuppofe  it  be  Flefh;,  Fifli, 

or 


Part  I.        in  the  C^y.  atio n.  125 

or  the  Entrails  of  Beads,  lying  in  the  Fields,  ex- 
posed to  the  hot  Sun-beams,  can  laft  but  a  few- 
Days  in  Cafe  and  Condition  to  be  a  fit  Aliment 
for  thefe  Creatures,  but  will  foon  be  quite  parch'd 
and  dry'd  up,  and  therefore  the  moil:  wife  Crea- 
tor hath  given  fuch  a  Nature  and  Temperament 
to  them,  that  within  a  very  few  Days  they  attain 
to  their  juft  Growth  and  Magnitude;  whereas 
Cifi  the  contrary,  other  Maggots,  who  are  in  no 
fuch  danger  of  being  flraiten'd  for  Food,  conti- 
nue a  whole  Month  or  more  before  they  give 
over  to  eat  and  ceafe  to  grow.  He  proceeds  fur- 
ther to  tell  us,  that  feme  of  thefe  Fly-maggots 
which  he  fed  daily  with  frefh  Meat,  he  brought 
to  Perfedlion  in  four  Days  time ;  fo  that  he  con- 
ceives that  in  the  Heat  of  Summer  the  Eggs  of  a 
Fly,  or  the  Maggots  contained  in  them,  may  in 
lefs  than  a  Month's  Space  run  through  all  their 
Changes,  and  come  to  perfedl  Flies,  which  may 
themfelves  lay  Eggs  again. 

Secondly,  I  fhali  take  notice  of  the  various 
ftrange  Inftinds  of  Animals,  which  will  neceffa- 
rily  demonftrate  that  they  are  direfted  to  Ends 
unknown  to  them  by  a  wife  Superintendent :  As 
I.  That  all  Creatures  fliould  know  how  to  de- 
fend themfelves  and  offend  their  Enemies,  where 
their  natural  Weapons  are  fituate,  and  how  to 
make  ufe  of  them.  A  Ccilf  will  fo  manage  his 
Head  as  tho*  he  would  pulh  with  his  Horns  even 
before  ihey  (hoot.  A  Boar  knows  the  Ufe  of  his 
Tuflies;  a  Dog  of  his  Teeth;  a  Horje  of  his 
Hoofs ;  a  Ccck  of  his  Spurs  ;  a  Bee  of  her  Stin-^  ; 
a  Rai?i  w  ill  butt  with  his  Head,  yea  tho'  he  be 

brought 


126      TieWisDOM  of  GOD    Parti. 

brought  up  tame,  and  never  faw  that  manner  of 
lighting.  Now,  why  another  Animal  which 
hath  no  Horns  fliould  not  make  a  (hew  of  puili- 
ing,  or  no  Spurs,  of  ftriking  with  his  Legs,  and 
the  Hke,  I  know  not,  but  that  every  Kind  is  pro- 
videntially direded  to  the  Ufe  of  its  proper  and 
natural  Weapons.  2.  That  thofe  Animals  that 
are  weak,  and  have  neither  Weapons  nor  Cou- 
rage to  fight,  are  for  the  moft  part  created  fwift 
of  Foot  or  Wing,  and  fo  being  naturally  timo- 
rous, are  both  willing  and  able  to  fave  themfelves 
by  Flight.  3.  That  Poultry,  Partridge,  and  other 
Birds,  ihould  at  the  fiift  fight  know  Birds  of 
Prey,  and  make  fign  of  it  by  a  peculiar  Note  of 
their  Voice  to  their  Young,  who  prefently  there- 
upon hide  themfelves  s  that  the  Lamb  (hould  ac- 
knowledge the  IFolf  its  Enemy,  tho'  it  had  never 
feen  one  before,  as  is  taken  for  granted  by  mofl 
Naturalifts,  and  may  for  ought  I  know  be  true, 
argues  the  Providence  of  Nature,  or  more  truly 
the  Gqd  of  Nature,  who  for  their  Prefervation 
hath  put  fuch  an  Infl:inft  into  them.  4.  That 
young  Animals  as  foon  as  they  are  brought  forth 
Ihould  know  their  Food  j  as  for  Example,  fuch 
as  are  nourifh'd  with  Milk  prefently  find  their 
way  to  the  Paps,  and  fuck  at  them;  whereas 
none  of  thofe  that  are  not  defign'd  for  that  Nou- 
rifhment  ever  offer  to  fuck,  or  feek  out  any  fuch 
Food.  Again,  5.  That  fuch  Creatures  as  are 
whole-footed  or  Fin-toed,  viz.  feme  Birds,  and 
Quadrupeds,  are  naturally  direded  to  go  into 
the  Water,  andfwim  there^  as  we  iee  DucklingSy 

tho* 


Part  I.       in  the  G  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  127 

tho'  hatched  and  led  by  a  Hen,  if  fhe  brings  them 
to  the  Brink  of  a  River  or  Pond  of  Water,  they 
prefently  leave  her,  and  in  they  go,  though  they 
never  faw  any  fuch  thing  done  before,  and  tho' 
the  Hen  clucks  and  calls,  and  doth  what  Ihe  can 
to  keep  them  out.  This  Pliny  takes  notice  of, 
Hijt,  Nat,  lib,  10.  cap,  55.  in  thefe  Words,  fpeak- 
ing  of  Hens :  Super  omnia  eft  Anatum  Ovis  fub^ 
d'ltis  atqiie  exclufis  admiratio^  pri?no  no7i  plane  ag- 
nofcentis  fcetum  :  mox  iucertos  incubitus  Jbllicite 
^onvocantis :  Pojlremo  I  amenta  circa  pifcince  Jlag- 
na^  mergentibiis  fe  ptdlis  naturd  duce.  So  that  we 
fee  every  Part  in  Animals  is  fitted  to  its  Ufe,  and 
the  Knowledge  of  this  Ufe  put  into  them :  For 
neither  do  any  Sort  of  Web-footed  Fowls  live 
confl:antly  upon  the  Land,  or  fear  to  enter  the 
Water,  nor  any  Land-Fowl  fo  much  as  attempt 
to  fwim  there.  6.  Birds  of  the  fame  Kind  make 
their  Nefts  of  the  fame  Material,  laid  in  the 
fame  Order,  and  exadty  of  the  fame  Figure ;  fo 
that  by  the  fight  of  the  Neft  one  may  certainly 
know  what  Bird  it  belongs  to  -,  and  this  they  do 
tho'-  living  in  diftant  Countries,  and  though  they 
never  faw  nor  could  fee  any  Neft  made,  that  is, 
though  taken  out  of  the  Neft  and  brought  up  by 
Hand ;  neither  were  any  of  the  fame  Kind  ever 
obferv'd  to  make  a  different  Neft,  either  for 
Matter  or  Fafhion  :  This,  together  with  the  cu- 
rious and  artificial  Contexture  of  fuch  Nefts,  and 
their  Fitnefs  and  Conveniencie  for  the  Reception, 
hatching  and  cherifhing  the  E^^i  and  Toufig  oi 
their  refpedive  Builders  (which  we  have  before 

taken 


128      7"^^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

taken  notice  of)  is  a  great  Argument  of  a  fupe- 
rior  Author  of  their  and  other  Natures,  who 
hath  endu'd  them  with  thefe  Inftind^s,  whereby 
they  are  as  it  were  adted  and  driven  to  brmg 
about  Ends  which  themfelves  aim  not  at  (fo  far 
as  we  can  difcern)  but  are  directed  to;  for  (as 
Arijiotle  obferves)  m-n  -nym^  cvtz  ^yiTkKjyjV-nz,  ovrz 
iSorjhd^o-Dl/jucvct  TTDiS,  they  a^  not  by  Art^  neither  do 
they  enquire^  neither  do  they  deliberate  about  what 
they  do.  And  therefore,  as  Dr.  Cudworth  faith 
well,  they  are  not  Mafters  of  that  Wifdom  ac- 
cording to  which  they  adl,  but  only  paffive  to 
the  Inftinds  and  Imprefles  thereof  upon  them. 
And  indeed  to  affirm  that  brute  Animals  do  all 
thefe  things  by  a  Knowledge  of  their  own,  and 
which  themfelves  are  Mafters  of,  and  that  with- 
out Deliberation  and  Confu^tation,  were  to  make 
them  to  be  endu'd  with  a  moft  perfed  Intelleft, 
far  tranfcending  that  of  human  Reafon ;  whereas 
it  is  plain  enough  that  Brutes  are  not  above  Con- 
fultation,  but  below  it,  and  that  thefe  Inftinds 
of  Nature  in  them  are  nothing  but  a  kind  of  Fate 
upon  them. 

The  Migration  of  Birds  from  an  hotter  to  a 
colder  Country,  or  a  colder  to  an  hotter,  accor- 
ding to  the  Seafons  of  the  Year,  as  their  Nature 
is,  1  know  not  how  to  give  an  Aqcount  of,  it  is 
fo  ftrange  and  admirable.  What  moves  them  to 
fbift  their  Quarters  ?  You  will  fay,  the  Difagree- 
ablenefs  of  the  Temper  of  the  Air  to  the  Con- 
ftitution  of  their  Bodies,    or  want    of  F^od. 

But 


Parti.       /;^ /i6^  Creation.  129 

But  how  come  they  to  be  dire(fled  to  the  fame 
Place  yearly,  tho'  fometimes  but  a  little  Iiland,as 
the  Soland-Goofe  to  the  Baffe  of  Edinburgh-Frith^ 
which  they  could  not  poflibly  fee,  and  fo  it  could 
have  no  Influence  upon  them  that  way  ?  The 
Cold  or  the  Heat  might  poflibly  drive  them  in  a 
right  Line  from  either  5  but  that  they  fhould  im- 
pel Land-Birds  to  venture  over  a  wide  Ocean,  of 
which  they  can  fee  no  End,  is  fl:range  and  unac- 
countable 5  one  would  think  that  the  Sight  of  fo 
much  Water,  and  prefent  Fear  of  drowning, 
fliould  overcome  the  Senfe  of  Hunger,  or  Dif- 
agreeablenefs  of  the  Temper  of  the  Air.  Befides, 
how  come  they  to  fleer  their  Courfe  aright  to 
their  fcveral  Quarters,  which  before  the  Com- 
pafs  was  invented  was  hard  for  a  Man  himfelf  to 
do,  they  being  not  able,  as  I  noted  before,  to 
fee  them  at  that  diftance?  Think  we  that  the 
^ails,  for  inftance,  could  fee  quite  crofs  the 
Mediterranean-Sea?  and  yet  it  is  clear  they  fly 
out  of  Itzily  into  Jfrick^  lighting  many  times  on. 
Ships  in  the  midft  of  the  Sea,  to  reft  themfelves 
whe'n  tir'd  and  fpent  with  flying.  That  they 
(hould  thus  fliift  Places,  is  very  convenient  for 
them,  and  accordingly  we  fee  they  do  it  y  which 
feems  to  be  impofllble  they  fliould,  unlefs  them- 
felves were  endu'd  with  Reafon,  or  direded  and 
afted  by  a  fuperior  intelligent  Caufe. 

The  like  may  be  faid  of  the  Migration  of  di- 
vers Sorts  of  Fiflies:  As  for  Example  5  the  SaU 
motiy  which  from  the  Sea  yearly  afcends  up  a 
Rivier  fometimes  406  or  500  Miles,  only  to  caft 

K  their 


130      7%e  Wisdom  of  GOD      Part  L 

their  Spawn,  and  fecure  it  in  Banks  of  Sand,  for 
the  Prefervation  of  it  till  the  Young  be  hatched 
or  excluded,  and  then  return  to  Sea  again.  How 
thefe  Creatures  when  they  have  been  wandring  a 
long  time  in  the  wide  Ocean,  fhould  again  find 
out  and  repair  to  the  Mouths  of  the  fame  Rivers, 
feems  to  me  very  ftrange,  and  hardly  accountable, 
without  recourfe  to  Inftinft  and  the  Diredlion  of 
a  fuperior  Caufe.  That  Birds,  feeing  they  have 
no  Teeth  for  the  Maftication  and  Preparation  of 
their  Food,  {hould  for  the  more  convenient 
Comminution  of  it  in  their  Stomachs  or  Giz- 
zards, fwallow  down  little  Pebble-ftones ,  or 
other  hard  Bodies ;  and  becaufe  all  are  not  fit  or 
proper  for  that  Ufe,  (hould  firft  try  them  in  their 
Bills,  to  feel  whether  they  be  rough  or  angular, 
for  their  Turns,  which  if  they  find  them  not  to 
be,  they  rejefl:  them ;  when  thefe  by  the  work- 
ing of  the  Stomach  are  worn  fmooth,  or  too 
fmall  for  their  Ufe,  they  avoid  them  by  Siege, 
and  pick  up  others;  that  thefe  are  of  great  Uie 
to  them  for  the  grinding  of  their  Meat,  thei;e  is 
no  doubt:  And  I  have  obferv'd  in  Birds  that 
have  been  kept  up  in  Houfes,  where  they  could 
get  no  Pebbles,  the  very  Yolks  of  their  Eggs 
have  changed  Colour,  and  become  a  great  deal 
paler  than  theirs  who  have  their  liberty  to  go 
abroad. 

Befides,  I  have  obferv'd  in  many  Birds,  the 

Gullet,  before  its  entrance  into  the  Gizzard,  tO 

be  much  dilated,  and  thick  fet,  or  as  it  were 

granulated,  with  a  multitude  of  Glandules,  each 

I  w^hereof 


Parti.        Z;^  /;5^  Creation.  131 

whereof  was  provided  with  its  excretory  VefTel, 
out  of  which,  by  an  eafy  PrcfTure,  you  might 
fqueeze  a  Juice  or  Pap,  which  ferved  for  the 
fame  Ufe  which  the  Saliva  doth  in  Quadrupeds, 
that  is,  for  the  macerating  and  diflblution  of  the 
Meat  into  a  Chyle  5  for  that  the  Saliva^  not- 
withftanding  its  Infipidnefs,  hath  a  notable  Vir- 
tue of  macerating  and  difTolving  Bodies,  appears 
by  the  Effefts  it  hath  in  killing  of  Quickfilver, 
fermenting  of  Dough  like  Leaven  or  Yeaft ,  ta- 
king away  Warts,  and  curing  other  cutaneous 
Diftempers;  fometimcs  exulcerating  the  Jaws, 
and  rotting  the  Teeth. 

Give  me  leave  to  add  one  Particular  more  con- 
cerning Birds,  which  fome  may  perchance  think 
too  homely  and  indecent  to  be  mentioned  in 
fuch  a  Difcourfe  as  this;  yet  becaufe  it  is  not 
belov^  the  Providence  of  Nature,  and  defign'd 
for  Cleanlinefs,  and  fome  great  Men  have 
thought  it  worth  the  obferving,  I  need  not  to  be 
afham'd  to  take  notice  of  it;  that  is,  that  in 
young  Birds  that  are  fed  in  the  Neft,  the  Excre- 
ment that  is  voided  at  one  time  is  fo  vifcid,  that 
it  hangs  together  in  a  great  Lump,  as  if  it  were 
inclofed  in  a  Film,  fo  that  it  may  eafily  be  taken 
up  and  carried  away  by  the  old  Bird  in  her  Bill; 
befides,  by  a  ftrange  Inftinfl:  the  young  Bird  ele- 
vates her  hinder  Parts  fo  high,  for  the  moft  part, 
that  (he  feldom  fails  to  caft  what  comes  from 
her  elear  over  the  fide  of  the  Neft ;  fo  we  fee 
here  is  a  double  Provifion  made  to  keep  the  Neft: 
clean  J  v/hich,  if  it  were  defiled  with  Ordure, 

K  2  the 


132       The  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

the  young  Ones  muft  neceffarily  be  utterly 
marr'd  and  ruin'd.  y.  The  Bee^  a  Creature  of 
the  loweft  Forms  of  Animals,  fo  that  no  Man 
can  fufpeft  it  to  have  any  confiderable  Meafure 
of  Underftanding ,  or  to  have  Knov^ledge  of, 
much  lefs  to  aim  at  any  End,  yet  makes  her 
Combs  and  Cells  with  that  geometrical  Accura- 
cy, that  fhe  muft  needs  be  ad:ed  by  an  Inftincft 
implanted  in  her  by  the  wife  Author  of  Nature ; 
for  firft  fhe  plants  them  in  a  perpendicular  Po- 
fture,  and  fo  clofe  together  as  with  Conveniency 
they  may,  beginning  at  the  top  and  working 
downwards,  that  fo  no  room  may  be  loft  in  the 
Hive,  and  that  fhe  may  have  eafy  Accefs  to  all 
the  Combs  and  Cells ;  befides,  the  Combs  being 
wrought  double,  that  is,  with  Cells  on  each  fide, 
a  common  Bottom  or  partition  Wall  could  not 
in  any  other  Site  have  fo  conveniently,  if  at  all, 
received  or  contain'd  the  Honey;  then  (he  makes 
the  particular  Cells  moft  geometrically  and  arti- 
ficially, as  the  famous  Mathematician  Pappus 
demonftrates  in  the  Preface  to  his  third  Book  of 
Mathematical  ColleBiohs.  Firft  of  all  (faith  he, 
fpeaking  of  the  Cells)  it  is  convenient  that  they 
be  of  fuch  Figures  as  may  cohere  one  to  another, 
and  have  common  Sides,  elfe  there  would  be 
empty  Spaces  left  between  them  to  no  Ufe,  but 
to  the  weakening  and  fpoiling  of  the  Work,  if 
any  thing  ihould  get  in  there ;  and  therefore, 
tho'  a  round  Figure  be  moft  capacious  for  the 
Honey,  and  moft  convenient  for  the  Bee  to  creep 
into,  yet  did  ftie  not  make  choice  of  that,  be- 
I  caufe 


Parti.        in  />6^  Cre  ation.  133 

caufe  then  there  muft  have  been  triangular  Spa- 
ces left  void.  Now  there  are  only  three  redi- 
lineous  and  ordinate  Figures  which  can  ferve  to 
this  Purpofej  and  inordinate,  or  unlike  ones, 
muft  have  been  not  oiily  lefs  elegant  and  beau- 
tiful, but  unequal.  [Ordinate  Figures  are  fuch  as 
have  all  their  Sides  and  all  their  Angles  equal.] 
The  three  ordinate  Figures  are,  "Triangles,  Squares^ 
and  Hexagons  *y  for  the  Space  about  any  Point 
ifiay  be  fiU'd  up  either  by  fix  equilateral  Tria?:^ 
gles^  or  four  Squares^  or  three  Hexagons ;  whereas 
three  Pentagons  are  too  little,  and  three  Hepta- 
gons too  much.  Of  thefe  three,  the  Bee  makes 
ufe  of  the  Hexagon,  both  becaufe  it  is  more  ca- 
pacious than  either  of  the  other,  provided  they 
be  of  equal  compafs,  and  fo  equal  Matter  fpent 
in  the  Conftruftion  of  each ;  and  fecondly,  be- 
caufe it  is  moft  commodious  for  the  Bee  to  creep 
into;  and  laftly,  becaufe  in  the  other  Figures 
more  Angles  and  Sides  muft  have  met  together 
at  the  fame  Point,  and  fo  the  Work  could  not 
have  been  fo  firm  and  ftrongj  moreover,  the 
Combs  being  double,  the  Cells  on  each  fide  the 
Partition  are  fo  ordered,  that  the  Angles  on  one 
fide  infift  upon  the  Centers  of  the  Bottoms  of 
the  Cells  on  the  other  fide,  and  not  Angle  upon 
or  againft  Angle,  which  alfo  muft  needs  contri- 
bute to  the  Strength  and  Firmnefs  of  the  Work ; 
thefe  Cells  flie  fills  with  Honey  for  her  Winter 
Provifion,  and  curioufly  clofes  them  up  'with 
Covers  of  Wax,  that  keep  the  included  Liquor 
from  fpilling,   and  from  external  Injuries,   as 

K  3  Mr. 


134  T/je  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  L 
Mr.  Boyle  truly  obferves,  Treatife  of  final  Caufes^ 
f,  169.  Another  Sort  of  Bee  I  have  obferv'dj 
may  be  called  the  Tree-Bee^  whofe  Induftry  is 
admirable  in  making  Provifion  for  her  Young. 
Firft,  fhe  digs  round  Vaults  or  Burrows  [Cwii- 
culos]  in  a  rotten  or  decayed  Tree,  of  a  great 
length,  in  them  {he  builds  or  forms  her  cylin- 
drical Nefls  or  Cafes,  refembling  Cartridges,  or 
a  very  narrow  Thimble,  only  in  proportion 
longer,  of  pieces  of  Rofe,  or  other  Leaves,  which 
fhe  fhears  off  with  her  Mouth,  and  plats  and 
joins  clofe  together  by  fome  glutinous  Subflance ; 
thefe  Cafes  fhe  fills  with  a  red  Pap,  of  a  thinner 
Confiftence  than  an  Eleduary,  of  no  pleafant 
Tafte,  which  where  fhe  gathers  I  know  not  -,  and 
which  is  mofl  remarkable,  fhe  forms  thefe  Cafes 
and  flores  them  with  this  Provifion  before  fhe 
hath  any  young  One  hatch'd,  or  fo  much  as  an 
Egg  laid ;  for  on  the  top  of  the  Pap  fhe  lays  one 
Egg,  and  then  clofes  up  the  VefTel  with  a  Cover 
of  Leaves :  the  inclos'd  Egg  foon  becomes  an 
Eula,  or  Maggot,  which  feeding  upon  the  Pap 
till  it  comes  to  its  full  Growth,  changes  to  a 
Nympha,  and  after  comes  out  a  Bee,  Another 
Infedt  noted  for  her  feeming  Prudence,  in  ma- 
king Provifion  for  the  Winter,  propofed  by  Solo- 
mo?i  for  our  Imitation,  is  the  Ant,  which  (as  all 
Naturalifls  agree)  hoard  up  Grains  of  Corn  a- 

gainfl  the  Winter  for  her  Suflenance, 
*  ^o^'  ^"  "*     and  is  reported  by  fome  to  *  bite  off 

the  Germen  of  them,  lefl  they  fhould 
fprout  by  the  Moifture  of  the  Earth,  which  I 

look 


Part  I.        Z;^  />^^  C  R  E  A  T I  ON.  1 35 

look  upon  as  a  mere  Fiftion ;  neither  fliould  1  be 
forward  to  credit  the  former  Relation,  were  it 
not  for  the  Authority  of  the  Scriptu7^e^  becaufe  I 
could  never  obferve  any  fuch  ftoring  of  Grain  by 
our  Country  Ants. 

Yet  there  is  a  Quadruped  taken  notice  of  even 
by  the  Vulgar,  for  laying  up  in  ftore  Provifion 
for  the  Winter;  that  is,  the  Squirrel^  whofe  Hoards 
of  Nuts  are  frequently  found,  and  pillaged  by 
rfiem. 

The  Beaver  is  by  credible  Perfons,  Eye-Wit- 
neffes,  affirmed  to  build  him  Houfes  for  Shelter 
and  Security  in  Winter-time.  See  Mr,  Boyle  of 
final  CauJeSy  p,  173. 

Befides  thefe  I  have  mentioned,  an  Hundred 
others  may  be  found  in  Books  relating  efpecially 
to  Phyfick:  as,  that  Dogs  when  they  are  fick, 
{hould  vomit  thcmfelves  by  eating  Grafs;  that 
Swine  fliould  refufe  Meat  fo  foon  as  they  feel 
themfelves  ill,  and  fo  recover  by  Abftinence; 
that  the  Bird  Ibis  fliould  teach  Men  the  way 
of  adminiftring  Clyfters,  Plin.  lib,  8.  cap,  27. 
the  wild  Goats  of  Dictamus  for  drawing  out  of 
Darts  and  healing  Wounds;  the  Swallow  the 
Ufe  of  Celandine  for  repairing  the  Sight,  &c, 
ibid.  Of  the  Truth  of  which,  becaufe  I  am  not 
fully  fatisfied,  I  fhall  make  no  Inference  from 
them. 

nirdly^  I  fliall  remark  the  Care  that  is  taken 
for  the  Prefervation  of  the  Weak,  and  fuch  as 
are  -exposed  to  the  Injuries,  and  preventing  the 
Increafe  of  fuch  as  are  noifome  and  hurtful ;  for 

K  4  as 


136      Hoe  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  L 

as  it  is  a  Demonftration  of  the  divine  Power  and 
Magnificence  to  create  fuch  Variety  of  Animals, 
not  only  great  but  fmall,  not  only  ftrong  and 
courageous,  but  alfo  weak  and  timorous ;  fo  is  it 
no  lefs  Argument  of  his  Wifdom  to  give  to  thefe 
Means,  and  the  Power  and  Skill  of  ufing  them, 
to  preferve  themfelves  from  the  Violence  and 
Injures  of  thofe.  That  of  the  Weak,  fome 
fhouid  dig  Vaults  and  Holes  in  the  Earth,  as 
Rabbets^  to  fecure  themfelves  and  their  Young ; 
others  fliould  be  arm'd  with  hard  Shells ;  others 
with  Prickles ;  the  reft  that  have  no  fuch  Arma- 
ture, fhouid  be  endu'd  with  great  Swiftnefs  or 
Pernicity  ;  and  not  only  fo  ,  but  fome  alfo 
have  their  Eyes  ftand  fo  prominent,  as  the  Hare^ 
that  they  can  fee  as  well  behind  as  before  them, 
that  fo  they  may  have  their  Enemy  alway  m 
their  Eye^  and  long,  hollow,  moveable  Ears, 
to  receive  and  convey  the  leaft  Sound,  or  that 
which  comes  from  far,  that  they  be  not  fudden- 
ly  furprized  or  taken  ( as  they  fay )  napping. 
Moreover,  it  is  remarkable,  that  in  this  Animal, 
and  in  the  Rabbet^  the  Mufcles  of  the  Loins  and 
hind  Legs  are  extraordinarily  large  in  proportion 
to  the  reft  of  the  Body,  or  thofe  of  other  Ani- 
mals, as  if  made  on  purpofe  for  Swiftnefs,  that 
they  may  be  able  to  efcape  the  Teeth  of  fo  many 
Enemies  as  continually  purfue  and  chafe  them ; 
^dd  hereto  the  Length  of  their  hind  Legs,  which 
is  no  fmall  Advantage  to  them,  as  is  noted  by 
'Pgimt  Julan  Barm  in  an  ancient  Dialogue  in  Verfe 
betyveen  the  Huntfman  and  his  Mail ;  The  Man 

there 


Part  I.        in  //6^  C  r  e  at  i  on.  137 

there  asks  his  Matter,  What  is  the  Reafon,  why 
the  Hare  when  fhe  is  near  fpent  makes  up  a 
Hill  ?  The  Matter  anfwers,  That  Nature  hath 
made  the  hinder-legs  of  the  Hare  longer  than 
the  Fore-legs  5  by  which  Means  (lie  climbs  the 
Hill  with  much  more  Eafe  than  the  Dogs,  whofe 
Legs  are  of  equal  Length,  and  fo  leaves  the  Dogs 
behind  her,  and  many  Times  efcapes  away  clear, 
and  faves  her  Life.  This  laft  Obfervation,  I 
mutt  confefs  my  felf  to  have  borrowed  out  of 
the  Papers  of  my  honoured  Friend  Mr.  John 
Aubrey^  which  he  was  pleafed  to  give  me  a  Sight 
of. 

I  might  here  ardd  much  concerning  the  Wiles 
and  Rufes,  which  thefe  timid  Creatures  make 
ufe  of  to  fave  themfelves,  and  efcape  their  Perfe- 
cutors,  but  that  I  am  fomewhat  diffident  of  the 
Truth  of  thofe  Stories  and  Relations.  I  fhall  only 
aver  what  my  felf  have  fometimes  obferv*d  of  a 
Duck,  when  clofely  purfued  by  a  Water-Dog ; 
fhe  not  only  dives  to  fave  herfelf,  (which  yet  (he 
never  does  but  when  driven  to  an  exigent,  and 
jutt  ready  to  be  caught,  becaufe  it  is  painful  and 
difficult  to  her)  but  when  fhe  comes  up  again, 
brings  not  her  whole  Body  above  Water,  but  only 
her  Bill,  and  Part  of  her  Head,  holding  the  reft 
underneath,  that  fo  the  Dog,  who  the  mean  time 
turns  round  and  looks  about  him,  may  not  efpy 
her,  'till  fhe  have  recovered  Breath. 

As  for  Sheep ^  which  have  no  natural  Wea- 
pons* or  Means  to  defend  or  fecure  themfelves, 
i;either  Heels  to  run,  nor  Claws  to  dig  ^  they  are 

delivered 


138  "The  Wisdom  of  GOD  Parti, 
delivered  into  the  Hand,  and  committed  to  the 
Care  and  Tuition  of  Man ;  and  ferving  him  for 
divers  Ufes,  are  nourished  andprotefted  by  him; 
and  fo  enjoying  their  Beings  for  a  Time,  by  this 
Means  propagate  and  continue  their  Species :  So 
that  there  are  none  deftitute  of  fome  Means  to 
preferve  themfelves,  and  their  Kind  ;  and  thefe 
Means  fo  effedual,  that  notwithftanding  all  the 
Endeavours  and  Contrivances  of  Man  and  Beafl: 
Co  deftroy  them,  there  is  not  to  this  Day  one 
Species  loft  of  fuch  as  are  mentioned  in  Hiftories, 
and  confequently  and  undoubtedly  neither  of 
fuch  as  w^ere  at  firft  created. 

Then  for  Birds  of  Prey,  and  rapacious  Ani- 
mals, it  is  remarkable  wrhat  Arifiotle  obferves. 
That  they  are  all  folitary,  and  go  not  in  Flocks, 
llaL^'\mv')(jtiv  ov^h  dyehaiovy  no  Birds  of  Prey  are 
gregarious.  Again,  that  fuch  Creatures  do  not 
greatly  multiply,  rm  yctfjL^o^vtl^oov  oAiyorojccc  Trdv 
ra.  They  for  the  moft  Part  breeding  and  bring- 
ing forth  but  one  or  two,  or  at  leaft,  a  few 
Young  Ones  at  once :  Whereas  they  that  are  fee-' 
ble  and  timorous  are  generally  multiparous ;  or, 
if  they  bring  forth  but  a  few  at  once,  as  Pigeojts^ 
they  compenfate  that  by  their  often  breeding, 
viz.  every  Month  but  two  throughout  the  Year; 
by  this  Means  providing  for  the  Continuation 
of  their  Kind.  But  for  the  Security  of  thefe  ra- 
pacious Birds,  it  is  worthy  the  noting,  that  be- 
caufe  a  Prey  is  not  always  ready,  but  perhaps 
they  may  fail  of  one  fome  Days,  Nature  hath 
made  them  patient  of  a  long  inedia^   and  belides, 

when 


Part  I.       in  /y&^  C  r  e  at  i  o  N.  139 

when  they  light  upon  one,  they  gorge  them- 
felves  fo  therewith,  as  to  fufRce  for  their  Nou- 
rifliment  for  a  confiderable  Time. 

Fourthly y  I  fhall  note  the  exadt  Fitnefs  of  the 
Parts  of  the  Bodies  of  Animals  to  every  one's 
Nature  and  Manner  of  Living.  A  notable  In- 
ftance  of  which  we  have  in  the  Swine,  a  Crea- 
ture well  known,  and  therefore  what  I  fhall  ob- 
ferve  of  it  is  obvious  to  every  Man.  His  proper 
and  natural  Food  being  chiefly  the  Roots  of 
Plants,  he  is  provided  with  a  long  and  ftrong 
Snout  5  long,  that  he  might  thruft  it  to  a  fuffi- 
cient  Depth  into  the  Ground  without  Offence  to 
his  ^Eyes ;  ftrong  and  conveniently  formed  for 
the  rooting  and  turning  up  the  Ground.  And 
befides,  he  is  endued  with  a  notable  Sagacity  of 
Scent,  for  the  finding  out  fuch  Roots  as  are  fit 
for  his  Food.  Hence  in  Italy,  the  ufual  Me- 
thod for  finding  and  gathering  of  Trufes,  or  fub- 
terraneous  Mufhromes,  (called  by  the  Italians 
Tartiifali,  and  in  Latin  I^ubera  terra)  is,  by  ty- 
ing a  Cord  to  the  Hind- leg  of  a  Pig,  and  dri- 
ving him  before  them  into  fuch  Paflures  as  ufual- 
ly  produce  that  Kind  of  Mufhrome,  and  ob- 
ferving  where  he  ftops  and  begins  to  root,  and 
there  digging,  they  are  fure  to  find  a  T'rufle ; 
which  when  they  have  taken  up,  they  drive 
away  the  Pig  to  fearch  for  more.  So  I  have  my 
felf  obferved,  that  in  Paflures  where  there  are 
Earth-nuts  to  be  found  up  and  down  in  feveral 
Patthes,  tho'  the  Roots  lie  deep  in  the  Ground, 
and  the  Stalks  be  dead  long  before  and  quite 

gone, 


I40  He  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  L 
gone,  the  Swine  will  by  their  Scent  eafily  find 
Siem  out,  and  root  only  in  thofe  Places  where 
they  grow. 

This  rooting  of  the  Hog  in  the  Earth,  calls 
to  mind  another  Inftance  of  like  Nature,  that  is 
the  Porpejfe^    which,    as  his  Englijh  Name  Por- 

•  S  i  efifli  ^^'  ^*^*  *  Pore  pefce^  imports,  re- 
^^^^"  *  fembles  the  Hog,  both  in  the 
Strength  of  his  Snout,  and  alfo  in  the  Manner  of 
getting  his  Food  by  rooting  ;  for  we  found  the 
Stomach  of  one  we  differed  full  of  Sand-Eels^ 
or  LaunceSy  which  for  the  moft  Part  lie  deep 
in  the  Sand,  and  cannot  be  gotten  but  by  root- 
ing or  digging  there.  We  have  feen  the  Coun- 
try-People in  Cornwall^  when  the  Tide  was 
out,  to  fetch  them  out  of  the  Sand  with  Iron- 
Hooks  thruft  down  under  them,  made  for  that 
Purpofe. 

Furthermore,  that  very  Adlion  for  which  the 
Swine  is  abominated,  and  look'd  upon  as  an  un- 
clean and  impure  Creature,  namely  wallowing 
in  the  Mire,  is  defign'd  by  Nature  for  a  very 
good  End  and  Ufe,  'viz.  not  only  to  cool  his 
Body,  for  the  fair  Water  would  have  done  that 
as  well,  nay,  better,  for  commonly  the  Mud 
and  Mire  in  Summer-time  is  warm  \  but  alfo 
to  fufFocate  and  deftroy  Lice,  Fleas,  and  other 
noifom  and  importunate  Infefts,  that  are  trou- 
blefome  and  noxious  to  him.  For  the  fame 
Reafon  do  all  the  Poultry-kind,  and  divers  other 
Birds,  bask  themfelves  in  the  Duft  in  Summer- 
time 


Part  I.       in  tbe  Ck'e  atio^.  141 

time  and  hot  Weather,    as  is  obvious  to  every 
one  to  obferve. 

2.  A  fecond  and  no  lefs  remarkable  Inftance, 
I  fhall  produce,  out  of  Dr.  More's  Antidote  againji 
Atheijm,  lib.  2.  cap.  10.  in  a  poor  and  contemp- 
tible Quadruped,  the  Mole, 

Firft  of  all  (faith  he)  her  Dwelling  being  un- 
der Ground,  where  nothing  is  to  be  feen,  Na- 
*ture  hath  fo  obfcurely  fitted  her  with  Eyes,  that 
Naturalifts  can  fcarcely  agree,  whether  (he  hath 
any  Sight  at  all  or  no.  [In  our  Obfervation, 
Moles  have  perfeft  Eyes,  and  Holes  for  them 
through  the  Skin,  fo  that  they  are  outwardly  to 
be  feen  by  any  that  fhall  diligently  fearch  for 
them  ;  tho'  indeed  they  are  exceeding  fmall,  not 
much  bigger  than  a  great  Pin's  Head.]  But  for 
Amends,  what  (he  is  capable  of  for  her  Defence 
and  Warning  of  Danger,  (he  has  very  eminently 
conferred  upon  her;  for  fhe  is  very  quick  of 
hearing,  [doubtlefs  her  fubterraneous  Vaults  are 
lik  Trunks  to  convey  any  Sound  a  great  Way.] 
And  then  her  fhort  Tail  and  fhort  Legs,  but 
broad  Fore- feet  armed  with  fharp  Claws,  we  fee 
by  the  Event  to  what  purpofe  they  are,  flie  fo 
fwiftly  working  herfelf  under  Ground,  and 
making  her  Way  fo  faft  in  the  Earth,  as  they 
that  behold  it  cannot  but  admire  it.  Her  Legs 
therefore  are  fliort,  that  flie  need  dig  no  more 
than  will  ferve  the  mere  Thicknefs  of  her  Body: 
And  her  fore- feet  are  broad,  that  (he  may  fcoup 
away  rnuch  Earth  at  a  Time :  And  (he  has  little 
or  no  Tail,  becaufe  (he  courfes  it  not  on  the 
Ground  like  a  i?^/  or  Monfe,  but  lives  under  the 

Earth, 


142  TAeWisDOM  of  GOD  Parti. 
Earth,  and  is  fain  to  dig  herfelf  a  Dwelling 
there  ;  and  {he  making  her  Way  thro'  fo  thick 
an  Element,  which  will  not  eafily  yield  as  the 
Water  and  Air  do,  it  had  been  dangerous  to 
draw  fo  long  a  Train  behind  her;  for  her  Ene- 
my might  fall  upon  her  Rear,  and  fetch  her 
out  before  fhe  had  perfed:ed  and  got  full  Pof- 
feffion  of  her  Works :  Which  being  fo,  what 
more  palpable  Argument  of  Providence  than 
(he? 

Another  Inftance  in  Quadrupeds  might  be 
the  Tamandua  ox  Aftt-Bear^  defcrib'd  by  Marc- 
grave  and  PifOy  who  faith  of  them,  that  they 
are  Night-walkers,  and  feek  their  Food  by 
Night.  Being  Jcept  tame,  they  are  fed  with 
Fleiih,  but  it  muft  be  minced  fmall,  becai^fe  they 
have  not  only  a  flender  and  fharp  Head  and 
Snout,  but  alfo  a  narrow  and  toothlcfs  Mouth  j 
their  Tongue  is  like  a  great  Lute-firing  (as  big 
as  a  Goofe-quill)  round,  and  in  the  greater  Kind 
(for  there  are  two  Species)  more  than  two  Foot 
long,  and  therefore  lies  doubled  in  a  Chanel 
between  the  lower  Parts  of  the  Cheeks.  This 
when  hungry  they  thruft  forth,  being  well 
moiftned,  and  lay  upon  the  Trunk  of  Trees, 
and  when  it  is  covered  with  Ants^  fuddenly  draw 
it  back  into  their  Mouths ;  if  the  Ants  lie  fo 
deep  that  they  cannot  come  at  them,  they  dig  up 
the  Earth  with  their  long  and  ftrong  Claws, 
wherewith  for  that  Purpofe  their  Fore- feet  are 
armed.  So  we  fee  how  their  Parts  are  fitted 
for  this  Kind  of  Diet,  and  no  other  j  for  the 
catching  of  it,  and  for  the  eating  of  it,  it  re- 
quiring 


Parti.       /?>  if^^  Creation.  143 

quiring  no  Comminution  by  the  Tectji,  as  ap- 
pears alfo  in  the  Chamcelion^  which  is  another 
Qnadruped  that  imitates  the  Tamandua  in  this 
Property  of  darting  out  the  Tongue  to  a  great 
Length,  with  wonderful  Celerity ;  and  for  the 
fame  Purpofe  too  of  catching  of  Jnfefts. 

Befides  thefe  Quadrupeds,  there  are  a  whole 
Genus  of  Birds^  called  Pici  Marcii^  or  Wood- 
.'Peckers^  that  in  like  Manner  have  a  Tongue 
which  they  can  £hoot  forth  to  a  very  great 
Length,  ending  in  a  fharp  ftiff  bony  Rib,  dented 
on  each  Side  ;  and  at  pleafure  thruft  it  deep  into 
the  Holes,  Clefts,  and  Crannies  of  Trees,  to 
ftab  and  draw  out  CoJJj,  or  any  other  Infects  lurk- 
ing there,  as  alfo  into  Ant-hiUs,  to  ftrike  and 
fetch  out  the  Ants  and  their  Eggs,  Moreover, 
they  have  ihort,  but  very  ftrong  Legs,  and  their 
Toes  ftand  two  forwards,  two  backwards,  which 
Diipofition  (as  Aldrovandiis  well  notes)  Nature, 
or  rather  the  Wifdom  of  the  Creator,  hath  grant- 
ed to  Woodpeckers^  becaufe  it  is  very  coavenieut 
for  the  climbing  of  Trees,  to  which  alfo  condu- 
ces' the  Stiffnefs  of  the  Feathers  of  their  Tails, 
and  their  bending  downward,  whereby  they 
are  fitted  to  ferve  as  a  Prop  for  them  to  lean  up- 
on, and  bear  up  their  Bodies.  As  for  the  Chamte- 
lion,  he  imitates  the  Woodfpite,  not  only  in  the 
Make,  Motion,  and  Ufe  of  his  Tongue  for 
ftriking  Ants^  Flies,  and  other  Infects  \  but  alfo 
in  rhe  Site  of  his  Toes,  whereby  he  is  wonder- 
fully  qualified  to  run  upon  Trees,    which  he 

doth 


14+     77)eWisDoM  of  GOD     Parti. 

does  with  that  Swiftnefs,  that  one  would  think 
he  flew,  whereas  upon  the  Ground  he  walks 
very  clumfily  and  ridiculoufly.  A  full  Defcrip- 
tion  of  the  outward  and  inward  Parts  of  this 
Animal,  may  be  feen  at  the  End  of  Penarolus's 
Obfervat.  It  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  Chamcelion^ 
tho'  he  hath  Teeth,  ufes  them  not  for  chev/ing 
his  Prey,  but  fwallows  it  immediately. 

I  fhall  add  two  Inftances  more  in  Birds,  and 
thofe  are, 

I.  TheSwalloWy  whofe  proper  Food  is  fmall 
Beetles,  and  other  Infedls  flying  about  in  the 
Air ;  as  we  have  found  by  diflTeding  the  Sto- 
machs both  of  old  Ones  and  Nefl:lings :  Which 
is  wonderfully  fitted  for  the  catching  of  thefe 
Animalcules  J  for  fhe  hath  long  Wings,  and  a 
forked  Tail,  and  fmall  Feet,  whereby  {he  is  as 
it  were  made  for  fwift  Flight,  and  enabled  to 
continue  long  upon  the  Wing,  and  to  turn  nim- 
bly in  the  Air :  And  (he  hath  alfo  an  extraordi- 
nary wide  Mouth,  fo  that  it's  very  hard  for  any 
Infedt,  that  comes  in  her  Way  to  efcape  her.  It 
is  thought  to  be  a  Sign  of  Rain,  when  this  Bird 
flies  low  near  to  the  Ground  -,  in  which  there 
may  be  fome  Truth  ;  becaufe  the  Infedls  which 
ftie  hunts  may  at  fuch  Times,  when  the  fuperior 
Air  is  charged  with  Vapours,  have  a  Senfe  of  it, 
and  defcend  near  the  Earth.  Hence,  when  there 
are  no  more  Infefts  in  the  Air,  as  in  Winter- 
time, thofe  Birds  do  either  abfcond,  or  betake 
themfelves  into  hot  Countries. 

2.  The 


Part  L       in  the  GK'^kTio n.  i 45 

2.  The  Colymbi,  ox  Doicchers^  or  Loo?2S,  whofe 
Bodies  are  admirably  fitted  and  conformed  for 
diving  under  Water,  being  cover'd  with  a  very- 
thick  Plumage,  and  the  Super/ides  of  their  Fea- 
thers fo  fmooth  and  flippery,  that  the  Water 
cannot  penetrate,  or  moiften  them  ;  whereby 
their  Bodies  are  defended  from  the  Cold,  the 
Water  being  kept  at  a  Diftance,  and  fo  poifed^ 
jhat  by  a  light  Impulfe  they  may  eafily  afcend 
in  it.  Then  their  Feet  are  fituate  in  the  hind- 
moft  Part  of  their  Body,  whereby  they  are  en- 
abled, fliooting  their  Feet  backwards^  and  ftri- 
king  the  Water  upwards,  to  plunge  themfelves 
down  into  it  with  great  Facility,  and  likewife 
to  move  forwards  therein.  Then  their  Legs  are 
made  flat  and  broad,  and  their  Feet  cloven  into 
Toes  with  appendant  Membranes  on  each  Sidej 
by  which  Configuration  they  eafily  cut  the  Wa- 
ter, and  are  drawn  forward,  and  fo  take  their 
Stroke  backwards  -,  and  befides>  I  conceive,  that 
by  means  of  this  Figure,  their  Feet  being  mov'd 
to  the  Right  and  Left-hand,  ferve  them  as  a 
Rudder  to  enable  them  to  turn  under  Water: 
For  fome  conceive,  that  they  fwim  eafier  under 
Water  than  they  do  above  it.  How  they  raife 
themfelves  up  again^  whether  their  Bodies  e- 
merge  of  themfelves  by  their  Lightnefs^  or 
whether  by  ftriking  againft  the  Bottom,  in  Man- 
ner of  a  Leap,  or  by  fome  peculiar  Motion  of 
their  Legs,  I  cannot  determine.  That  they 
dive  to  the  Bottom  is  clear  ;  for  that  in  the  Sto- 
machs both  of  the  greater  and  lefler  Kinds  we 
found  Grafs  and  other  Weeds,    and  in  the  lef- 

L  .  ■     fer 


146      The'Wisj>ou  ef  GOD     Part  L 

fer  kind  nothing  elfe  ;  though  both  prey  upon 
Fifh.  Their  Bills  alfo  are  made  ftreight  and 
fharp  for  the  eafier  cutting  of  the  Water,  and 
ftriking  their  Prey.  Could  we  fee  the  Motions 
G)f  their  Legs  and  Feet  in  the  Water,  then  we 
jfhould  better  comprehend  how  they  afcend,  de- 
fcend,  and  move  to  and  fro  ;  and  difcern,  how 
wufely  and  artificially  their  Membecs  are  formed 
and  adapted  to  thofe  Ufes. 

II.  In  Birds^  all  the  Members  are  moft  ex- 
actly fitted  for  the  Ufe  of  Flying.  Firft,  The 
Mufcles,  which  ferve  to  move  the  Wings,  are 
the  greateft  and  ftrongeft,  becaufe  much  Force 
is  required  to  the  Agitation  of  them  ^  the  under- 
fide  of  them  is  alfo  made  Concave,  and  the  up- 
per Convex,  that  they  may  be  eafily  lifted  up, 
and  more  ftrongly  beat  the  Air,  which  by  this 
Means  doth  more  refill  the  Defcent  of  their  Bo- 
dy downwards.  Then  the  Trunk  of  their  Bo- 
dy doth  fomewhat  refemble  the  Hull  of  a  Shipj- 
the  Head,  the  Prow,  which  is  for  the  moft 
part  fmall,  that  it  may  the  more  eafily  cut  the 
Air,  and  make  v/ay  for  their  Bodies ;  the  Train 
ferves  to  fteer,  govern,  and  dired;  their  Flight ; 
and  however  it  may  be  held  ered  in  their  {land- 
ing, or  walking,  yet  is  direfted  to  lie  almoft 
in  the  fame  Plain  with  their  Backs,  or  rather 
a  little  inclining  when  they  fly.  That  the  Train 
ferves  to  fleer  and  direft  their  Flight,  and  turn 
their  Bodies  like  the  Rudder  of  a  Ship,  is  evident 
in  the  Kite,  who,  by  a  light  turning  of  his  Train, 

moves 


Parti.        in  the  Creation,  147 

moves  his  Body  which  Way  he  pleafes.  lidem 
indenfur  artem  guhernandi  docuijfe  caiida  fexibus^ 
in  Cf^lo  7nonfirante  natiira  quod  opus  ejfet  in  pro- 
fundo,  Plin.  Lib.  10.  c.  10.  I'hey  Jeem  to  have 
taught  Men  the  Art  of  fleering  a  Ship  by  the 
Flexures  of  their  T'ails  >  Nature  JJjewing  in  the 
Air  "what  was  yieedful  to  he  done  in  the  Deep,  And 
it's  notable  that  Arijlotle  truly  obferves,  that 
whole-footed  Birds,  and  thofe  that  have  long 
Legs,  have  for  the  moft  part  (hort  Tails ;  and 
therefore  whilft  they  fly,  do  not,  as  others,  draw 
them  up  to  their  Bellies,  but  ftretch  them  at 
length  backvvards,  that  they  may  ferve  to  fteer 
and  guide  them  inftead  of  Tails.  Neither  doth 
the  Tail  ferve  only  to  diredl  and  govern  the 
Flight,  but  alfo  partly  to  fupport  the  Body,  and 
keep  it  even  j  wherefore,  when  fpread,  it  lies 
parallel  to  the  Horizon,  and  ftands  not  perpen- 
dicular to  it,  as  Fiihes  do.  Hence  Birds  that^ 
have  no  Tails,  as  fome  Sorts  of  Colymbi^  or  Duck- 
ers,  fly  very  inconveniently  with  their  Bodies  al- 
moft  ered. 

.  To  this  I  (hall  add  further,  That  the  Bodies 
of  Birds  are  fmall  in  Comparifon  of  Quadru- 
peds, that  they  may  more  eafily  be  fupported  in 
the  Air  during  their  Flight ;  which  is  a  great 
Argument  of  Wifdom  and  Defign:  Elfe  why 
lliould  not  we  fee  Species  of  Pegafi,  or  Flying- 
Horfes,  of  Grijfins,  of  Harpies,  and  an  Huu* 
dj*ed  more,  which  might  make  a  Shift  to  liye 
well  enough,  notwithftanding  they  could  make 
no  Ufe  of  their  Wings :  Befides,  their  Bodies 
.  are  not  only  fmall,    but  of  a  broad  Figure,  that 

.    L  2         ^  the 


148       7%eWisDouof  GOD     Parti. 

the  Air  may  more  reiift  their  Defcents ,    they  are 
alfo  hollow  and  light ;    nay,    their  very  Bones 
are  light :    For  though  thofe  of  tjie  Legs  and 
Wings  are  folid  and  firm,    yet  have  they  ample 
Cavities,    by  which  Means  they  become  more 
rigid  and  ftifF)  it  being    demonftrable,    that  a 
hollow  Body  is  more  ft  iff  and  inflexible  than  a  fo- 
lid one  of  equal  Subftance  and  Matter.     Then 
the  Feathers  alfo  are  very  light,    yet  their  Shafts 
•  hard  and  ftiff,    as  being  either  empty,    or  filled 
with  a  light  and  fpungy  Subftance,    and  their 
Webs  are  not  made  of  continued  Membranes ; 
for  then,    had  a  Rupture  by  any  Accident  been 
made  in  them,    it  could  not  have  been  confoli- 
dated,    but  of  two  Series  of  numerous  Pumulcey 
or  contiguous  Filaments,     furniflied  all  along 
with  Hooks  on  each  fide,  whereby  catching  hold 
on  one  another,  they  ftick  faft  together  5  fo  that 
when  they  are  ruffled,    or  difcompofed,  the  Bird 
with  her  Bill  can  eafily  preen  them,    and  reduce 
them  to  their  due  Pofition  again.     And  for  their 
firmer  Cohasfion,    the  wife  and  bountiful  Author 
of  Nature  hath  provided  and  placed  on  the  Rump 
two  Glandules,    having  their  excretory  Veffels, 
round  which  grow  Feathers  in  Form  of  a  Pen- 
cil,   to  which  the  Bird  turning  her  Head,    cat- 
ches hold  upon  them  with  her  Bill,    and  a  little 
comprefling   the  Glandules,    fqueezes  out  and 
brings  away  therewith  an  oily  Pap,  or  Liniment, 
moft  fit  and  proper  for  the  Inundtion  of  the  Fea- 
thers, and  caufing  their  Filaments  more  ftrongly 
t,o  cohere.     And  is  not  this  ftrange  and  admira- 
ble, 


Parti.        in  the  Creation.  149 

ble,  and  argumentative  of  Providence,  that  there 
fhould  be  fuch  an  Unguent,  or  Pap,  prepared, 
fuch  an  open  Veflel  to  excern  it  into,  to  receive 
and  retain  it ;  that  the  Bird  fl^^ould  know  where 
it  is  fituate,  and  how,  and  to  what  Purpofes  to 
ufe  it  ?  And  becaufe  the  Bird  is  to  live  many 
Years,  and  the  Feathers  in  time  would,  and 
mufl  neceffarily  be  worn  and  fhatter'd,  Nature 
hath  made  Provifion  for  the  cafting  and  renew- 
ing of  them  Yearly.  Moreover,  thofe  large 
Bladders,  or  Membranes,  extending  to  the  Bot^ 
toms  of  the  Bellies  of  Birds,  inro  which  the 
Breath  is  received,  conduce  much  to  the  alle- 
viating of  the  Body,  and  facilitating  the  Flight : 
For  the  Air  received  into  thefe  Bladders,  is  by 
the  Heat  of  the  Body  extended  into  twice,  or 
thrice,  the  Dimenfions  of  the  External,  and  fo 
muft  needs  add  a  Lightnefs  to  the  Body.  And 
the  Bird  when  (lie  would  defcend,  may  either 
comprefs  this  Air  by  the  Mufcles  of  the  Abdo- 
men, or  expire  as  much  of  it  as  may  enable  her 
to  defcend  fwifter,  or  (lower,  as  (lie  pleafes.  I 
niight  add  the  Ufe  of  the  Feathers  in  cheri(hing 
and  keeping  the  Body  warm  ;  which,  the  Crea- 
ture being  of  fmall  Bulk,  mull  needs  (land  in 
great  Stead  againft  the  Rigour  of  the  Cold.  And 
for  this  Reafon  we  fee,  that  Water-Fowls,  which 
were  to  fwim,  and  fit  long  upon  the  cold  Wa- 
ter, have  their  Feathers  very  thick  (et  upon  their 
Breafts  and  Bellies,  and  befides  a  plentiful  Down 
there  growing,  to  fence  againft  the  Cold  of  the 
Water,  and  to  keep  oft' its  immediate  Contad. 

L  c;  ^  Thac 


1^0      The  Wis-Dou  of  GOD     Parti. 

Thiat  the  Tails  of  all  Birds  in  general  do  not 
conduce  to  their  turning  to  the  Right  and  Left, 
ucccrding  to  the  common  Opinion,  but  rather 
for  their  Alcent  and  Defcent,  fome  modern  Phi- 
lofophers  have  obferv'd  and  prov'd  by  Experi- 
ment ;  for  that  if  you  pluck  off,  for  Inltance,  a 
Pigeon's  Tail,  fhe  will  neverthelels,  with  equal 
Facility,  turn  to  and  fro :  Which  upon  fecond 
Thoughts,  and  further  Confideration,  I  grant  to 
be  true,  in  Birds  whofe  Tails  are  pointed,  and 
end  in  aright  Line :  But  in  thofe  that  have  fork- 
ed Tails,  Autopfy  convinceth  us  that  it  hath 
this  Ufe ;  and  therefore  they  pronounce  too  bold- 
ly of  all  in  general.  For  it  is  manifeft  to  Sight, 
that  the  fork'd-tail  Kite,  by  turning  her  Train 
fideways,  elevating  one  Horn,  and  depreffing  the 
other,  turns  her  whole  Body.  And  doubtlefs 
the  Tail  hath  the  fame  ufe  in  Swallows,  who 
make  the  moft  fudden  Turns  in  the  Air  of  any 
Birds,  and  have  all  of  them  forked  Tails. 

III.  As  for  Flfhes,  their  Bodies  are  long  and 
{lender,  or  elfe  thin,  for  the  moft  Part,  for  their 
more  eafy  fwimming,  and  dividing  the  Water. 
The  Wind-bladder,  wherewith  moft  of  them 
are  furnifhed,  ferves  to  poife  their  Bodies,  and 
keep  them  equiponderant  to  the  Water,  which 
elfe  wou'd  fink  to  the  Bottom,  and  lie  grove- 
ling there,  as  hath,  by  breaking  the  Bladder, 
been  experimentally  found.  By  the  Contradtion 
and  Dilatation  of  this  Bladder,  they  are  able 
to  taife,  or  fink  themfelves  at  Pleafure,  and 
continue  in  what  Depth  of  Water  they  lift. 
2  The 


Part  I.        //?  /^^  C  R  E  A  T  ro  N.  151 

The  Fins,  madeofgriftly  Spokes,  or  Rays,  con- 
neded  by  Membranes,  lb  that  they  may  be' con- 
traded,  or  extended  iike  Womens  Fans,  and  fur- 
niflied  with  Mufcles  for  Motion,  ferve  partly 
for  Progreffion,  but  chiefly  to  hold  the  Body  up- 
right; which  appears  in  that  when  they  are  cut 
off,  it  wavers  to  and  fro,  and  fo  foon  as  the  Fifh . 
dies,  the  Belly  turns  upwards.  The  great 
Strength  by  which  Fifhes  dart  themfelves  for- 
*  ward  with  incredible  Celerity,  like  an  Arrow 
out  of  a  Bow,  lies  in  their  Tails,  their  Fins, 
mean  time,  left  they  (hould  retard  their  Motion, 
being  held  clofe  to  their  Bodies.  And  therefore 
almoft  the  whole  Mufculous  Fleih  of  the  Body 
is  beftow'd  upon  the  Tail  and  Back,  and  ferves 
for  the  Vibration  of  the  Tail,  the  Heavlnefs  and 
Corpulency  of  the  Water  requiring  a  great  Force 
to  divide  it. 

In  Cetaceous  Fiflies,    or,    as  the  Latim  call 
them,  *  Sea-Beafts,  the  Tail  hath  a  dif-     ^ 
ferent  Pofition  from  what  it  hath  in  all     MarL^^ 
other  Fifties ;  for  whereas  in  thefe  it  is 
ereded  perpendicular  to  the  Horizon,  in  them  it 
lies  parallel  thereto,    partly  to  fupply  the  Ufeof 
the  hinder  Pair  of  Fins  which  thefe  Creatures 
lack,  and  partly  to  raife  and  deprefs  the  Body  at 
pleafure.     For  it  being  necelTary  that  thefe  Fifties 
ihould  frequently  afcend  to  the  Top  of  the  Water 
to  breathe,  or  take  in  and  let  out  the  Air,  it  was 
fitting  and  convenient  that  they  ftiould  be  pro- 
vided with  an  Organ  to  facilitate   their  Afcent 
and  Defcent  as  they  had  Occafion.     And  as  for 
their  turning  of  their  Bodies  m  the  Water,   they 

L  4  muft 


152      Tie  Wisdom  of  GOD    Partit 

muft  perform  that  as  Birds  do,  by  the  Motion  of 
one  of  their  Fins,  while  the  other  is  quiefcent. 
It  is  no  lefs  remarkable  in  them,  that  their  whole 
Body  is  incompafied  round  with  a  copious  Fat, 
which  our  Fifhermen  call  the  Bhibber,  of  a  great 
Thicknefs ;  which  ferves  partly  to  poife  their 
Bodies,  and  render  them  equiponderant  to  the 
Water  y  partly  to  keep  off  the  Water  at  fome 
Diftance  from  the  Blood,  the  immediate  Con- 
tadt  whereof  would  be  apt  to  chill  it ;  and  part- 
ly alfo  for  the  fame  Ufe  that  Clothes  ferve  us, 
to  keep  the  Fi(h  warm,  by  refleding  the  hot 
Steams  of  the  Body,  and  fo  redoubling  the  Heat, 
as  we  have  before-noted.  For  we  fee,  by  Ex- 
perience, that  fat  Bodies  are  nothing  near  fo 
fenfible  of  the  Impreffions  of  Cold  as  lean.  And 
I  have  obferved  fat  Hogs  to  have  lain  abroad  in 
the  open  Air,  upon  the  cold  Ground,  in  Winter 
Nights  ;  whereas  the  lean  Ones  have  been  glad 
to  creep  into  their  Cotes,  and  lie  upon  Heaps  to 
keep  themfelves  warm. 

I  might  here  take  Notice  of  thofe  Amphibious 
Creatures,  which  w^e  may  call  Aquatic  Quadru- 
peds (though  one  of  them  there  is  that  hath  but 
two  Feet,  viz.  the  Maimti,  or  Sea-Cow)  the 
Beaver^  the  Otter ^  the  Phoca^  or  Sea-Calf,  the 
Water-Rat^  and  the  F;7?g*,  the  Toes  of  whofe 
Feet  are  joined  by  Membranes,  as  in  Water- 
Fowls,  for  fwirnming  5  and  who  have  very  fmall 
Ears,  and  Ear-holes,  as  rhe  Cetaceous  Fifhes 
have,  for  hearing  in  the  Water. 

To  this  Head  belongs  the  adapting    of  the 

Parts  that  miniiter  to  Generation   in  the  Sexes 

2  one 


Part  L        in  the  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  153 

one  to  another ;  and  in  Creatures  that  nourifli 
their  Young  with  Milk,  the  Nipples  of  the 
Breaft  to  the  Mouth  and  Organs  of  Sudion  ; 
which  he  muft  needs  be  wilfully  blind  and  void 
of  Senfe,  that  either  difcerns  not,  or  denies  to 
be  intended  and  made  one  for  the  other.  That 
the  Nipples  fhould  be  made  fpungy,  and  with 
fuch  Perforations,  as  to  admit  Paffage  to  the 
Milk  when  drawn,  otherwife  to  retain  it  j  and 
*  the  Teeth  of  the  Young  either  not  fprung,  or  fo 
foft  and  tender,  as  not  to  hurt  the  Nipples  of  the 
Dam,  are  Effeds  and  Arguments  of  Providence 
and  Defign. 

A  more  full  Defcription  of  the  Breafts  and 
Nipples  I  meet  with,  in  a  Book  of  that  ingenious 
Anatomift  and  Phyfician,  Antonhts  Niick^  enti- 
tled, Ademgrafhia  Curiofa^  cap.  2.  He  makes 
the  Breafts  to  be  nothing  but  Glandules  of  that 
Sort  they  call  Conglomerated^  made  up  of  an  infi- 
nite Number  of  little  Knots,  or  Kernels,  each 
whereof  has  its  excretory  Veffel,  or  Lactiferous 
Dudt  \  three,  or  four,  or  five  of  thefe  prefently 
meet,  and  join  into  one  fmall  Trunk,  in  like' 
Manner  do  the  adjacent  Glandules  meet  and  u- 
nite  ;  feveral  of  thefe  leflfer  Trunks,  or  Branches, 
concurring,  make  up  an  excretory  Veffel  of  a 
notable  Bignefs,  like  to  that  of  the  Pajtcreas^ 
but  not  fo  long,  yet  fufficiently  large,  to  receive 
and  retain  a  good  Quantity  of  Milk  ;  whjch  be- 
fore it  enters  the  Nipple,  is  again  contracted, 
and  ftraitned  to  that  Degree,  that  it  will  fcarce 
admit  a  fmall  Bridle.  Who  nov/  can  be  fo  im- 
pudent as  to  deny,  that  all  this  was  contrived  and 

defigncd 


154     "n^e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  L 

defigned  purpofely  to  retain  the  Milk,  that  it 
fhould  not  flow  out  of  it  felf,  but  eafily  be  drawn 
out  by  PrelTure  and  Sudion ;  or  to  affirm  that 
this  fell  out  accidentally,  than  which  there  could 
not  have  been  a  more  ingenious  Contrivance  for 
the  Ufe  to  which  it  is  employed,  invented  by  the 
Wit  of  Man? 

To  this  Head  of  the  Fitnefs  of  the  Parts  of 
the  Body  to  the  Creature's  Nature,  and  Manner 
of  Living,  belongs  that  Obfervation  oi  Arijiotle^ 
i:Sov  opviQoev  QdoL  /Lch  yji}Ji-\(jcvo')^aL  aatpKOCpxyx  ircivra. 
Such  Birds  as  have"  crooked  Beaks  and  Talons, 
are  all  Carnivorous;  and  fo  of  Quadrupeds, 
aap^ccpo^ovTct,  Caniivora  omnia.  All  that  have 
Serrate  Teeth,  are  Carnivorous,  This  Obferva-. 
tion  holds  true  concerning  all  European  Birds ; 
but  I  know  not  but  that  Parrots  may  be  an  Ex- 
ception to  it.  Yet  it  is  remarkable,  that  fuch 
Birds  as  are  Carnivorous  have  no  Gizzard,  or 
Mufculous,  but  a  Membranous  Stomach, ,  that 
Kind  of  Food  needing  no  fuch  Grinding,  or  Com- 
minution as  Seeds  do,  but  being  torn  into  Strings, 
orfmall  Flakes,  by  the  Beak,  may  be  eafily  con- 
coded  by  a  Membranous  Stomach. 

To  the  Fitnefs  of  all  the  Parts  and  Members 
of  Animals,  to  their  refpedive  Ufes,  may  alfo 
be  referred  another  Obfervation  of  the  fame 
Arijiotle^  Udvra.  rd  ?««,  apriai;  i^n  TrS'a;.  All 
Animals  have  even  Feet,  not  more  on  one  Side 
than  another;  which,  if  they  had,  would  ei- 
ther hinder  their  walking,  or  hang  by  not  on- 
ly ufelefs,  but  alfo  burthenfome.  For  though 
a  Creature  might  make  a  limping  Shift  to  hop, 

fuppofe 


Part  I.       in  /^^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  155 

fuppofe  with  three  Feet,  yet  nothing  fo  conve- 
niently or  fteddily  to  walk  or  run,  or  indeed  to 
ftand  ;  fo  that  we  fee  Nature  hath  made  choice 
of  what  is  moft  fit,  proper,  and  ufeful :  They 
have  alfo  not  only  an  even  Number  of  Feet,  an- 
fwering  by  Pairs  one  to  another,  which  is  as  well 
decent  as  convenient,  but  thofe  too  of  an  equal 
Length,  I  mean,  the  feveral  Pairs ;  whereas  were 
thofe  on  one  fide  longer  than  they  on  the  other, 
?t  would  have  caus'd  an  inconvenient  halting  or 
limping  in  their  going. 

I  iliall  mention  but  one  more  Obfervation  of 
Ariftotle^  that  is,  Xitrwlv  fjJ^vov  bcS^V,  there  is  no 
Creature  only  volatile,  or  no  flying  Animal,  but 
hath  Feet  as  well  as  Wings,  a  Power  of  walking 
or  creeping  upon  the  Earth,  becaufe  there  is  no 
Food,  or  at  leaft  not  fufficient  Food  for  them  to 
be  had  always  in  the  Air  ;  or  if  in  hot  Countries 
we  may  fuppofe  there  is,  the  Air  being  never 
without  Store  of  Infefts  flying  about  in  it,  yet 
could  fuch  Birds  take  no  Reft,  for  having  no 
Feet  they  could  not  pearch  upon  Trees  5  and  if 
they  fl^ould  alight  upon  the  Ground,  they  could 
by  no  means  raife  themfelves  any  more,  as  w^e 
fee  thofe  Birds  which  have  but  fhort  Feet,  as  the 
S^wift  and  Martinet ^  with  difficulty  do ;  befides, 
they  would  want  means  of  breeding,  having  no 
where  to  lay  their  Eggs,  to  fit,  hatch,  or  brood 
their  Young.  As  for  the  Story  of  the  Manucodi^ 
ata^  or  Bird  of  Paradijiy  which  in  the  former 
Age's  was  generally  receiv'd  and  accepted  for 
true,  even  by  the  Learned,  it  is  now  difcover'd 

to 


156      The  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

to  be  a  Fable,  and  rejedted  and  exploded  by  all 
Men,  thofe  Birds  being  well  krtown  to  have  Legs 
and  Feet  as  well  as  others,  and  thofe  not  (hort, 
fmall,  nor  feeble  ones,  but  fufficiently  great  and 
ftrong,  and  ann'd  with  crooked  Talons,  as  being 
the  Members  of  Birds  of  Prey. 

It  is  alfo  very  remarkable,  that  all  flying  Infedls 
Ihould  be  cover'd  with  flielly  Scales,  like  Armour, 
partly  to  fecure  them  from  external  Violence, 
from  Injuries  by  Blows  and  Preflures;  partly  to 
defend  their  tender  Mufcles  from  the  Heat  of  the 
Sun-beams,  which  would  be  apt  to  parch  and 
dry  them  up,  being  of  fmall  Bulk;  partly  alfo 
to  reftrain  the  Spirits,  and  to  prevent  their  Eva- 
poration. 

I  fhall  now  add  another  Inflance  of  the  Wif- 
dom  of  Nature,  or  rather  the  God  of  Nature,  in 
adapting  the  Parts  of  the  fame  Animal  one  to  a- 
nother,  and  that  is,  the  proportioning  the  Length 
of  the  Neck  to  that  of  the  Legs.  For  feeing  ter- 
reflrial  Animals,  as  well  Birds  as  Quadrupeds, 
are  endu'd  with  Legs,  upon  which  they  ftand, 
and  wherewith  they  transfer  themfelves  from 
Place  to  Place  to  gather  their  Food,  and  for  o- 
ther  Conveniences  of  Life,  and  fo  the  Trunk  of 
their  Body  muft  needs  be  elevated  above  the  Su- 
perficies of  the  Earth,  fo  that  they  could  not  con- 
veniently either  gather  their  Food  or  Drink  if 
they  wanted  a  Neck,  therefore  Nature  hath  not 
only  furnifli'd  them  therewith,  but  with  fuch  an 
one  as  is  commenfurable  to  their  Legs,  except 
here  the  Elephant,  which  hath  indeed  a  fliorc 

Neck, 


Part  L        in  the  Ckv,  ATio-^.  157 

Neck,  for  the  exceflive  Weight  of  his  Head  and 
Teeth,  which  to  a  long  Neck  would  have  been 
infupportable,  but  is  provided  with  a  Trunk, 
wherewith,  as  with  a  Hand,  he  takes  up  his  Food 
and  Drink,  and  brings  it  to  his  Mouth.  I  lay, 
the  Necks  of  Birds  and  Quadrupeds  are  com- 
menfurate  to  their  Legs,  fo  that  they  which  have 
'long  Legs  have  long  Necks,  and  they  that  have 
(liort  Legs,  fhort  ones,  as  is  feen  in  the  Crocodile^ 
and  all  Lizards ;  and  thofe  that  have  no  Legs,  as 
they  do  not  want  Necks,  fo  neither  have  they 
any,  as  Pipes,  This  Equality  between  the  Length 
of  the  Legs  and  Neck,  is  efpecially  ktn  in  Beafts 
that  feed  conftantly  upon  Grafs,  whofe  Necks 
and  Legs  are  always  very  near  equal ;  very  near, 
I  fay,  becaufe  the  Neck  muft  neceflarily  have 
fome  Advantage,  in  that  it  cannot  hang  perpen- 
dicularly down,  but  muft  incline  a  little;  more- 
over, becaufe  this  Sort  of  Creatures  muft  needs 
hold  their  Heads  down  in  an  inclining  Pofture 
for  a  confiderable  time  together,  which  would 
be  very  laborious  and  painful  for  the  Mufcles, 
therefore  on  each  fide  the  Ridge  of  the  Vertebres 
of  the  Neck  Nature  hath  placed  an  STcy^'p^jnc, 
or  nervous  Ligament,  of  a  great  thicknefs  and 
ftrength,  apt  to  ftretch,  and  (brink  again,  as  need 
rec^ires,  and  void  of  Senfe,  extending  from  the 
Head  ( to  which,  and  the  next  Vertebres  of  the 
Neck,  it  is  faften'd  at  that  end)  to  the  middle 
Vertebres  of  the  Back  (to  which  it  is  knit  at  the 
other)  to  aflift  them  to  fupport  the  Head  in  that 
Pofture  ;  which  Apmeurojis  is  taken  notice  of  by 

the 


158       7/jeWisi>oM  of  GOD    Parti. 

the  Vulgar  by  the  Name  of  Fixfax^  or  Pack-wax^ 
or  White-leather.  It  is  alfo  very  obfervable  in 
Fowls  that  wade  in  the  Water,  which  having 
long  Legs,  have  alfo  Necks  anfwerably  long  5 
only  in  thefe  too  there  is  an  Exception,  exceed- 
ing worthy  to  be  noted  3  for  fome  Water-Fowl, 
which  are  Palmipeds^  or  whole-footed,  have  very 
long  Necks,  and  yet  but  fliort  Legs,  as  Swans 
and  GeeJ'e^  and  fome  Indian  Birds;  wherein  we 
may  obfeTve  the  admirable  Providence  of  Na- 
ture. For  fuch  Birds  as  were  to  fearch  and  ga- 
ther their  Food,  whether  Herbs  or  Infedls,  in  the 
bottom  of  Pools  and  deep  Waters,  have  long 
Necks  for  that  purpofe,  though  their  Legs,  as  is 
moil;  convenient  for  fwimming,  be  but  fhort; 
whereas  there  are  no  Land- Fowl  to  be  iztxi  with 
fhort  Legs  and  long  Necks,  but  ail  have  their 
Necks  in  Length  commenfurate  to  their  Legs. 
This  Inftance  is  the  more  confiderable,  becaufe 
the  Atheirts  ufual  Flam  will  not  here  help  them 
out  \  for  (fay  they)  there  were  many  Animals  of 
difproportionate  Parts  and  of  abfurd  and  uncouth 
Shapes  produced  at  iirft,  in  the  Infancy  of  the 
World,  but  becaufe  they  could  not  gather  th.eir 
Food,  or  perform  other  Fundions  neceflary  to 
maintain  Life,  they  foon  perifh'd,  and  were  loft 
again.  For  thefe  Birds  we  fee  can  gather  their 
Food  upon  Land  conveniently  enough  notwith- 
ftanding  the  Length  of  their  Necks.  For  Ex- 
ample, Geefe  graze  upon  Comm^ons,  and  can 
feed  themfelves  fat  upon  Land ;  yet  is  there  not 
one  Land  Bird  which  hath  its  Neck  thus  difpro- 
portionate to  its  LegSj  nor  one  Water  one  neither, 

but 


Part  I.       in  the  C?.^  ATI Q n.  i 5 9 

but  fuch  as  are  deftin'd  by  Nature  in  fuch  man- 
ner as  we  have  mention'd  to  fearch  and  gather 
their  Food ;  for  Nature  makes  not  a  long  Neck 
to  no  purpofe. 

Lajilyy  Another  Argument  of  Providence  and 
Council  relating  to  Animals,  is  the  various  Kinds 
of  Voices  the  fame  Animal  ufes  on  divers  Occa- 
iions,  and  to  different  Purpofes.     Hen  Birds,  for 
^Example,  have  a  peculiar  fort  of  Voice  when 
they  would  call  the  Male  3  which  is  fo  eminent 
in  ^ailsy  that  it  is  taken  notice  of  by  Men,  who 
by  counterfeitbig  tnis  Voice  with  a  Quail-Pipe, 
eafily  draw  the  Cocks  into  their  Snares.     The 
common  Hen,  all  the  while  flie  is  broody,  fits, 
and  leads  her  Chickens ,  ufes  a  Voice  which  we 
call  Clockings  another  ilie  employs  v/hen  fhe  calls 
her  Chickens  to  partake  of  any  Food  (he  hath 
found  for  them,  upon  hearing  whereof  they  fpee« 
dily  run  to  her ;  another  when  upon  fight  of  a 
Bird  of  Prey,  or  Apprehenfion  of  any  Danger, 
{he  would  fcare  them,  bidding  them  as  it  were  to 
{hift  for  themfelves,  whereupon  they  fpeedily  run 
away,  and  feek  Shelter  among  Bufhes,  or  in  the 
thick  Grafs,  or  elfewhere  difperfmg  themfelves 
far  and  wide.     Thefe  Adions  do  indeed  neceffa- 
rily  infer  Knowledge  and  Intention  of,  and  Di- 
redion  to  the  Ends  and  Ufes  to  which  they  ferve, 
not  in  the  Birds  themfelves,  but  in  a  fuperior 
Agent,  who  hath  put  an  Inftindt  in  them  of  ufing 
fuch  a  Voice  upon  fuch  an  Occafion ;  and  in  the 
Young,  of  doing  that  upon  hearing  of  it,  which 
by  Providence  was^  intended.     Other  Voices  llie 
hath  when  angry,  when  (he  hath  laid  an  Egg, 

whca 


i6o  T/jeWisT>ou  of  GOD  Parti 
when  in  Pain  or  great  Fear,  all  fignificant;  which 
may  more  eafily  be  accounted  for,  as  being  EfFedts 
of  the  feveral  Paffions  of  Anger,  Grief,  Fear, 
Joy  ;  which  yet  are  all  argumentative  of  Provi- 
dence, intending  their  feveral  Significations  and 
Ufes. 

I  might  alfd  inftance  in  Quadrupeds,  fome  of 
which  have  as  great  a  Diverfity  of  Voices  as  Hens 
themfelves,  and  all  of  them  fignificant ;  for  Ex- 
ample, that  common  domeftick  Animal  the  Caty 
as  is  obvious  to  every  one  to  obferve,  and  there- 
fore I  (hall  not  fpend  Time  to  mention  Particu- 
lars. 

ObjeB,  But  againft  the  Ufes  of  feveral  Bodies 
I  have  inftanc^d  in  that  refer  to  Man,  it  may  be 
objedVed,  that  thefe  Ufes  were  not  defign'd  by 
Nature  in  the  Formation  of  the  Things,  but  that 
the  Things  were  by  the  Wit  of  Man  accommo- 
dated to  thofe  Ufes. 

To  which  I  anfwer,  with  Dr.  More^  in  the 
Appendix  to  his  Antidote  agaijiji  Atheifm^  that 
the  feveral  ufeful  Dependencies  of  this  Kind, 
(viz,  of  St07ies,  'timber y  and  Metals^  for  build- 
ing of  Houfes  or  Ships,  the  Magnet  for. Na- 
vigation, &c.  Fire  for  melting  of  Metals,  and 
forging  of  Inftruments  for  the  Purpofes  menti- 
oned) we  only  find,  not  make  them.  For  whe- 
ther we  think  of  it  or  no,  it  is,  for  Example, 
manifeft,  that  Fuel  is  good  to  continue  Fire, 
and  Fire  to  melt  Metals,  and  Metals  to  make 
Inftruments  to  build  Ships  and  Houfes,  and  fo 
on.     Wherefore  it  being   true,    that   there   is 

fuch 


Part  I.       //^  /^^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  1 6 1 

fuch  a  fubordinate  Ufefulnefs  in  the  Things 
themfelves  that  are  made  to  our  Hand,  it  is  but 
Reafon  in  us  to  impute  it  to  fuch  a  Caufe,  as  was 
aware  of  the  Ufefulnefs  and  Serviceablenefs  of 
its  own  Works.  To  which  I  (hall  add,  that 
fince  we  find  Materials  fo  fit  to  ferve  all  the  Ne- 
ceflities  and  Conveniencies,  and  to  exerc.ife  and 
employ  the  Wit  and  Induftry  of  an  intelligent 
and  adive  Being ;  and  fince  there  is  fuch  an  one 
*  created  that  is  endued  with  Skill  and  Ability  to 
ufc  them,  and  which  by  their  Help  is  enabled  to 
rule  over  and  fubdue  all  inferior  Creatures,  but 
without  them  had  been  left  necefTitous,  help- 
lefs,  and  obnoxious  to  Injuries  above  any  other; 
and  fince  the  Omnifcient  Creator  could  not  but 
know  all  the  Ufes,  to  which  they  might  and 
would  be  employed  by  Man,  to  them  that  ac- 
knowledge the  Being  of  a  Deity  ;  it  is  little  lefs 
than  a  Demonftration,  that  they  were  created 
intentionally,  I  do  not  fay  only,  for  thofe 
Ufes. 

Methinks,  by  all  this  Provifion  for  the  Ufe 
and  Service  of  Man,  the  Almighty  interpreta- 
tively  fpeaks  to  him  in  this  Manner:  1  have 
now  placed  thee  in  a  fpacious  and  well-furnifh'd 
World ;  I  have  endued  thee  with  an  Ability  of 
underftanding  what  is  beautiful  and  proportion- 
able, and  have  made  that  which  is  fo,  agree- 
able and  delightful  to  thee;  I  have  provided 
thee  with  Materials  whereon  to  exercife  and 
employ  thy  Art  and  Strength  ;  I  have  given 
thee  an  excellent  Jnftrument,  the  Hand,  ac- 
commodated to  make  ufe  of  them  all ;    I  have 

M  .  diftin- 


i62      7^^  Wisdom  of  GOD      Part  L 

diftinguiflied  the  Earth  into  Hills  and  Vallies^ 
and  Plains,  and  Meadows,  and  Woods ;  all  thefe 
Parts,    capable  of  Culture  and  Improvement  by 
thy  Induftry  ;     I  have  committed  to  thee  for 
thy  Affiftance  in  thy  Labours  of  Plowing,    and 
Carrying,   and  Drawing,  '  and  Travel,  the  labo- 
rious Ox,    the  patient  Afs^    and  the  ftrong  and 
ferviceable  Horfe ;    I  have  created  a  Multitude 
of  Seeds  for  thee  to  make  Choice  out  of  them, 
of  what  is  moft  pleafant  to  thy  Tafte,   and  of 
moft  whokfome  and  plentiful  Nourifhment ;  I 
have  alfo  made  great  Variety  of  Trees,  bearing 
Fruit  both  for  Food  and  Phyfick,  thofe  too  capa- 
ble of  being  meliorated  and  improved  by  Tranf- 
plantation,  Stercoration,  Incifion,  Pruning,  Wa- 
tering, and  other  Arts  and  Devices.     Till  and 
manure  thy  Fields,    fow  them  with  thy  Seeds ; 
extirpate  noxious  and  unprofitable  Herbs ;  guard 
them  from  thelnvafion  and  Spoil  of  Beafts;  clear 
and  fence  in  thy  Meadows  and  Paftures ;  drefs 
and  prune  thy  Vines,    and  fo  rank  and  difpofe 
them  as  is  moft  fuitable  to  the  Climate ;  plant 
thee  Orchards ,  with  all  Sorts  of  Fruit-Trees,  in 
fuch  Order  as  may  be  moft  beautiful  to  the  Eye, 
and  moft  comprehenfive  of  Plants ;   Gardens  for 
culinary  Herbs,     and  all  Kinds  of   Salleting  5 
for  delectable  Flov^ers,    to  gratify  the  Eye  with 
their  agreeable  Colours  and  Figures,    and  thy 
Scent  with  their  fragrant  Odours ;  for  Odorife- 
rous and  Ever-greert    Shrubs    and  Suffrutices ; 
for  Exotick  and  Medicinal  Plants  of  all  Sorts  j 
and  difpofe  them  in  that  comely  Order,    as  may 
be  both  pleafant  to  behold,  and  commodious  for 
I  Accefs* 


Parti.       in  //6^  Creation.  163 

Accefs.     I  have  furnifhed  thee  with  all  Materials 
for  Building,  as  Stone,    and  Timber,  and  Slate, 
and  Linne,    and  Clay,    and  Earth,    whereof  to 
make    Bricks  and  Tiles  5    deck   and  befpangle 
the  Country  with  Houfes  and  Villages  conve- 
nient for  thy  Habitation,    provided  with   Out- 
houfes  and  Stables  for  the  harbouring  and  fhel- 
ter  of  thy  Cattle,   with  Barns  and  Granaries  for 
the  Reception,  and  Cuftody,  and  ftoring  up  thy 
*  Corn  and  Fruits.      I  have  made  thee  a  fociablc 
Creature,    Zci'oi'  7ro^m?tci/,    for  the  Improvement 
of  thy  Underftanding  by  Conference,  and  Com- 
munication  of  Obfervations  and  Experiments; 
for  mutual  Help,    and  Afliftance,    and  Defence ; 
build  thee  large  Towns  and  Cities  with  ftreight 
and  well-pav'd  Streets,    and    elegant  Rows  of 
Houfes,    adorn'd  with  magnificent  Temples  for 
my  Honour  and  Worship,    with  beautiful  Pala- 
ces for  thy  Princes  and  Grandees,    with  jftately 
Halls  for  publick  Meetings  of  the  Citizens  and 
their  feveral  Companies,   and  the  Seffions  of  the 
Court  of  Judicature ;    befides  publick  Portico's 
and  Aqu^dufts.     I  have  implanted  in  thy  Na- 
ture a  Defire  of  feeing  ftrange  and  foreign,  and 
finding  out  unknown  Countries,    for  the  Im- 
provement,   and  Advance  of  thy  Knowledge  in 
Geography^    by  obferving  the  Bays,    and  Creeks, 
and  Havens,    and  Promontories,   the  Out-lets  of 
Rivers,    the  Situation  of  the  Maritime  Towns 
and  Cities,    the  Longitude    and  Latitude,    ^c. 
of'thofe  Places:    In  Politicks^    by  noting  their 
Government,    their  Manners,    Laws,    and  Cu- 
ftoms,    their  Diet  and  Medicines,    their  Trades 

M  2  .  and 


164  7%eWisDouof  GOD  Parti. 
and  Manufaftures,  their  Houfes  and  Buildings, 
their  Exercifes  and  Sports,  &c.  In  Phyfiology^ 
or  Natural  Hiftory,  by  fearching  out  their  Na- 
tural Rarities,  the  Produdlions  both  of  Land 
and  Water;  what  Species  of  Animals,  Plants, 
and  Minerals,  of  Fruits  and  Drugs  are  to  be 
found  here,  what  Commodities  for  Bartering 
and  PermutatioUj  whereby  thou  mayeft  be  ena- 
bled to  make  large  Additions  to  Natural  Hiftory, 
to  advance  thofe  other  Sciences,  and  to  benefit 
and  enrich  thy  Country  by  Increafe  of  its  Trade 
and  Merchandize.  I  have  given  thee  Timber 
and  Iron  to  build  the  Hulls  of  Ships,  tall  Trees 
for  Mafts,  Flax  and  Hemp  for  Sails,  Cables, 
and  Cordage,  for  Rigging.  I  have  armed  thee 
with  Courage  and  Hardinefs  to  attempt  the  Seas, 
and  traverfe  the  fpacious  Plains  of  that  liquid 
Element.  I  have  affifted  thee  with  a  Compafs, 
to  direft  thy  Courfe  when  thou  {halt  be  out  of  all 
Ken  of  Land,  and  have  nothing  in  View  but  Sky 
and  Water.  Go  thither  for  the  Purpofes  before-- 
mentioned,  and  bring  Home  what  may  be  ufe- 
ful  and  beneficial  to  thy  Country  in  general,  or 
thy  felf  in  particular. 

I  perfuade  my  felf,  that  the  bountiful  and 
gracious  Author  of  Man's  Being  and  Faculties, 
and  all  Things  elfe,  delights  in  the  Beauty  of 
his  Creation,  and  is  well  pleafed  with  the  In- 
duftry  of  Man,  in  adorning  the  Earth  with  beau- 
tiful Cities  and  Caftles ;  with  pleafant  Villages 
and  Country-Houfes ;  with  regular  Gardens  and 
Orchards,  and  Plantations  of  all  Sorts  of  Shrubs, 
I  and 


Parti.        in  the  Creation.  165 

and  Herbs,  and  Fruits,  for  Meat,   Medicine,  or 
moderate    Delight ;     with    (hady  Woods    and 
Groves,   and  Walks  fet  with  Rows  of  elegant 
Trees ;  with  Pa/lures  ckathed  with  Flocks,    and 
Valleys  cover  d  with  Corn,    and  Meadows  bur- 
thened  with  Grafs,    and  whatever  elfe  differen- 
ceth   a  civil  and  well-cultivated  Region,    from, 
a  barren  and  defolate  Wildernefs. 
,     If  a  Country  thus  planted  and  adorn'd,  thus 
polifhed  and  civilized,    thus  improved  to  the 
Height  by  all  Manner  of  Culture  for  the  Support 
and  Suftenance,    and  convenient  Entertainment 
of  innumerable  Multitudes  of  People,    be  not  to 
be  preferred  before  a  barbarous  and  inhofpitable 
Scythia,    without  Houfes,    without  Plantations, 
without  Corn-fields  or   Vineyards,    where  the 
roving  Hords  of  the  favage  and  truculent  Inhabi- 
tants transfer  themfelves  from  Place  to  Place  in 
Waggons,    as  they  can  find  Pafture  and  Forage 
for  their  Cattle,  and  live  upon  Milk,  and  Flefli 
roafted  in  the  Sun,  at  thePomels  of  their  Sad- 
dles ;  or  a  rude  and  unpoliflied  America,  peopled 
with  flothful  and  naked  Indians,  inftead  of  welU 
built  Houfes,  living  in  pitiful  Huts  and  Cabbins, 
made  of  Poles  fet  end- ways  ;   then  fu rely  the 
brute  Beafls  Condition,    and  Manner  of  Living, 
to  which,    what  we  have  mentioned  doth  near- 
ly approach,  is  to  be  efteem^d  better  than  Man's, 
and  Wit  and  Reafon  was  ir>  vain  beftowed  on 
him. 

M  3  Laflk, 


i66      neWisDOM  of  GOD     Part  L 

Laftly,  I  might  draw  an  Argument  of  the  ad- 
mirable Art  and  Skill  of  the  Creator  and  Com- 
pofer  of  them,  from  the  incredible  Smalnefs  of 
fome  of  thofe  natural  and  enlivened  Machines, 
the  Body  of  Animals. 

Any  Work  of  Art  of  extraordinary  Finenefs 
and  Subtlety,  be  it  but  a  fmall  Engine  or  Move- 
ment,   or  a  curious  carved  or  turned  Work  of 
Ivory  or  Metals,    fuch  as  thofe  Cups  turned  of 
Ivory  by  O/walJiis  Nerlinger  of  Suevia,    men- 
tion'd  by  Joa??,  Faber^  in  his  Expofitions  of  Rec-- 
chus  his  Mexican  Animals,    which  all  had  the 
perfecft  Form   of  Cups,    and  were  gilt  with  a 
Golden  Border  about  the  Brim,    of  that  wonder- 
ful Smalnefs,  that  F^^^r  himfelf  put  a  thoufand 
of  them  into  an  excavated  Pepper-corn ;    and 
when  he  was  weary  of  the  Work,  and  yet  had  not 
filled  the  Veflel,    his  Friend,  John  Carlm  Schad^ 
that  {hewed  them  him,    put  in  four  hundred 
more.     Any  fuch  Work,    I  fay,    is  beheld  with 
Admiration,  and  purchafed  at  a  great  Rate,  and 
treafured  up  as  a  fmgular  Rarity  in  the  MuJ'ceiim$ 
and  Cabinets  of  the  Curious,    and  as  fuch  is  one 
of  the    firft  Things  fhewed  to  T^ravellen  and 
Strangers.     But  what  are  thefe  for  their  Finenefs 
and  Parvity  (for  which  alone,  and  their  Figure, 
they  are  confiderable)  to  thofe  minute  Machines 
endued  with  Life  and  Motion,  I  mean,  the  Bo- 
dies of  thofe  A?iimalcida^  not  long  fince  difcover- 
ed  in  Pepper-water,    by  Mr.  Leuenboek,  of  Delft 
in  Holland,    (whofe  Obfervations  were  confirm- 
ed and  improved  by  our  Learned  and  Worthy 

Country- 


Part  L       in  /)6^  C  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  1 67 

Country-man,    Dr.  Robert  Hook)  who  tells  us, 
That  fome  of  his  Friends  (whofe  Teftimonials 
he  defired),     did  affirm.     That  they   had  feen 
loooo,    others  30000,    others  45000  little  liv- 
ing Creatures,    in  a  Quantity  of  Water  no  big- 
ger than  a  Grain  of  Millet ;   and  yet  he  made 
it  his  Requeft  to  them,  that  they  would  only  ju- 
ftify  (that  they  might  be  within  compiafs)  half 
♦  the  Number  that  they  believed  each  of  them 
faw  in  the  Water.     From  the  greateft  of  thefe 
Numbers  he  infers,    that  there  will  be  8280000 
of  thefe  living  Creatures  feen  in  one  Drop  of 
Water  j    which  Number  (faith  he)  I  can  with 
Truth  affirm,  I  have  difcerned.     This  (proceeds 
he)  doth  exceed  Belief:    But   I  do  affirm,  if  a 
large  Grain  of  Sand  were  broken  into  8000000  of 
equal  Parts,    one  of  thefe  would  not  exceed  the 
Bignefs  of  one  of  thofe  Creatures.      Dr.  Hook 
tells  us,    That  after  he  had  difcovered  vaft  Mul- 
titudes of  thofe  exceeding  fmall  Creatures  which 
Mn  Lmenhoek  had  defcribed,    upon  making  ufe 
of  other  Lights  and  GlaiTes,    he  not  only  magni- 
fied thofe  he  had  difcovered  to  a  very  great  Big^ 
nefs,  but  difcovered  many  other  forts  very  much 
fmaller  than  them  he  firft  faw,  and  fome  of  them 
fo  exceeding  fmall,    that  Millions  of  MillioriJ^ 
might  be  contained  in  one  Drop  of  Water.     If 
Fliny,  confidering  fuch  Infeds  as  were  known  to 
him,    and  thofe  were  none  but  what  Wjbre  vi- 
fible  to  the  naked  Eye,    was  moved  to  cry  our, 
That  the  Artifice  of  Nature  was  no  where  more 
confpicuous  than  in  thefe.     And  again,    In  hii, 

M  4  tarn 


i68      7%e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  L 

tarn  parvis  at  que  tarn  nullis  qua  ratio,  quanta  vis, 
quam  inextricabilis  perfeBio  ?  And  again,  Rerum 
natura  niifquam  magis  quam  in  miiiirnis  tota  eji, 
Hift.  Nat.  1.  1 1,  c.  I.  What  would  he  have  faid, 
if  he  had  feen  Animals  of  fo  ftupendous  Small- 
nefs,  as  I  have  mentioned  ?  How  would  he  have 
been  rapt  into  an  Extafie  of  Aftonifhment  and 
Admiration  ? 

Again :   If  confidering  the  Body  of  a  Gnat, 
(which  by  his  own  Confeffion  is  none  of  the 
leaft  of  Infefts)  he  could  make  fo  many  admi- 
ring Queries,    Where  hath  Nature  difpofed  fo  ma- 
ny Se77fe.s  in  a  Gnat  ?   TJhi  vijum  prcetendit  ?    Vbi 
gujiatum  applicavit  ?    Ubi  odoratum  injeruit  ?  Vbi 
*vero  truculent  am  ill  am  &  portione  maxim  am  vocem 
ingeneravit?    ^id  fubtilitate   pennas  adnexuitf 
Fralongavit  pedum  crura  ?  Difpofuit  jejunam  ca-- 
veam  uti  ahum  ?  Avidam  fanguinis  &  potijjimum 
humani  Jitim  accendit?    T'elum   verb  perfodiendo 
tergori  quo  fpiculavit  ingenio  ?  Atque  ut  in  capaci, 
cum  cerni  non  pojjit  exilitas,    it  a  reciproca  gemi- 
navit  arte,   ut  fodiendo  acuminatum  pariter  for- 
bendoque  fifulofum  effet.     Which  Words  fhould 
I  tranfla;te,    would  lofe  of  their  Emphafis   and 
Elegancy;    if,    I  fay,  he  could  make  fuch  Que- 
ries about  the  Members  of  a  Gnat,    what  may 
we  make,     and  what  would  he  in  all  likelihood 
have  made,    had  he  feen  thefe  incredibly  fmall 
living  Creatures  ?    How  would  he  have  admired 
the   immenfe  Subtilty  (as  he  phrafes  it)  of  their 
Parts  ?    For  to  ufe  Dr.  Hook's  Words  in  his  Mi^ 
crpfcopium,  p.  103.    If  thefe  Creatures  be  foex-^ 

feeding 


Parti.        in  iheCKEATiQ}^.  169 

ceeding  fmall,  what  muft  we  think  of  their 
Mufcles  and  other  Parts  ?  Certain  it  is,  that  the 
Mechanifm  by  which  Nature  performs  the  Muf- 
cular  Motion,  is  exceeding  fmall  and  curious, 
and  to  the  Performance  of  every  Mufcular  Mo- 
tion, in  greater  Animals  at  leaft,  there  are  not 
fewer  diftindt  Parts  concerned  than  many  Mil- 
lions of  Millions,  and  thefe  vifible  through  a  Mi- 
crofcope. 

Ufe.  Let  us  then  confider  the  Works  of  God, 
and  obferve  the  Operations  of  his  Hands:  Let 
us  take  notice  of,    and  admire  his  infinite  Wif- 
dom  and  Goodnefs  in  the  Formation  of  them : 
No  Creature  in  this  fublunary  World  is  capable 
of  fo  doing,    befides  Man,    and  yet  we  are  defi- 
cient herein :     We  content  ourfelves  with  the 
Knowledge  of  the  Tongues,    or  a  little  Skill  in 
Philology,    or  Hiflory  perhaps,    and  Antiquity, 
and  negled  that  which  to  me  feems  more  mate- 
rial,   I  mean,    Natural  Hiftory,    and  the  Works 
of  the  Creation :  I  do  not  difcommend  or  dero- 
gate from  thofe  other  Studies :    I  fhould  betray 
mine  own  Ignorance  and  Weaknefs  fhould  I  do 
fo ;  I  only  wifh  they  might  not  altogether  juflle 
out,  and  exclude  this.     I  wifh  that  this  might  be 
brought  in  Fafhion    among  us  j    I  wifli  Men 
would  be  fo  equal  and  civil,    as  not  to  difparage, 
deride,  and  vilifie  thofe  Studies  which  themfelves 
skill  not  of,  or  are  not  converfant  in ;   no  Knowr- 
ledge  can  be  more  pleafant  than  this,    none  that 
doth  fo  fatisfie  and  feed  the  Soul  ^    in  Compari- 

fon 


lyo     I'he  Wisdom  of  GOD    Parti. 

parifon  whereto  that  of  Words  and  Phrafes  feem 
to  me  infipid  and  jejune.  That  Learning  (faith 
a  wife  and  obfervant  Prelate)  which  confifts  only 
in  the  Form  and  Pedagogy  of  Arts,  or  the  criti- 
cal Notions  upon  Words  and  Phrafes,  hath  in  it 
this  intrinfical  Imperfection,  that  it  is  only  fo 
far  to  be  efteemed,  as  it  conduceth  to  the  Know- 
ledge of  Things,  being  in  it  felf  but  a  kind  of 
Pe(kntry,  apt  to  infed:  a  Man  with  fuch  odd 
Humours  of  Pride,  and  Affediation,  and  Curio- 
fity,  as  will  render  him  unfit  for  any  great  Em- 
ployment. Words  being  but  the  Images  and 
Matter,  to  be  wholly  given  up  to  the  Study  of 
thefe,  what  is  it  but  Pygmaliori^  Frenzy,  to  fall 
in  Love  with  a  Pidure  or  Image  ?  As  for  Ora- 
tory^ which  is  the  beft  Skill  about  Words,  that 
hath  by  fome  wife  Men  been  efteem'd,  but  a  vo- 
luntary Art,  like  to  Cookery,  which  fpoils 
wholefome  Meats,  and  helps  unwhojefome,  by 
the  Variety  of  Sauces,  ferving  more  to  the  Plea- 
fure  of  Tafte,  than  the  Health  of  the  Body. 

It  may  be  (for  ought  I  know,  and  as  fome 
Divines  have  thought)  part  of  our  Bufinefs 
and  Employment  in  Eternity,  to  contemplate 
the  Works  of  God,  and  to  give  him  the  Glory 
of  his  Wifdom,  Power,  and  Goodn.efs,  mani- 
fefted  in  the  Creation  of  them.  I  am  fure 
it  is  part  of  the  Bufxnefs  of  a  Sabbath-day,  and 
the  Sabbath  is  a  Type  of  that  Eternal  Reft ; 
for  the  Sabbath  feems  to  have  been  firft  infti- 
tuted  for  a  Commemoration  of  the  Works  of 

the 


Part  I.       in  the  Creation.  171 

the  Creation,  from  which  God  is  faid  to  have 
refted  upon  the  Seventh  Day. 

It  is  not  likely  that  Eternal  Life  (hall  be  a  tor- 
pid and  unadlive  State,  or  that  it  fhall  confift 
only  in  an  uninterrupted  and  endlefs  Ad:  of  Love; 
the  other  Faculties  ihall  be  employed  as  w^ell  as 
the  Will  in  Adions  fuitable  to  and  perfedive  of 
tjaeir  Natures;  efpecially  the  Underftanding,  the 
fupreme  Faculty  of  the  Soul,  which  chiefly  dif- 
ferenceth  us  from  brute  Beafts,  and  makes  us  ca- 
pable of  Virtue'  and  Vice,  of  Rewards  and  Pu- 
niihments,  fhall  be  bufy'd  and  employed  in  con- 
templating the  V^orks  of  God,  and  obferving 
the  divine  Art  and  Wifdom,  manifefted  in  the 
Structure  and  Compofition  of  them,  and  refledl- 
ing  upon  their  great  Architect  the  Praife  and 
Glory  due  to  him ;  then  fhall  we  clearly  fee, 
to  our  great  Satisfaction  and  Admiration,  the 
Ends  and  Ufes  of  thefe  things,  which  here  were 
either  too  fubtle  for  us  to  penetrate  and  difcover, 
or  too  remote  and  unacceiTible  for  us  to  come  to 
any  'diflindl  View  of,  viz,  the  Planets  and  fixed 
Stars,  thofe  illuflrious  Bodies,  whofe  Contents 
and  Inhabitants,  whofe  Stores  and  Furniture,  we 
have  here  fo  longing  a  Delire  to  know,  as  alfo 
their  mutual  Subferviency  to  each  other.  Now 
the  Mind  of  Man  being  not  capable  at  once  to 
advert  to  more  than  one  thing,  a  particular  View 
and  Examination  of  fuch  an  innumerable  Num- 
ber of  vaft  Bodies,  and  the  great  Multitude  of 
Species,  both  of  animate  and  inanimate  Beings, 

which 


172  T/je  Wisdom  of  GOD  Parti, 
which  each  of  them  contains,  will  afford  Mat- 
ter enough  to  exercife  and  employ  our  Minds,  I 
do  not  fay  to  all  Eternity,  but  to  many  Ages, 
ftiould  we  do  nothing  elfe. 

Let  it  not  fuffice  us  to  be  Book-learn'd,  to 
read  what  others  have  written,  and  to  take  upon 
Truft  more  Falfhood  than  Truth ;  but  let  us  our 
felves  examine  Things  as  we  have  Opportunity, 
and  converfe  with  Nature  as  well  as  Books.  Let 
us  endeavour  to  promote  and  increafe  this  Know- 
ledge, and  make  new  Difcoveries,  not  fo  much 
diftrufting  our  own  Parts,  or  defpairing  of  our 
own  Abilities,  as  to  think  that  our  Induftry  can 
add  nothing  to  the  Invention  of  our  Anceftors, 
or  correft  any  of  their  Miftakes.  Let  us  not 
think  that  the  Bounds  of  Science  are  fixed,  like 
Hercules's  Pillars,  and  infcrib'd  with  a  A^^  plus 
ultra ;  let  us  not  think  we  have  done  when  we 
have  learn'd  what  they  have  delivered  to  us  -,  the 
Treafures  of  Nature  are  inexhauftible ;  here  is 
Employment  enough  for  the  vafteft  Parts,  the 
moft  indefatigable  Induftries,  the  happieft  Op^ 
portunities,  the  moft  prolix  and  undiilurb'd  Va- 
cancies. Multa  'venientis  cevi  populus  ignota  nobis 
fciet :  Multa  jkculis  tunc  futuris^  cum  memaria 
nojiri  exoleverit  rejervanlur,  Pufilla  res  mundus 
ejl^  nifi  in  eo  quod  qucerat  omnis  mu7idus  habeat. 
Seneca  Nat.  Quaeft.  Lib.  7.  Cap.  3 1.  T^he  People 
of  the  next  Age  jh all  know  many  things  unknown  to 
us :  Many  are  refervdfor  Ages  then  to  come^  when 
we  fhall  be  quite  forgotten^  no  Memory  ofm  remain-^ 

ing. 


Part  I.       in  the  Creation.  173 

i?7g.  The  World  would  be  a  pitiful  fmall  thing  in- 
deedy  if  it  did  not  contain  enough  for  the  Enquiries 
of  the  ii;hole  W^orld.  Yet,  and  again,  Epijl,  64. 
Multum  adhuc  rejlat  Operis,  multimque  rejlabit^ 
nee  ulli  nato  poji  milk  fcecula  pracludetur  occafo 
aliquid  adhuc  adjiciendi.  Much  Work  fill  re^ 
tnains^  and  much  will  remain  5  neither  to  him  that 
fall  be  born  after  a  thoifand  Ages^  will  Matter  be 
wanting  for  neiv  Additiofis  to  what  hath  already 
been  invented.  Much  might  be  done  would  we 
but  endeavour,  and  nothing  is  infuperable  to 
Paiiis  and  Patience.  I  know  that  a  new  Study 
at  firft  feems  very  vaft,  intricate,  and  difficult ; 
but  after  a  little  Refolution  and  Progrefs,  after 
a  Man  becomes  a  little  acquainted,  as  I  may  fo 
fay,  with  it,  his  Underftanding  is  wonderfully 
cleared  up  and  enlarged,  the  Difficulties  vanifh, 
and  the  thing  grows  eafy  and  familiar.  And  for 
our  Encouragement  in  this  Study,  obferve  what 
the  Pfalmift  faith,  Ffal  cxi.  2.  T&  Works  of  the 
Lord  are  great ^  fought  out  of  all  them  that  have 
Pleafure  therein.  Which  tho'  it  be  principally 
fpoken  of  the  Works  of  Providence,  yet  may  as 
well  be  verify'd  of  the  Works  of  the  Creation. 
I  am  forry  to  fee  fo  little  Account  made  of 
real  experimental  Philofophy  in  this 
*  Univerfity,  and  that  thofe  ingeni-  ^^helT^hffu- 
ous  Sciences  of  the  Mathematicks  thor  liv'd  at 
are  fo  much  negleded  by  us  j  and  the  firji  ^wH- 
therefore  do  earneilly  exhort  thofe  ^^"^'^J^^^^- 
that  are  young,  efpecially  Gentlemen,  to  fet 
upon  thefe  Studies  j  ^  they  may  poffibly  invent 

fomething 


174      TieWisDoM  of  GOD    Parti. 

fomething  of  eminent  Ufe  and  Advantage  to  the 
World  'y  and  one  fuch  Difcovery  would  abun- 
dantly compenfate  the  Expence  and  Travel  of 
one  Man's  v^hole  Life.  Hov^ever,  it  is  enough 
to  maintain  and  continue  what  is  already  invent- 
ed ;  neither  do  I  fee  what  more  ingenious  and 
manly  Employment  they  can  purfue,  tending 
more  to  the  Satisfadion  of  their  own  Minds,  and 
the  lUuftration  of  the  Glory  of  God,  for  he  is 
wonderful  in  all  his  Works. 

But  I  would  not  have  any  Man  crofs  his  na- 
tural Genius  or  Inclinations,  or  undertake  fuch 
Methods  of  Study  as  his  Parts  arc  not  fitted  to, 
or  not  ferve  thofe  Ends  to  which  his  Friends, 
upon  mature  Deliberation,  have  defign'd  him; 
but  thofe  who  do  abound  with  Leifure,  or  who 
have  a  natural  Propenfion  and  Genius  inclining 
them  thereto ;  or  thofe  who  by  reafon  of  the 
Strength  and  Greatnefs  of  their  Parts,  are  able 
to  compafs  and  comprehend  the  whole  Latitude 
of  Learning. 

Neither  yet  need  thofe  who  are  defign'd  to 
Divinity  it  felf  fear  to  look  into  thefe  Studies, 
or  think  they  will  engrofs  their  whole  Time, 
and  that  no  confiderable  Progrefs  can  be  made 
therein,  unlefs  Men  lay  afide  and  negled:  their 
ordinary  Callings  and  neceffary  Employments. 
No  fuch  Matter.  Our  Life  is  long  enough, 
and  we  might  find  Time  enough  did  we  huf- 
band  it  well :  Vitam  non  accepimns  brevem^  fed 

fccimuSy 


Parti.        in  the  CR^ATio't^.  175 

JecimuSy  nee  mopes  ejus,  fed  frodigi  fiimm^  as  *S^- 
neca  faith,  We  have  not  received  a  fbort  Life^  but 
have  made  it  Jo  -,  neither  do  we  want  Time^  but  are 
prodigal  of  it.     And  did  bui  young  Men  fill  up 
that  Time  with  thefe  Studies,  which  lies  upoa 
their  Hands,  which  they  are  incumbered  with, 
and  troubled  how  to  pafs  away,  much  might  be 
done  even  fo.     I  do  not  fee  but  the  Study  of  true 
Phyfiology  may  be  juftly  accounted  a  proper,  or 
ifpoTmi^ix  Preparative  to  Divinity.    But  to  leave 
that,  it  is  a  generally  receiv'd  Opinion,  that  all 
this  vifible  World  was  created  for  Man ;  that 
Man  is  the  End  of  the  Creation ;   as  if  there 
were  no  other  End  of  any  Creature,  but  fome 
way  or  other  to  be  ferviceable  to  Man.     This 
Opinion  is  as  old  as  Tully ;  for,  faith  he,  in  his 
Second  Book,  De  Nat,  Deorum,     Principio  ipfe 
Mundus  Deorum    hominumque  caufd  fa^us  eji : 
quceque  in  eo  funt  omnia  ea  parata  ad  fruBum 
hominum  &  inventa  funt.     But  tho'  this  be  vul- 
garly receiv'd,  yet  wife  Men  now-a-days  think 
otherwife.  Dr.  More  affirms,  *  That 
Creatures  are  made  to  enjoy  themlelves         *  Antidot. 
as  well  as  to  Jerve  us ;  ana  that  tt  ts  a     ^  „ 
grofs  piece  of  Ignorance  and  Rujiicity 
to  think  otherwife.     And  in  another  Place:  This 
comes  only  out  of  Pride  and  Ignorance^  or  a  haughty 
Prefhnption  \  becaufe  we  are  encouraged  to  believe 
that  in  fome  Senfe  all  Things  are  made  for  Man^ 
therefore  to  think  that  they  are  not  at  all  made  for 
themfelves.     But  he  that  pro?iounceth  this^  is  igfio- 
rani  of  the  Nature  of  Man^  and  the  Knowledge  of 

Things : 


176      TieWisboM  of  GOD     Parti. 

Things  :  For  if  a  good  Man  be  merciful  to  his 
Beafiy  then  furely  a  good  God  is  bountiful  and  be- 
nign^ and  takes  Pleafure  that  all  his  Creatures  en- 
joy themfeheSy  that  have  Life  and  Senfe^  and  are 
capable  of  Enjoyment. 

Thofe  Philofophers  indeed  who  hold  Man  to 
be  the  only  Creature  in  this  fublunary  World 
endu'd  with  Senfe  and  Perception,  and  that  all 
other  Animals  are  mere  Machines  or  Puppets, 
have  fome  reafon  to  think  that  all  Things  here 
below  were  made  for  Man.  But  this  Opinion 
feems  to  me  too  mean,  and  unworthy  the  Ma- 
jefty,  Wifdom,  and  Power  of  God ;  nor  can  it 
well  confift  with  his  Veracity,  inftead  of  a  Mul- 
titude of  noble  Creatures,  endu'd  with  Life  and 
Senfe,  and  fpontaneous  Motion,  as  all  Mankind 
till  of  late  Years  believ'd,  and  none  ever  doubted 
of  (fo  that  it  feems  we  are  naturally  made  to 
think  fo)  to  have  ftock'd  the  Earth  with  divers 
Sets  of  Automata^  without  all  Senfe  and  Percep- 
tion, being  wholly  afted  from  without,  by  the 
Impulfe  of  external  Objedts. 

But  be  this  fo,  there  are  infinite  other  Crea- 
tures without  this  Earth,  which  no  confiderate 
Man  can  think  were  made  only  for  Man,  and 
have  no  other  Ufe.  For  my  part,  I  cannot  be- 
lieve that  all  Things  in  the  World  were  fo  made 
for  Man,  that  they  have  no  other  Ufe. 

For 


Part  I.        in  the  CviEATio n.  177 

For  it  feems  to  me  highly  abfurd  and  unrea- 
fonable,  to  think  that  Bodies  of  fuch  vaft  Mag- 
nitude as  the  fix'd  Stars,  were  only  made  to 
twinkle  to  us,  nay,  a  Multitude  of  them  there 
are,  that  do  not  fo  much  as  twinkle,  being  ei- 
ther by  reafon  of  their  Diftance,  or  of  their 
Smalnefs,  altogether  invifible  to  the  naked  Eye, 
and  only  difcoverable  by  a  Telefcope ;  and  it  is 
likely,  perfeder  Telefcopes  than  we  yet  have, 
■jnay  bring  to  light  many  more;  and  who  knows, 
how  many  lie  out  of  the  Ken  of  the  beft  Tele- 
fcope that  can  poffibly  be  made  ?  And,  I*  be- 
lieve, there  are  many  Species  in  Nature,  even 
in  this  fublunary  World,  which  were  never  yet 
taken  Notice  of  by  Man,  and  confequently  of  no 
Ufe  to  him,  which  yet  we  are  not  to  think  were 
created  in  vain  ;  but  may  be  found  out  by,  and 
of  Ufe  to,  thofe  who  fliall  live  after  us  in  future 
Ages.  But  though  in  this  Senfe  it  be  not  true, 
th^t  all  Things  were  made  for  Man  5  yet,  thus 
far  it  is  that  all  the  Creatures  in  the  V/orld 
may  be  fome  way  or  other  Ufeful  to  us,  at  leaft 
to  Qxercife  our  Wits  and  Underftandings,  in  con-r 
fidering  and  contemplating  of  them,  and  fo  af- 
ford us  Subjed:  of  adjniring  and  glorifying  their 
and  our  Maker.  Seeing  then,  we  do  believe, 
and  alTert,  that  all  Things  were  in  fome  Senfe 
made  for  us,  we  are  thereby  oblig'd  to  make 
ufe  of  them  for  thofe  Purpofes  for  which.they 
ferve  us,  elfe  we  fruftrate  this  End  of  their 
Creation.  Now  fom.e  of  them  ferve  only  to  ex- 
ercife  our  Minds ,:    Many  others  there  be,  which 

N  might 


178      The  Wisdom  of  GOD      Part  L 

might  probably  ferve  us  to  good  Purpofe, 
whofe  Ufes  are  not  difcovered,  nor  are  they 
ever  like  to  be,  without  Pains  and  Induftry. 
True  it  is,  many  of  the  greateft  Inventions 
have  been  accidentally  ftumbled  upon ;  but 
not  by  Men  fupine  and  carelefs,  but  bufy  and 
inquifitive.  Some  Reproach  methinks  it  is  to 
learned  Men,  that  there  fhould  be  fo  many  Ani- 
mals in  the  World,  vsrhofe  outv^ard  Shape  is  not 
yet  taken  Notice  of,  or  defcrib'd,  muchlefs  their 
Way  of  Generation,  Food,  Manners,  Ufes,  ob- 
ferved. 

The  Scripture,  Tfal,  148.  calls  upon  the  SiiUy 
Mooriy  and  Stars ^  Fire  and  Hail^  Snow  and  Va- 
four^  Jlormy  Winds  and  Tempejis^  Mount aiiis  and 
all  Hilhy  fruitful  'TreeSy  and  all  Cedars^  Beajis 
and  all  Cattle y  creeping  Tubings  and  flying  Fowly 
&c.  to  praife  the  Lord.  How  can  that  be  ?  Can 
fenfelefs  and  inanimate  Things  praife  God  ?  fuch 
as  are  the  Sun,  and  Moon,  and  Stars.  And  al- 
though Beafts  be  advanced  higher  to  fome  De- 
gree of  Senfe  and  Perception  ;  yet  being  void  of 
Reafon  and  Underllanding,  they  know  nothing 
of  the  Caufes  of  Things,  or  of  the  Author  and 
Maker  of  themfelves,  and  other  Creatures.  All 
that  they  are  capable  of  doing,  in  reference  to 
the  praifing  of  God,  is  (as  I  faid  before^  by  af- 
fording Matter,  or  Subjed,  of  praifmg  him,  to 
rational  and  intelligent  Beings.  So  the  Pfalmift, 
P/al.xix.  I.  jTfo  Heavens  declare  the ^  Glory  of 
Ggdy  a?id  the  Firmament  Jheweth  his  Handy-work. 
And  therefore  the  Pfalnufty  when  he  calls  upon 
I  Sun, 


Parti.        in  the  Creation.  179 

Sun,  and  Moon,  and  Stars,  to  praife  God,  doth 
in  effedt  call  upon  Men  and  Angels,  and  other 
rational  Beings,  to  confider  thofe  great  EfFeds 
of  the  divine  rower  and  Wifdom,  their  vaft  Di- 
menfions,  their  regular  Motions  and  Periods, 
their  admirable  Difpofition  and  Order,  their  emi- 
nent Ends  and  Ufes  in  illuminating  and  enliven- 
ing the  Planets,  and  other  Bodies  about  them, 
.and  their  Inhabitants,  by  their  comfortable  and 
cherifhing  Light,  Heat,  and  Influences,  and  to 
give  God  the  Glory  of  his  Power,  in  making  fuch 
great  and  illuftrious  Bodies,  and  of  his  Wifdom 
and  Goodnefs  in  fo  placing  and  difpofing  of 
them,  fo  moving  them  regularly  and  conftant- 
ly,  without  clafhing,  or  interfering,  one  with 
another,  and  enduing  them  with  fuch  excellent 
Virtues  and  Properties,  as  to  render  them  fo  fer- 
viceable  and  beneficial  to  Man,  and  all  other 
Creatures  about  them. 

The  like  may  be  faid  of  Fire,  Hail,  Snow, 
and  other  Elements  and  Meteors,  of  Trees,  and 
ether  Vegetables,  of  Beafls,  Birds,  Infeds,  and 
all  Animals,  when  they  are  commanded  to 
praife  God,  which  they  cannot  do  by  them- 
felves ;  Man  is  commanded  to  confider  them 
particularly,  to  obfefve  and  take  notice  of  their 
curious  Strudure,  Ends,  and  Ufes,  and  give 
God  the  Praife  of  his  Wifdom,  and  other  At- 
tributes dierein  manifefted. 

^    N  2  And 


i8o       77)eWisDouof  GOD     Part  L 

And  therefore  thofe  who  have  Leifure,  Op- 
portunity, and  Abilities,  to  contemplate  and 
confider  any  of  thefe  Creatures,  if  they  do  it 
not,  do  as  it  were  rob  God  of  fome  Part  of  his 
Glory,  in  negleding  or  flighting  fo  eminent  a 
Subjed  of  it,  and  wherein  they  might  have  dif- 
covered  fo  much  Art,  Wifdom,  and  Contri- 
vance. 

And  it  is  particularly  remarkable,  that  the  Di- 
vine Author  of  this  P/hlm,  amongft  other  Crea- 
tures, calls  upon  Infeds  alfo  to  praife  God; 
which  is  as  much  as  to  fay,  Ye  Sons  of  Men, 
negled  none  of  his  Works,  thofe  which  feem 
moft  vile  and  contemptible  :  there  is  Praife  be- 
longs to  him  for  them.  Think  not  that  any 
Thing  he  hath  vouchfafed  to  create,  is  unwor- 
thy thy  Cognizance,  to  be  flighted  by  thee.  It 
is  Pride  and  Arrogance,  or  Ignorance  and  Fol- 
ly, in  thee  fo  to  think.  There  is  a  greater  Depth" 
of  Art  and  Skill  in  the  Structure  of  the  meaneft 
Infed,  than  thou  art  able  for  to  fathom,  or  com- 
prehend. 

The  Wifdom,  Art,  and  Power  of  Almighty 
God,  fliines  forth  as  vifibly  in  the  Strudlure  of 
the  Body  of  the  minuted  Infed,  as  in  that  of  a 
Horfe,  or  Elephant :  Therefore  God  is  faid  to  be, 
Maximiis  in  ^ninimis..  We  Men  efteem ,  it  a  more 
difficult  Matter,  and  of  greater  Art  and  Curio- 
iwvy  to  frame  a  fmall  Watch,  than  a  large  Clock : 
I  And 


Part  I.  Z;^  />6^    C  R  E  A  T  I  O  N.  I  8  I 

And  no  Man  blames  him  who  fpent  his  whole 
Time  in  the  Confideration  of  the  Nature  and 
Works  of  a  Bee,  or  thinks  his  Subjed  was  too 
narrow.  Let  us  not  then  efteem  any  Thing  con- 
temptible, or  inconfiderable,  or  below  our  no- 
tice taking  5  for  this  is  to  derogate  from  the  Wif- 
dom  and  Art  of  the  Creator,  and  to  confefs  our- 
felves  unworthy  of  thcfe  Endowments  of  Know- 
ledge and  Underflanding  which  he  hath  beftow- 
fed  on  us.  Do  we  praife  D^dalus,  and  Architas^ 
and  Hero,  and  Callicrates,  and  Albertus  MagnuSy 
and  many  others  which  I  might  mention,  for 
their  Cunning  in  inventing,  and  Dexterity  in 
framing. and  compofing  a  few  dead  Engines,  or 
Movements,  and  {hall  we  not  admire  and  mag- 
nify the  Great  A/i/zi^p^o^  K3o-//«,  Former  of  the 
World,  who  hath  made  fo  many,  yea,  1  may 
fay,  innumerable,  rare  Pieces,  and  thofe  too  not 
dead  Ones,  fuch  as  ceafe  prcfently  to  move  fo 
foon  as  the  Spring  is  down  ;  but  all  living,  and 
themfelves  performing  their  own  Motions,  and 
thofe  fo  intricate  and  various,  and  requiring  fuch 
a  Multitude  of  Parts  and  fubordinate  Machines, 
that  it  is  incomprehenfible  what  Art  and  Skill, 
and  Induftry,  mull  be  employed  in  the  framing 
of  one  of  them  ? 

I  have  already  noted  out  of  Dv,  Hook,  that 
to  the  Performance  of  every  Mufcular  Motion, 
at  leaft  in  greater  Animals,  there  are  not  fewer 
dLftinft  Parts  concerned,  than  many  Millions  of 
Millions. 

N  3  Further, 


i82      ne  Wisdom  of  GOD     Parti. 

Further,  from  the  Conlideration  of  our  own 
Smallnefs  and  Inconfiderablenefs,  in  refped:  of 
the  Greatnefs  and  Splendor  of  thofe  glorious 
heavenly  Bodies,  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars, 
to  which  our  Bodies  bear  no  Proportion  at  all 
either  in  Magnitude,  or  Luftre ;  let  us  with  the 
Holy  Pfalmiji  raife  up  our  Hearts  to  magnify 
the  Goodnefs  of  God  towards  us  in  taking  fuch 
Notice  of  us,  and  making  fuch  Provifion  for  us, 
and  advancing  us  fo  highly  above  all  his  Works, 
jy^/.viii.  3.  When  I  conjider  the  Heavens^  the 
Work  of  thy  Fingers^  the  Moon  and  the  Stars  which 
thou  haft  ordained.  What  is  Man  that  thou  art 
mindful  of  him  ^  and  the  Son  of  Man  that  thou  vi- 
Jitef  him  ?  For  thou  haji  made  him  a  little  lower 
than  the  Angels^  and  haJi  crowned  him  with  Glory 
and  Honour^  &c. 

But  it  may  be  objedledj  that  God  Almighty- 
was  not  fo  felfilh  and  defirous  of  Glory,  as  to, 
make  the  World,  and  all  the  Creatures  therein, 
only  for  his  own  Honour,  and  to  be  praifed  by 
Man.  To  affert  this,  wxre,  in  Des  Cartes' s>  Opi- 
nion, an  abfurd  and  childifh  Thing,  and  a  re- 
fembling  of  God  to  a  proud  Man.  It  is  more 
worthy  the  Deity,  to  attribute  the  Creation 
of  the  World,  to  the  Exundation  and  Overflow- 
ing of  his  tranfcendent  and  infinite  Goodnefs, 
which  is  of  its  own  Nature,  and  in  the  very 
Notion  of  it,  moft  free,  difFufive,  and  commu- 
nicative. 


To 


Parti.       in  //^^  Cre  ation.  183 

To  this  I  {hall  anfwer  in  two  Words ;  Firft, 
The  Teftimony  of  Scripture  makes  God  in  all 
his  Ad:ions  to  intend  and  defign  his  own  Glory 
mainly,  Prov,  xvi.  4.  God  made  all  Tubings  for 
himfelf.  How !  for  himfelf  ?  He  hath  no  Need 
of  them  :  He  hath  no  Ufe  of  them.  No,  he 
made  them  for  the  manifeftation  of  his  Power, 
Wifdom,  and  Goodnefs,  and'  that  he  might  re- 
*ceive  from  the  Creatures  that  were  able  to  take 
Notice  thereof,  his  Tribute  of  Praife,  PfaLX,  14. 
Offer  unto  God  Thankfghijig.  And  in  the  next 
Verfe,  I  will  deliver  thee^  and  thou  Jloalt  glorify 
me.  And  again  in  the  la  ft  Verfe,  Whofo  offer  eth 
Praije^  glorijieth  me.  So  Praife  is  called  a  Sa- 
crifice, and  the  Calves  of  the  Lips,  Plof  xiv.  2. 
Ifa.  xlii.  8.  I  am  the  Lord^  that  is  my  Name,  a?id 
my  Glory  will  I  not  give  to  another,  Ifa.  xlviii.  1 1. 
And  I  will  not  give  my  Glory  to  another.  The 
Scripture  calls  upon  the  Heavens,  the  Earth, 
and  Sun,  and  Moon,  and  Stars,  and  all  other 
Creatures,  to  praife  the  Lord ;  that  is,  by  the 
Mouth  of  Man,  (as  I  (hewed  before)  who  is 
hereby  required  to  take  notice  of  all  thefe  Crea- 
tures, and  to  admire  and  praife  the  Power,  Wif- 
dom, and  Goodnefs  of  God,  manifefted  in  the 
Creation  and  Defignations  of  them. 

Secondly,  It  is  moft  reafonable  that  God  Al- 
mighty (hould  intend  his  own  Glory :  For  he 
being  infinite  in  all  Excellencies  and  Perfecti- 
ons,   and  independent  upon  any  other  Being; 

N  4  nothing 


184      T^oe  Wisdom  of  GOD   Parti, 
nothing  canbefaid  or  thought  of  him  too  Great, 
and  which  he  may  not  juftly  challenge  as  his 
due ;  nay,    he  cannot  think  tdo  highly  of  him- 
felf,    his  other  Attributes  being  adequate  to  his 
Underftanding  5  fo  that,  though  his  Underftand- 
ing  be  infinite,    yet  he  underftands  no  more  than 
his  Pov/er  can  effeft,    becaufe  that  is  infinite  al- 
fo.     And  therefore  it  is  fit  and  reafonable,    that 
he  fhouldown  and  accept  the  Creatures  Acknow- 
ledgments and  Celebrations  of  thofe  Virtues  and 
Perfedions,    which  he  hath  not  received  of  any 
other,    but  pofleffeth  eternally  and  originally  of 
himfelf      And   indeed,    (with  Reverence  be  it 
fpoken)  what  elfe  can  we  imagine  the  ever-blef- 
fed  Deity  to  delight  and  take  Complacency  in 
for  ever,    but  his  own  infinite  Excellencies  and 
Perfeftions,    and  the  Manifeflations  and  Effeds 
of  them,    the  Works  of  the  Creation,    and  the 
Sacrifices  of  Praife  and  Thanks  offered  up  by 
fuch  of  his  Creatures  as  are  capable  of  confidering 
thofe  Works,    and   difcerning  the   Traces  and- 
Footfteps  of  his  Power  and  Wifdom  appearing 
in  the  Formation  of  them ;  and  moreover,  whofe 
bounden  Duty  it  is  fo  to  do  ?    The  Reafon  why 
Man  ought  not  to  admire  himfelf,    or  feek  his 
own  Glory,    i»,  becaufe  he  is  a  Dependent  Crea- 
ture,   and  hath  nothing  but  what  he  hath   re- 
ceived ;  and  not  only  dependent,  but  imperfed:; 
yea,  weak  and  impotent :  And  yet  I  do  not  take 
Humility  in  Man  to  confift  in  difowning,    or 
denying  any  Gift  or  Ability  that  is  in  him,  but 
in  a  juft  Valuation  of  fuch  Gifts  and  Endow- 
liients,    yet  rather  thinking  too  meanly .  than  too 

highly 


Parti.        //^ /i6^  Creation.  185 

highly  of  them  5  becaufe  human  Nature  is  fo  apt 
to  err  in  running  into  the  other  Extreme,    to 
flatter  it  felf,    and  to  accept  thofe  Praifes  that  ' 
are  not  due  to  it ;   Pride  being  an  Elation  of 
Spirit  upon  falfe  Grounds,    or  a  Defire  and  Ac- 
ceptance of  undue  Honour.     Otherwife,    I  do 
not  fee  why  a  Man  may  not  admit,    and  accept 
the  Teflimonies  of  others,  concerning  any  Per-*. 
ftd:ion,    Accomplifhment,    or  Skill,    that  he  is 
really  pofTefTed  of,    yet  can  he  not  think  of  him- 
felf  to  deferve  any  Praife  or  Honour  for  it,    be- 
caufe both  the  Power  and  the  Habit  are  the  Gift 
of  God:    And    confidering  that  one   Virtue  is 
counter-balanced  by  many  Vices,    and  one  Skill 
or  Perfeftion  with  much  Ignorance  and  Infir- 
mity. 


The  End  of  the  Firji  Part. 


^\!/// ^M.^\l///^\l///.^\Il/^^Mm/i5^\^M 


The  SECONDPARTofthe 

WISDOMofGOD 

Manifefted   in   the 

WORKS 

O  F    T  H  E 

CREATION 

Particularly  in  the 

I.  Whole  Body  of  the  E  a  r  t  h. 
II.  Bodies  of  Man, 
And  other  Animals. 


•m/m^mhmfWhm/m 


itQMki5SMkJSS\dk£iMkiQMkiSi\ 


■^jmtmmMm^mt 


^mmm 


THE 

WISDOM   of  G  O  D 

Manifefted  in  the 

WORKS 

O  F    T  H  E 

CREATION. 


riiMiiMirji^gsi^MiriiMirggMiriiy^isisi 

P  A  R  T     11. 

I  Proceed  now  to  feleft  fome  particular  Pieces 
of  the  Creation,  and  to  confider  them  more 
dillinftly.     They  fhall  be  only  two. 

I.  The  whole  Body  of  the  Earth. 

II.  The  Body  of  Man. 

Firjl,  The  Body  of  the  Earth  ;  and  therein  I 
{hall  take  notice  of,  i.  Its  Figure.  2.  Its  Mo- 
tion.    3.  The  Conflitution  of  its  Parts, 

.        ■  By 


igo     7/)e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  IL 

By  Earth  I  here  underftand  not  the  dry  Land> 
c^r  the  Earth  contradiftinguifh'd  to  Water,  or  the 
Earth  confider*d  as  an  Element,  but  the  whole 
terraqueous  Globe,  '  compofed  of  Earth  and 
Water. 

I.  For  the  Figure^  I  could  eafily  demonftrate 
it  to  be  fpherical.  That  the  Water,  which  by 
reafon  of  its  Fluidity  fhould,  one  would  think, 
compofe  it  felf  to  a  Level,  yet  doth  not  fo,  but 
hath  a  gibbofe  Superficies^  may  to  the  Eye  be 
demonftrated  upon  the  Sea.  For  when  two 
Ships  failing  contrary  ways  lofe  the  fight  one  of 
another,  firft  the  Keel  and  Hull  difappear,  after- 
wards the  Sails;  and  if  when  upon  the  Deck 
you  have  perfedlly  loft  fight  of  all,  you  get  up 
to  the  top  of  the  Main-Maft,  you  may  defcry  it 
again.  Now  what  fhould  take  away  the  fight  of 
thefe  Ships  from  each  other  but  the  Gibbofity  of 
the  interjacent  Water?  The  Roundnefs  of  the 
Earth  from  North  to  South  is  demonftrated 
from  the  appearance  of  northern  Stars  above  the 
Horizon,  and  lofs  of  the  fouthern  to  them  that 
travel  northward ;  and  on  the  contrary,  the  lofs 
of  the  northern,  and  appearance  of  the  fouthern 
to  them  that  travel  fouthward.  For  were  the 
Earth  a  Plain,  we  fhould  fee  exad:ly  the  fame 
Stars  wherever  we  were  placed  on  that  Plain. 
The  Roundnefs  from  Eaft  to  Weft  is  demonftra- 
ted from  EcUpfes  of  either  of  the  great  Lumina- 
ries, For  why  the  fame  Eclipje^  fuppole  of  the 
Swi^  which  is  feen  to  them  that  live  more  eafter:^ 
ly,  when  the  Sun  is  elevated  fix  Degrees  above 

the 


Part  II.       in  //6^  C r e  a t ion.  191 

the  Horizon,  fhould  be  feen  to  them  that  live 
one  degree  more  wefterly,  when  the  Sun  is  but 
five  Degrees  above  the  Horizon,  and  fo  lower 
and  lower  proportionably  to  them  that  live  more 
and  more  wefterly,  till  at  laft  it  appear  not  at 
all,  no  Account  can  be  -given  but  the  Globofity 
of  the  Earth.  For  were  the  Earth  a  perfedt  Plain, 
the  Sun  would  appear  eclips'd  to  all  that  live 
upon  that  Plain,  if  not  exadlly  in  the  fame  Ele- 
vation, yet  pretty  near  it ;  but  to  be  fure  it  would 
never  appear  to  fome,  the  Sun  being  elevated 
high  above  the  Horizon;  and  not  at  all  to  others. 
It  being  clear  then  that  the  Figure  of  the  Earth 
is  fpherical,  let  us  confider  the  Conveniences  of 
this  Figure. 

1.  No  Figure  is  fo  capacious  as  this,  and  con- 
fequently  whofe  Parts  are  fo  well  compa6i:ed  and 
united,  and  lie  fo  near  one  to  another  for  mutual 
Strength.  Now  the  Earth,  which  is  the  Bafis  of 
all  Animals,  and,  as  fome  think,  of  the  whole 
Creation,  ought  to  be  firm,  and  ftable,  and  folid, 
and  as  much  as  is  poflible  fecur'd  from  all  Ruins 
and  Concuflions. 

2.  This  Figure  is  moft  confonant  and  agree- 
able to  the  natural  Nutus^  or  Tendency  of  all 
heavy  Bodies.  Now  the  Earth  being  fuch  a  one, 
and  all  itj  Parts  having  an  equal  PropenfioA  or 
Connivency  to  the  Center,  they  mull  needs  be  in 
greatefl  Reft,  and  moft  immoveable,  when  they 
are  all  equidiftant  from  it;  whereas  were  it  an 

angular 


192     ThWisDOM  of  GOD     PartIL 

angular  Body,  all  the  Angles  would  be  vaft  and 
fteep  Mountains,  bearing  a  confiderable  Propor- 
tion to  the  whole  Bulk,  and  therefore  thofe  Parts 
being  extremely  more  remote  from  the  Center 
than  thofe  about  the  middle  of  the  Plains,  would 
confequently  prefs  very  ftrongly  thitherward,  and 
unlefs  the  Earth  were  made  of  Adamant  or  Mar- 
ble, in  time  the  other  Parts  would  give  way,  till 
all  were  levell'd. 

3.  Were  the  Earth  an  angular  Body,  and  not 
round,  all  the  whole  Earth  would  be  nothing  elfe 
but  vaft  Mountains,  and  fo  incommodious  for 
Animals  to  live  upon,  for  the  middle  Point  of 
every  Side  would  be  nearer  the  Center  than  any 
other,  and  confequently  from  that  Point,  which 
way  foever  one  travell'd,  would  be  up-hill,  the 
Tendency  of  all  heavy  Bodies  being  perpendicu- 
larly to  the  Center  5  befides,  how  much  this  would 
obftruft  Commerce,  is  eafily  feen ;  for  not  only 
the  Declivity  of  all  Places  would  render  them 
very  difficult  to  be  travelled  over,  but  likewife  the 
midft  of  every  Side  being  loweft  and  neareft  the 
Center,  if  there  were  any  Rain,  or  any  Rivers, 
muft  needs  be  fiU'd  with  a  Lake  of  Water,  there 
being  no  way  to  difcharge  it,  and  poffibly  the 
Water  would  rife  fo  high  as  to  overflow  the 
whole  Latus,  But,  furely,  there  would  be 
much  more  Danger  of  the  Inundation  of  whole 
Countries  than  now  there  is,  all  the  Waters 
falling  upon  the  Earth,  by  reafon  of  its  De- 
clivity every  way,    eafily  defcending  ipwn  to 

the 


Part  II.        in  the  Creation.  193 

the  common  Receptacle  the  Sea.  And  thefe 
Lakes  of  Water  being  far  diftantone  from  ano^ 
ther,  there  could  be  no  Commerce  between  far 
remote  Countries,  but  by  Land. 

4.  A  Spherical  Figure  is  mod  commodious 
for  Dinetial  Motion,  or  Revolution,  upon  its 
ov/n  Axis;  for  in  that,  neither  can  the  Medium 
^t  all  refift  the  Motion  of  the  Body,  becaufe  it 
ftands  not  in  its  way,  no  Part  coming  into  any 
Space  but  what  the  Precedent  left,  neither  doth 
one  Part  of  the  Superficies  move  fafter  than  ano- 
ther: Whereas  were  it  Angular,  the  Parts  about 
the  Angles  would  find  ftrong  Refiftance  from 
the  Air,  and  thofe  Parts  alfo  about  the  Angles 
would  move  much  fafter  than  thofe  about  the 
Middle  of  the  Planes,  being  remoter  from  the 
Center  than  they.  It  remains  therefore  that  this 
Figure  is  the  moft  commodious  for  Motion.    • 

Here  I  cannot  but  take  Notice  of  the  Folly 
and  Stupidity  of  the  Epicurea?2Sy  who  fancied 
the  Earth  to  be  flat  and  contiguous  to  the  Hea- 
vens- on  all  Sides,  that  it  defcended  a  great  way 
with  long  Roots  5  and  that  the  Sun  was  new 
made  every  Morning,  and  not  much  bigger  than 
it  feems  to  the  Eye,  and  of  a  flat  Figure,  and 
many  other  fuch  grofs  Abfurdities  as  Children 
among  us  would  be  afliamed  of. 


Sesondly.y  I  come  now  to  fpcak  of  the  Motion 
of  the  Jiarth,  That  the  E^rth  (fpeaking  ac- 
i:Q.rding    to    Philofophical   Accuratenefs)    doth 

O  move 


194     ^^^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  11. 

move  both  upon  its  own  Poles,  and  in  the  Eclip- 
tick,  is  now  the  received  Opinion  of  the  moil 
learned  and  skilful  Mathematicians,  To  prove 
the  Diurnal  Motion  of  it  upon  its  Poles,  I  need 
produce  no  other  Argument  than,  Firji,  The 
vaft  Difproportion  in  refped:  of  Magnitude,  that 
is  between  the  Earth  and  the  Heavens,  and  the 
great  Unlikelihood  that  fuch  an  infinite  Num- 
ber of  vaft  Bodies  {hould  move  about  fo  incon- 
fiderable  a  Spot  as  the  Earth,  which  in  Compar- 
rifon  with  them,  by  the  concurrent  Suffrages 
of  Mathematicians  of  both  Perfwafions,  is  a  mere 
Point,  that  is,  next  to  nothing.  Secondly^  The 
immenfe  and  incredible  Celerity  of  the  Motion 
of  the  Heavenly  Bodies  in  the  ancient  Hypothejis, 
thirdly ^  Of  its  Annual  Motion  in  the  Ecliptick, 
the  Stations  and  Retrogradations  of  the  fuperior 
Planets  are  a  convincing  Argument,  there  being 
a  clear  and  facile  Account  thereof  to  be  given 
from  the  mere  Motion  of  the  Earth  in  the  Eclip- 
tick J  whereas  in  the  old  Hypothefis  no  Account 
can  be  given,  but  by  the  unreafonable  Fiction  of 
Epicycles,  and  contrary  Motions ;  add  hereto, 
the  great  Unlikelihood  of  fuch  an  enormous 
Epicycle  as  Ve?2iis  muft  defcribe  about  the  Sun, 
not  under  the  Sun,  as  the  old  Aflronomers  fan- 
cied. About  the  Sun,  I  fay,  as  appears  by  its 
being  hid  or  eclipfed  by  it,  and  by  its  feveral 
Phafes,  like  the  Moon.  So  that  whofoever  doth 
tlearly  underftand  both  Hypothefcs,  cannot,  I 
perfwade  my  felf,    adhere  to  the  Old,  and  reject 

the 


Part  II.       /;^  /;5^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  195 

the  New,    without  doing  fome  Violence  to  his 
Faculties. 

Againft  this  Opinion  lie  two  Objedions,  Ftrjt^ 
That  it  is  contrary  to  Senfe,  and  the  common 
Opinion  and  Belief  of  Mankind.  Seco?2dlyy  That 
it  feemeth  contrary  to  fome  Expreffions  in  Scri- 
pture, To  the  firft  I  anfwer,  That  our  Senfes 
are  fometimes  miftaken,  and  what  appears  to 
j:hem  is  not  always  in  reality  fo  as  it  appears. 
For  Example :  The  Sun,  or  Moon,  appear  no 
bigger,  at  moft,  than  a  Cart-wheel,  and  of  a 
flat  Figure.  The  Earth  feems  to  be  plain : 
The  Heavens  to  cover  it  like  a  Canopy,  and  to 
be  contiguous  to  it  round  about :  A  Fire-brand 
nimbly  moved  round,  appears  like  a  Circle  of 
Fire ;  and  to  give  a  parallel  Inftance,  a  Boat 
lying  ftill  at  Anchor  in  a  River,  to  him  that 
Sails  and  Rows  by  it,  feems  to  move  apace ; 
and  when  the  Clouds  pafs  nimbly  under  the 
Moon,  the  Moon  it  felf  feems  to  move  the  con- 
trary way.  And  there  have  been  whole  Books 
written  in  Confutation  of  vulgar  Errors.  aS*^- 
condly\  As  to  the  Scripture^  when  fpeaking  of 
thefe  Things,  it  accommodates  it  felf  to  ths 
common  and  received  Opinions,  and  employs 
the  ufual  Phrafes  and  Forms  of  Speech  (as  all 
wife  Men  alfo  do,  though,  in  Stridtnefs,  they 
be  of  a  different  or  contrary  Opinion)  without  In- 
tention of  delivering  any  thing  Doftrinally  con- 
cerning thefe  Points,  or  confuting  the  contrary : 
And  yet  by  thofethat  maintain  the  Opinion  of 
the  Earth's  Motion;   there  might  a  convenient 

O  2  Inter- 


196  T/^eWisDouof  GOD  Part  If. 
Interpretation  be  given  of  fuch  Places  as  feem  to 
contradid:  it.  Hovvbeit,  becaufe  feme  pious 
Perfons  may  be  offended  at  fuch  an  Opinion,  as 
favouring  of  Novelty,  thinking  it  inconfiftent 
with  Divine  Revelation,  I  fhall  not  pofitively 
affert  it,  only  propofe  it  as  an  Hypothefn  not  al- 
together improbable.  Suppofing  then,  that  the 
Earth  doth  move  about  upon  its  ov^n  Poles,  and 
in  the  Ecliptick  about  the  Sun,  I  fhall  fhew 
hov^  admirably  its  Situation  and  Motion  are 
contrived  for  the  Conveniency  of  Man,  and  o- 
ther  Animals :  Which  I  cannot  do  more  fully 
and  clearly  than  Dr.  More  hath  already  done  in 
his  Aiitidote  againji  Atheijm^  whofe  Words  there- 
fore I  fhall  borrov^. 

Firft,  Speaking  of  the  Varalleltjm  of  the  Axis 
of  the  Earthy  he  faith,  I  demand  w^hether  it  be 
better  to  have  the  Axis  of  the  Earth  fteady  and 
perpetually  parallel  to  it  felf,  or  to  have  it  care- 
lefly  tumble  this  way  and  that  way  as  it  happens, 
or  at  leaft  very  varioufly  and  intricately  ?  And- 
you  cannot  but  anfwer  me,  it  is  better  to  have 
it  fteady  and  parallel  \  for  in  this  lies  the  neceffa- 
ry  Foundation  of  the  Art  of  Navigation  and  Di- 
alling. For  that  fteady  Stream  of  Particles, 
which  is  fuppofed  to  keep  the  Axis  of  the  Earth 
parallel  to  it  felf,  affords  the  Mariner  both  his 
Cymjura^  and  his  Compafs.  The  Load-Jlone  and 
the  Load-Jlar  depend  both  upon  this.  The  Load- 
Jione^  as  I  could  demonftrate,  were  it  not  too 
great  a  Digreffion  5  and  the  Load-Jlar.,  becaufe 
that  which  keeps  the  Axis  parallel  to  it  felf, 
I  makes 


Part  II.       in  the  Creation.  197 

makes  each  of  the  Fole^  conftantly  refpeftfuch  a 
Point  in  the  Heavens;  as  for  Example,  the 
North-Pole  to  point  almoll  diredly  to  that 
which  we  call  the  Pole-Jlar.  And  befides,  JD/- 
alling  could  not  be  at  all  without  this  Steadinefs 
of  the  Axis.  But  both  thefe  Arts  are  pleafant, 
and  one  efpecially  of  mighty  Importance  to 
Mankind.  For  thus  there  is  an  orderly  Mea- 
furing  of  our  Time  for  Affairs  at  home,  and  an 
Opportunity  of  Traffick  abroad,  with  the  moft 
remote  Nations  of  the  World,  and  fo  there  is  a 
mutual  Supply  of  the  feveral  Commodities  of  all 
Countries,  befides  the  enlarging  our  Underfland- 
ings  by  fo  ample  Experience  we  get  both  of 
Men  and  Things.  Wherefore  if  we  were  ra- 
tionally to  confult,  whether  the  Axis  of  the 
Earth  were  better  be  held  fteady  and  parallel  to 
it  felf,  or  left  at  random,  we  would  conclude  it 
ought  to  be  fteady,  and  fo  we  find  it  de  FaBOj 
though  the  Earth  move  floating  in  the  Liquid 
Heavens,  So  that  appealing  to  our  own  Facul- 
ties we  are  to  affirm.  That  the  conflant  Di-' 
redtion  of  the  Axis  of  the  Earth  was  eilabliflied 
by  a  Principle  of  Wifdom  and  Council. 

Again,  There  being  feveral  Poflures  of  this 
fteady  Diredion  of  the  Axis  of  the  Earthy  viz. 
either  perpendicular  to  a  Plane,  going  through 
the  Center  of  the  Sun,  or  Co-incident,  or  In- 
clining, I  demand  which  of  all  thefe  Reafoji  and 
Knowledge  would  make  choice  of?  Not  of  a 
perpendicular  Pofture  ;  for  fo  both  the  pleafant 
Variety,    and  great  Convenience  of  Summer  and 

O  3  Wnitcr, 


198     The  WisBOM  of  GOD    Part  11. 

Winter,  Spring  and  Autumn,  would  be  loft, 
and  for  want  of  Acceffion  of  the  Sun,  thefe  Parts 
of  the  Earth,  which  nov/  bring  forth  Fruits, 
and  are  Habitable,  would  be  in  an  Incapacity  of 
ever  bringing  forth  any ;  fith  then,  the  Heat 
could  never  be  greater  than  now  it  is  at  our  loth 
of  March,  or  the  nth  oi September,  and  there- 
fore not  fufficient  to  bring  their  Fruits  and  Grain 
to  Maturity,  and  confequently  could  entertain 
no  Inhabitants^  and  thofe  Parts  that  the  full 
Heat  of  the  Sun  could  reach,  he  plying  them 
always  alike  without  any  annual  Receffion,  or 
Intermiffion,  would  at  laft  grow  tired,  or  ex- 
haufled,  or  be  wholly  dried  up,  and  want  Moi- 
fture,  the  Sun  diffipating  and  cafting  off  the 
Clouds  Northwards  and  Southwards.  Befides, 
we  obfervethat  an  orderly  Viciffitude  of  Things, 
doth  much  more  gratifie  the  Contemplative  Pro- 
perty in  Man. 

And  now  in  the  fecond  Place,  neither  would 
Reafon  make  choice  of  a  co-incident  Pofition^ 
For  if  the  Axis  thus  lay  in  a  Plane  that  goeth 
through  the  Center  of  the  Sun,  the  Ecliptick 
would,  like  a  Colure,  or  one  of  the  Meridians^ 
pafs  through  the  Foles  of  the  Earth,  which 
would  put  the  Inhabitants  of  the  World  into  a 
pitiful  Condition.  For  they  that  efcape  beft  in 
the  Temperate  Zone,  would  be  accloyed  with 
long  Nights  very  tedious,  no  lefs  than  forty 
Days,  and  thofe  that  now  never  have  their 
Night  above  twenty-four  Hours,  as  Friejland^ 
'  Iceland-^ 


Part  IL       Z;^  /^^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  1 99 

Iceland^  the  furtheft  Parts  of  Riiffia  and  Norway y 
would  be  deprived  of  the  Sun,  above  an  Hun- 
dred and  Thirty  Days  together.  Our  felves  in 
England,  and  the  reft  of  the  fame  CHme,  would 
be  clofed  up  in  Darknefs  no  lefs  than  a  Hundred, 
or  Eighty  Days  -,  and  fo  proportionably  of  the 
reft,  both  in  and  out  of  the  Temperate  Zones. 
And  as  for  Summer  and  Winter,  though  thofc 
Viciflitudes  would  be,  yet  it  could  not  but 
taufe  raging  Difeafes,  to  have  the  Sun  ftay  fo 
long,  defcnbing  his  little  Circles  fo  near  the 
Poles,  and  lying  fo  hot  on  the  Inhabitants,  that 
had  been  in  fo  long  Extremity  of  Darknefs  and 
Cold  before. 

It  remains  therefore,  that  the  Pofture  of  the 
Axis  of  the  Earth  be  inclining,  not  perpendicu- 
lar, not  co-incident  to  the  fore-mention'd  Plane. 
And  verily,  it  is  not  only  inclining,  but  in  fo  fit 
a  Proportion,  and  there  can  be  no  £tter  imagined 
to  make  it,  to  the  utmoft  Capacity,  as  well  plea- 
fant  as  habitable.  For  though  the  Courfe  of  the 
Sun  be  curbed  between  the  Tropicks,  yet  are 
not  thofe  Parts  diredly  fubjedi:  to  his  perpendi- 
cular Beams,  either  Unhabitable,  or  extremely 
Hot,  as  the  Ancients  fancied :  By  the  Teftimo- 
ny  of  Travellers,  and  particularly  Sir  Walter 
Raleigh,  the  Parts  under  and  near  the  Line, 
being  as  fruitful  and  pleafant,  and  fit  to  make 
a  Paradife  of,  as  any  in  the  World.  And  that 
they  are  as.  fultable  to  the  Nature  of  Man,  and 
as  'convenient    to   live   in,     appears   from  the 

O  4  Longai- 


200     He  Wisdom  of  GOD   Fart  IL 

Longsevity  of  the  Natives ;  as  for  Inftance,  the 
lEtkiopes^  called  by  the  Ancients  MaxpJ/Swi ;  but 
efpecially  in  the  Brafilians  in  America^  the  ordi- 
nary Term  of  whofe  Life  is  a  Hundred  Years, 
as  is  fet  down  by  P//^,  a  Learned  Phyfician  of 
Holland^  who  travelled  thither  on  purpofe  to 
augment  Natural  Knowledge,  but  efpecially 
what  related  to  Phyfick.  And  reafonable  it  is 
that  this  fhould  be  fo ;  for  neither  doth  the  Sun 
lie  long  upon  them,  their  Day  being  but  Twelve 
Hours,  and  their  Night  as  long,  to  cool  and  re- 
frefli  them:  And  befides,  they  have  frequent 
Showers,  and  conftant  Breezes,  or  fre(h  Gales 
of  Wind  from  the  Eafl,  It  was  the  Opinion  of 
AfdepiadeSy  as  Plutarch  reports,  that  generally 
the  Inhabitants  of  Cold  Countries  are  longer 
liv'd  than  thofe  of  Hot,  becaufe  the  Cold  keeps  in 
the  Natural  Heat,  as  it  were  locking  up  the 
Pores  to  prevent  its  Evaporation;  whereas  in 
Hot  Regions  the  Heat  is  eafily  diffipated,  the 
Pores  being  large  and  open  to  give  it  way.  Which , 
Opinion,  becaufe  I  find  fome  Learned  Men  ft  ill 
to  adhere  to,  I  (hall  produce  fome  further  In- 
ftances  out  of  Monfieur  Rocbeforfs  Hiftory  of 
the  Antilles  Illands,  to  confirm  the  contrary, 
and  to  (hew  how  often  and  eafily  we  may  be 
deceived,  if  we  trufi:  to  our  own  Ratiocina- 
tions, how  plaufible  foever,  and  confult  not  Ex- 
perience. 

The  ordinary  Life  (faith  he)  of  our  Caribbemis 
is  an  Hundred  and  Fifty  Years  long,  and  fome- 
times  more.  There  were  fome  among  them 
not  long  fince  living,    who  remembred  to  have 

feea 


Part  II.        in  /^^  C  r  e  at  i  o n.  20 1 

feen  the  firft  Spaniards  that  boarded  America,  who 
we  may  thence  conclude,  liv'd  to  beat  leaft  160 
Years  old. 

The  Hollanders  who  traffick  in  the  Molucca 
Iflands,  affure  us,  that  the  ordinary  term  of  Life 
of  the  Natives  there  is  one  hundred  and  thirty 
Years. 

Vincent  le  Blanc  tells  us,  that  in  Sumatra,  Ja- 
va, and  the  neighbouring  Iflands,  the  Life  of 
t?he  Inhabitants  is  extended  to  140  Years,  and 
that  in  the  Realm  of  Cajfuby  it  reaches  150. 
Francis  Pirara  promotes  the  Life  of  the  Brajj- 
Hans  beyond  the  Term  we  have  fet  it,  v.  g,  to  160 
Years  or  more,  and  fays  that  in  Florida  and  Ju- 
catan  there  are  Men  found  who  pafs  that  Age. 
And  it  is  faid,  that  the  French  in  Laudoniors 
Voyage  into  Florida,  Anno  1564.  faw  a  certain 
old  Man,  who  affirmed  himfelf  to  be  three  hun- 
dred Years  old,  and  the  Father  of  five  Genera- 
tions j  And  well  he  might  be  of  double  that  num- 
ber, 

LafHy,  Mapheous  reports,  that  a  certain  Be?!- 
galife  vaunted  himfelf  to  be  335  Years  old.  So 
far  Monfieur  Rochejort,  Indeed  thefe  two  laft 
Inftances,  being  perchance  Angular  and  extra- 
ordinary, do  not  prove  the  Point  3  for  even  a- 
mong  us,  where  the  ordinary  term  of  Life  is 
about  threefcore  and  ten,  or  fourfcore,  there 
occur  fome  rare  Inftances  of  Perfons,  who  have 
lived  130,  140,  150  Years  and  more.  But  the 
other  Teftimonies  being  general,  prove  it  beyond 
contradidtion  5  neither  yet  is  the  thing  in  it  felf 

impro- 


202     The  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  IL 

improbable  •,  for  there  being  not  fo  great  Inequa- 
lity of  Weather  in  thofe  hot  Countries,  as  there 
is  in  cold,  the  Body  is  kept  in  a  more  equal  Tem- 
per, and  not  having  fuch  frequent  Shocks,  as 
are  occalion'd  by  fuch  Air,  and  often  Changes, 
and  that  from  one  Extreme  to  another,  holds 
out  much  longer.  So  we  fee  infirm  and  crazy 
Perfons,  when  they  come  to  be  fo  weak  as  to  be 
fixed  to  their  Beds,  hold  out  many  Years,  fome 
I  have  heard  of,  that  have  laid  bed-rid  20  Years: 
Becaufe  in  the  Bed  they  are  always  kept  in  an 
almoft  equal  Temper  of  Heat,  who,  had  they 
been  expofed  to  the  Exceffes  of  Heat  and  Cold, 
would  not  probaby  have  furvived  one. 

Seeing  then,  this  bed  pofture  which  our  Rea- 
fon  could  make  choice  of,  we  fee  really  eftablifli- 
ed  in  Nature,  we  cannot  but  acknowledge  it  to 
be  the  iffue  of  Wifdom,  Counfel,  and  Provi- 
dence. Moreover,  a  further  Argument  to  evince 
this  is,  That  though  it  cannot  but  be  acknow- 
ledged, that  if  the  Axis  of  the  Earth  were  per- 
pendicular to  the  Plane  of  the  Ecliptick,  her 
Motion  would  be  more  eafy  and  natural,  yet 
notwithftanding,  for  the  Conveniences  fore- 
mentioned,  we  fee  it  is  made  in  an  inclining  po- 
fture. 

Another  very  confiderable,  and  heretofore 
unobferv'd  Convenience  of  this  inclination  of 
the  Earth's  Axisy  Mr.  Keill  aifords  us  in  his  Ex- 
amination of  Dr.  Burnet'^  'theory  of  the  Earthy 
p.  69. 

There 


Part  II.       in  //5^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  203 

There  is  (faith  he)  one  more  [befides  what  he 
had  mentioned  before]  confiderable  Advantage, 
which  we  reap  by  the  prefent  Pofition  of  the 
Earth,  which  1  will  here  infert,  becaufe  I  do  not 
know  that  it  is  taken  notice  of  by  any  ;  and  it  is, 
that  by  the  prefent  Inclination  of  the  Earth's 
Axis  to  the  Plane  of  the  Ecliptick^  we  who  live 
beyond  45  Degrees  of  Latitude,  and  ftand  moft  in 
need  of  it,  have  more  of  the  Sun's  Heat  through- 
cfut  the  Year  than  if  he  had  fhin'd  always  in  the 
Equator  j  that  is,  if  we  take  the  Sum  of  the  Sun's 
Actions  upon  us  both  in  Summer  and  Winter, 
they  are  greater  than  its  Heat  would  be  if  he  mo- 
ved always  in  the  Equator-,  or  which  is  the  fame 
thing,  the  Aggregate  of  the  Sun's  Heat  upon  us 
while  he  defcribes  any  two  oppofite  Parallels,  is 
greater  than  it  would  be  if  in  thofe  two  Days  he 
defcrib'd  the  Equator -,  whereas  in  the  Torrid 
Zone^  and  even  in  the  Temperate,  almoft  as  far 
as  45  Degrees  of  Latitude,  the  Sum  of  the  Sun's 
Heat  in  Summer  and  Winter  is  lefs  than  it  would 
be,  were  the  Axis  of  the  Earth  perpendicular  to 
the  Plane  of  the  Ecliptick ;  for  the  Demonftra- 
tion  of  which  I  refer  the  Reader  to  the  Book  it 
felf. 

I  think  (proceeds  he)  this  Confideration  cannot 
but  lead  us  into  a  tranfcendent  Admiration  of  the 
divine  Wijdom^  which  hath  placed  the  Earth  in 
fuch  a  Pofture,  as  brings  with  it  feveral  Conve- 
niences beyond  what  we  can  eafily  difcover  with- 
out Study  and  Application  ;  and  I  make  no  que- 
ftion,  but  if  the  reft  of  the  Works  of  Nature  were 

well 


204     "The  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  I L 

well  obferv^d,  we  (hould  find  feveral  Advantages 
which  accrue  to  us  by  their  prefent  Conftitution, 
which  are  far  beyond  the  Ufes  of  them  that  are 
yet  difcover'd  5  by  which  it  will  plainly  appear, 
that  God  hath  chofen  better  for  us  than  we  could 
have  done  for  our  felves. 

If  any  Man  fhould  objedl  and  fay,  it  would  be 
more  convenient  for  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Earth 
if  the  Tropicks  flood  at  a  greater  diftance,  and 
the  Sun  mov'd  further  northward  and  fouthward, 
for  fo  the  North  and  South  Parts  would  be  re- 
lieved, and  not  expos'd  to  fo  extreme  Cold,  and 
thereby  rendered  uninhabitable,  as  now  they  are: 

To  this  I  anfwer,  That  this  would  be  more 
inconvenient  to  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Earth  in 
general,  and  yet  would  afford  the  North  and 
Houth  Parts  but  little  more  Comfort ;  for  then  as 
much  as  the  Diftances  between  the  Tropicks  were 
enlarged,  fo  much  would  alfo  the  Artick  and 
Antartick  Circles  be  enlarg'd  too;  and  fo  we  here 
in  Englandy  and  fo  on  northerly,  fhould  not  have 
that  grateful  and  ufeful  Succeflion  of  Day  and 
Night,  but  proportionably  to  the  Sun's  coming 
towards  us,  fo  would  our  Days  be  of  more  than 
Twenty-four  Hours  Length  \  and  according  to 
his  recefs  in  Winter,  our  Nights  proportionable  ; 
which  how  great  an  Inconvenience  it  would  be, 
is  eafily  feen ;  whereas  now  the  whole  Latitude 
of  the  Earth,  which  hath  at  any  time  above 
twenty-four  Hours  Day  and  twenty-four  Hours 
Night,  is  little  and  inconfiderable  in  comparifon 

of 


Part  II.       in  //6^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  205 

of  the  whole  Bulk,  as  lying  neir  the  Poles ;  and 
yet  neither  is  that  Part  altogether  unufeful,  for 
in  the  Waters  there  live  Fifhes,  which  other 
where  are  not  obvious;  fo  we  know  the  chief 
Whale-ffttJig  is  in  Greenland -.y  yea,  not  only  Fifli, 
but  great  Variety  of  Water-Fowl,  both  whole 
and  cloven-footed,  frequent  the  Waters,  and 
feed  there,  breeding  alfo  on  the  Cliffs  by  the  Sea- 
fide,  as  they  do  with  us ;  the  Figures  and  De- 
fcriptions  of  a  great  many  whereof  are  given  us 
by  Martin  in  his  Voyage  to  Spitzberg^  or  Gree?7- 
hmdy  and  on  the  Land  Bears,  and  Foxes,  and 
Deer,  in  the  moft  northerly  Country  that  was 
ever  yet  touched  ;  and  doubtlefs,  if  we  fhall  dif- 
cover  further  to  the  very  Nortb  Pole,  we  {hall 
find  all  that  Trad  not  to  be  vain,  ufelefs,  or  un- 
occupy'd. 

thirdly,  The  third  and  laft  thing  I  proposed 
was,  the  Conftitution  and  Confiftency  of  the 
Parts  of  the  Earth.  And  firft,  admirable  it  is 
that  the  Waters  fcould  be  gathered  together  into 
fuck  great  Conceptacula,  and  the  dry  Land  ap- 
pear ;  and  tho'  we  had  not  been  affur'd  thereof 
by  divine  Revelation,  we  could  not  in  reafon  but 
have  thought  fuch  a  Divifion  and  Separation  to 
have  been  the 'Work  of  Omnipotency,  and  infi- 
nite Wifdom  and  Goodnefs ;  for  in  this  Condi- 
tion the  Water  nourifhes  and  maintains  innume- 
rable Multitudes  of  various  Kinds  of  Fiflies,  and 
the  dry  Land  fupports  and  feeds  as  great  Variety 
of  Plants  and  Animals,  which  have  their  firm 

Footing 


2o6     T:he  Wi s D oM  of  GOD    Part  IL 

Footing  and  Habitation  j  whereas  had  all  been 
'Earthy  all  the  Species  of  Fijhes  had  been  loft,  and 
all  thofe  Commodities  which  the  Water  affords 
us ;  or  all  Water^  there  had  been  no  living  for 
Plants,  or  terreftrial  Animals,  or  Man  himfelf, 
and  all  the  Beauty,  Glory  and  Variety  of  this  in- 
ferior World  had  been  gone,  nothing  being  to  be 
feen,  but  one  uniform  dark  Body  of  Water ;  or 
had  all  been  mix  d  and  made  up  of  Water  and 
Earth  into  one  Body  of  Mud  or  Mire,  as  one 
would  think  fhould  be  moft  natural  ^  for  why 
fuch  a  Separation  as  at  prefent  we  find  {hould  be 
made,  no  Account  can  be  given  but  Providence  ; 
I  fay,  had  all  this  Globe  been  Mire  or  Mud,  then 
could  there  have  been  no  Poffibility  for  any  Ani^ 
mals  at  all  to  have  liv'd,  excepting  fome  few,  and 
thofe  very  dull  and  inferior  ones  too.  That 
therefore  the  Earth  fhould  be  made  thus,  and 
not  only  fo,  but  with  fo  great  Variety  of  Parts, 
as  Mountains,  Plains,  Vallies,  Sand,  Gravel, 
Lime,  Stone,  Clay,  Marble,  Argilla,  &c,  which 
are  fo  deledable  and  pleafant,  and  likewife  fo 
ufeful  and  convenient  for  the  breeding  and  living 
of  various  Plants  and  Animals,  fome  affecting 
Mountains,  fome  Plains,  fome  Vallies,  fome  wa- 
tery Places,  fome  Shade,  fome  Sun,  fome  Clay, 
fome  Sand,  fome  Gravel,  ^c.  That  the  Earth 
fliould  be  fo  figured  as  to  have  Mountains  in  the 
mid-land  Parts,  abounding  with  Springs  of  Wa- 
ter, pouring  down  Streams  and  Rivers  for  the 
NecelTities  and  Conveniences  of  the  Inhabitants 

of 


Part  II.       in  /i&i^  C  r  e  a  t  i  o n.  207 

of  the  lower  Countries,  and  that  the  Levels  and 
Plains  fhould  be  form'd  with  fo  eafy  a  Declivity 
as  to  caft  off  the  Water,  and  yet  not  render  Tra- 
velling or  Tillage  very  difficult  or  laborious; 
thefe  things,  I  fay,  mull  needs  be  the  Refult  of 
Counfel,  Wifdom,  and  Defign ;  efpecially  when 
(as  I  faid  before)  not  that  w^ay  which  feems  more 
facil  and  obvious  to  Chance  is  chofen,  but  that 
virhich  is  more  difficult  and  hard  to  be  trac'd, 
when  it  is  moft  convenient  and  proper  for  thofe 
nobler  Ends  and  Defigns  which  were  intended 
by  its  wife  Creator  and  Governor.  Add  to  all 
this,  that  the  whole  dry  Land  is,  for  the  moft 
part,  cover'd  over  v/ith  a  lovdy  Carpet  of  green 
Grafs,  and  other  Herbs,  of  a  Colour  not  only 
moft  grateful  and  agreeable,  but  moft  ufeful  and 
falutary  to  the  Eye  ;  and  this  alfo  decked  and 
adorn'd  with  great  Variety  of  Flowers  of  beauti- 
ful Colours  and  Figures,  and  of  moft  pleafant 
and  fragrant  Odours,  for  the  Refr^fhment  of  our 
Spirits  and  our  innocent  Delight ;  as  alfo  ^with 
beautiful  Shrubs  and  ftately  Trees,  affording  us 
npt  only  pleafant  and  nouriihing  Fruits,  many 
Liquors,  Drugs,  and  good  Medicines,  but  Tim- 
ber, and  Utenfils  for  all  Sorts  of  Trades  and  the 
Conveniences  of  Man  ;  out  of  many  Thoufands 
of  which  we  will  only  juft  name  a  few,  left  wc 
fhould  be  tedious  and  too  bulky. 

Fir/?,  The  Coco,  or  Coker-Nut  Tree,  that  fup- 

plies  the  Lidiafu  with  almoft  whatever  they  ft  and 

I  in 


2o8     7y5^  Wi s D o M  of  GOD     Part  II. 

in  need  of,  as  Bread,  Water,  Wine,  Vinegar, 
Brandy,  Milk,  Oil,  Honey,  Sugar,  Needles, 
Thread,  Linnen,  Clothes,  Cups,  Spoons,  Bee- 
foms,  Bafkets,  Paper,  Mafts  for  Ships,  Sails, 
Cordage,  Nails,  Coverings  for  their  Houfes,  ^c. 
which  may  be  feen  at  large  in  the  many  printed 
Relations  of  Voyages  and  Travels  to  the  E^- 
IfidieSy  but  moft  faithfully  in  the  Hortiis  Mala- 
baricus,  publifh'd  by  that  immortal  Patron  of 
natural  Learning,  He7iry  Van  Reede  Van  Draa- 
kenjiein^  who  has  had  great  Commands  and  Em- 
ploys in  the  Dutch  Colonies. 

Secondly^  ThQ  J^loe  Muricafa^  vel  Aculeata ^ 
which  yields  the  Americans  every  thing  their 
Neceffities  require,  as  Fences  and  Houfes,  Darts, 
Weapons,  and  other  Arms,  Shoes,  Linnen,  and 
Clothes,  Needles  and  Thread,  Wine  and  Honey, 
beiides  many  Utcnfils ;  for  all  which  Hernandes^ 
Garcililafo  de  la  Vega,  and  Margrave,  may  be 
confvilted. 

l^hirdlyy  The  Bandiira  Cmgalenfium,  called  by 
fome  the  Priapus  Vegetabilis,  at  the  end  of  whofe 
Leaves  hang  long  Sacks  or  Bags,  containing  a 
pure  limpicT Water,  of  great  Ufe  to  the  Natives 
when  they  want  Rain  for  Eight  or  Ten  Months 
together. 

A  parallel  Inftance  to  this  of  the.  Bandiira, 
my  learned  and  worthy  Friend  Dotlor  Sloane  af- 
fords 


Part  II.        in  the  CviY.  AT  I  on.  209 

fords  us  in  a  Plant  by  him  obferved  in  the  Ifland 
of  Jamaica,  and  delcribed  by  the  Title  of  ViJ^ 
cum  Caryophiikides  Maximum  flore  tripetalo  paU 
tide  luteo,  Jhnine  filamentojo,  which  is  commonly 
caird,  in  that  'ifland,  Wild  Pine,  Philofopb. 
"TrajifaB,  N°  251.  Page  114.  I  fliall  not  tran- 
fcribe  the  whole  Defcription,  bat  only  that  Pare 
of  it  which  relates  to  this  ParticuUir :  "  From 
''  the  Root  (wliich  he  had  defcribed  before)  arife 
"  Leaves  on  every  fide,  after  the  manner  of 
''  Leeks,  or  Ananas y  whence  the  Name  of 
'*  Wild' Pine,  or  Aloes,  being  folded  or  inclofed 
"  one  within  another,  each  of  which  is  two 
''  Foot  and  an  half  long,  and  from  a  three  Inch 
"  Breadth  at  Beginning,  or  Bafe,  ends  in  a 
"  Point,  having  a  very  hollow  or  concave  in- 
*^  ward  Side,  and  a  round  or  convex  outward 
*-'  one  :  So  that  by  all  their  hollow  Sides  is  made 
"  within  a  very  large  Prefervatory  Ciftern  or  Ba- 
*'  fin,  (it  to  contain  a  pretty  Quantity  of  Water, 
^  which  in  the  ruiny  Seafon  ialls  upon  the  ut- 
"  moil  Parts  of  the  fpreading  Leaves,  which  have 
"  -Chanels  in  them,  conveying  it  down  to  the 
"  Ciftern  where  it  is  kept,  as  in  a  Bottle,  the 
"  Leaves,  after  they  are  fvvelled  out  like  a  bul- 
**  bous  Root  to  make  the-Bottle,  bending  inward 
"  or  coming  again  clofe  to  the  Stalk,  by  that 
"  means  hindring  the  Evaporation  of  the  Wa- 
"  ter,  by  the  Heat  of  the  Sun-Beams. 

'*  In  the  mountainous,  as  well  as  the  dry 
"  low  Woods,  ip  Scarcity  of  Water,  this  Re- 
*■   fervatory  is  nor  only  neceflary  and  fufficienc 

P  ''  for 


2IO     the  V/isDOM  of  GOD     Part  II. 

"  for  the  Nourifliment  of  the  Plant  it  felf,  but 
''  likewife  is  very  ufeful  to  Men,  Birds,  and  all 
"  Sorts  of  Infedts,  whither  in  Scarcity  of  Wa- 
*'  ter  they  come  in  Troops,  and  feldom  go  away 
"  without  Refrefhment. 

"  Captain  Dampier^  in  his  Voyages,  Vol  II. 
"  oi  Campeche,  tells  us.  That  thefe  Bafins  made 
"  of  the  Leaves  of  the  Wild-Pine^  will  hold  a 
"  Pint  and  half  or  a  Quart  of  Water,  and  that 
*'  when  they  find  thefe  Pinesy  they  flick  their 
"  Knives  into  the  Leaves  juft  above  the  Roots, 
"  and  that  lets  out  the  Water,  which  they  catch 
"  in  their  Hats,  as  (faith  he)  I  have  done  many 
*'  times,  to  my  great  Relief. 

Fourthly,  The  Cinnamon-Tree  of  Ceylon,  in 
whofe  Parts  there  is  a  wonderful  Diverfity :  Out 
of  the  Root  they  get  a  Sort  of  Camphire,  and  its 
Oil ;  out  of  the  Bark  of  the  Trunk,  the  true  Oil 
of  Cinnamon  ;  from  the  Leaves,  an  Oil  like  that 
oi  Cloves  \  out  of  the  Fruit,  2iyu?iipcr  0\\,  with 
a  Mixture  of  thofe  of  Cinnanwi  and  Cloves  -,  be- 
fides,  they  boil  the  Berries  into  a  Sort  of  Wax, 
out  of  which  they  make  Candles,  Plaifters,  Un- 
guents. Here  we  may  take  Notice  of  the  Candle- 
Trees  of  the  Wejl-Indies,  out  of  whofe  Fruit, 
boil'd  to  a  thick  fat  Confiftence,  are  made  very 
good  Candles,  many  of  which  have  been  lately 
diftributed  by  that  moft  ingenious  Merchant, 
Mx.  Charles  Dubois. 

Fifth!:!, 


Part  II.       in  the  Cky.  AT lo"^.  211 

Fifthly^  The  Fount  aim  ^  or  Dropping-Trees,  m 
the  I  lies  of  Ferro,  St.  Thomas^  and  in  Guiney^ 
which  ferve  the  Inhabitants  inftead  of  Rain,  and 
frefli  Springs : '  My  honoured  Friend,  Dr.  T^an- 
cred  Robinjon^  in  a  late  Letter  to  me,  is  not  of 
VoJJiiis's  Opinion,  that  thefe  Trees  are  of  the 
Farulaceous  YawA,  becaufe  he  obferves,  that  by 
^  the  Defcriptions  of  Eye-witneiTes,  and  by  the 
dry'd  Sample  fent  by  Paludafius  to  the  Duke  of 
Wirtenberg,  the  Leaves  are  quite  different  from 
thofe  of  the  Ferula  ^^  coming  nearer  to  the  Sefeli 
Fthiopicum  Salicis  vel  Periclymeni  folio :  There- 
fore the  DoBor  rather  thinks  them  to  be  of  the 
haurel-YxwA^  though  he  concludes  here  may  be 
many  different  Sorts  of  thefe  running  Aqueous- 
Trees  ;  becaufe  that  Pba?2ome?2on  does  not  de- 
pend upon,  or  proceed  from  any  Peculiarity  of 
the  Plant,  but  rather  from  the  Place  and  Situa- 
tion ;  of  which  he  writes  more  at  large,  in  a 
Letter  printed  in  another  Difcourfe  of  mine. 

'Sixthly^  and  Lajily,  We  will  only  mention 
the  Names  of  fome  other  Vegetables,  which,, 
with  Eighteen  or  Twenty  Thoufand  more  of 
that  Kind  ,  do  manifeft  to  Mankind  the  illu- 
ftrious  Bounty  and  Providence  of  the  Almighty 
and  •  Omnifcient  Creator,  towards  his  unde- 
ferving  Creatures  5  as  the  Cotton-Tree's y  the 
J^anyoc^  or  Cajfava -,  the  Potatoes  the  Jefuit'S' 
Bark  Tree  j  the  Poppy  ;  the  Rhubarb  ^  the  Scam- 

P  2  mony-^ 


212       T/)eWisDouof  GOD    Part  II. 

mony  -,  the  Jalap  -,  the  Coloqui7itida ;  the  China  ; 
Sarfa-y  the  Serpent  aria  Virginiana  ^  or  Snake- 
weed 5  the  A^///,  or  Gen/eg  -,  the  Numerofe  Bal- 
fam^  and  Gum-tree^',  many  of  which  are  of  late 
much  illuftrated  by  the  great  Iilduftry  and  Skill 
of  that  moft  difcerning  Botanift,  Dr.  Leonard 
Plukenet.  Of  what  great  Ufe  all  thefe,  and  in- 
numerable other  Plants,  are  to  Mankind  in  the 
feveral  Parts  of  Life,  few  or  none  can  be  igno- 
rant ;  befides  the  known  Ufes  in  Curing  Dif- 
eafes,  in  Feeding  and  Cloathing  the  Poor,  in 
Building,  in  Dying:  In  all  Mechanicks  there 
may  be  as  nuny  more  not  yet  difcovered,  and 
which  may  be  referved  on  purpofe  to  exercife 
the  Faculties  beftowed  on  Man,  to  find  out  what 
is  neceffary,  convenient,  pleafant,  or  profitable 
to  him. 

To  fum  up  all  in  brief:  This  T' err  aqueous 
Globe  we  know  is  made  up  of  two  Parts  j 

1.  A  thin  and  fluid. 

2.  A  firm  and  confiftent.. 

The  former,  called  by  the  Name  of  Water , 
the  latter,  of  Earthy  or  Dry  Land.  The  Land^ 
being  the  more  denfe  and  heavy  Body,  doth 
naturally  defcend  beneath  the  Water,  and  oc- 
cupy the  lower  Place ;  the  Water  afcends*  and 
floats  above  it.  But  we  fee  that  it  is  not  thus : 
For  the  Land,  though  the  more  heavy,  is  for- 
cibly and  contrary  to  its  Nature  fo  elevated  as 
to  cafl:  off  the  Water,    and  ftand  above  it,    be- 


Part  II.       Z;^  />6^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N,  213 

ing  (as  the  Pfalmifl  phrafes  it)  founded  upcn  or 
above  the  Seas,  and  eJiabliJISd  above  the  Floods ^ 
Plal.  xxiv.  2.  and  this  in  fuch  manner,  that  not 
only  on  one  fide  of  the  Globe,  but  on  all  fides, 
there  were  probably  Continents  and  Iflands,  rai- 
fed  fo  equally  as  to  counterbalance  one  another, 
the  Water  flowing  between  them,  and  filling  the 
hollow  and  depreflTed  Places;   neither  was  the 
^  dry  Land  only  raifed  up  and  made  to  appear,  but 
fome  Parts  (which  we  call  Mountains)  were  high- 
ly elevated  above  others,  and  thofe  fo  difpos'd 
and  fituated  (as  we  have  fhewn)  in  the  mid-land 
Parts,  and  in  continued  Chains  running  Eajl  and 
Weji,  as  to  render  all  the  Earth  habitable,  a  great 
Part  whereof  otherv^ife  would  not  have  been  fo ; 
but  the  Torrid  Zone  mull  indeed  have  been  fuch 
a  Place  as  the  Ancients  fancy 'd  it,  unhabitable 
for  Heat.     Let  us  now  confider  how  much  be<:ter 
it  is  that  the  dry  Land  fiaould  be  thus  raifed  up, 
and  the  Globe  divided  almoft  equally  between 
Earth  and  Water,  than  that  all  its  Surface  fiiould 
be  one  uniform  and  dark  Body  of  Water  j  I  fay 
Water,  becaufe  that  naturally  occupies  the  fupe- 
rior  Place,  and  not  Earth  ;  for  were  it  all  Water, 
the  whole  Beauty  of  this  inferior  Vv^orld  were 
gone;  there  could  be  no  fuch  pleafant  and  deli- 
cious Profpeds  as  the  Earth  now  aftbrds  us ;  no 
Diftindlion,  and  grateful  Variety  of  Mountains 
and  Hills,  Plains  and  Vallies,  Rivers  and  Pools, 
and  Fountains;    no  (h ad y  Woods,  ficr'd  with 
lofty  and  towring  Trees  for  Timber,  lowly  and 
more  fpread  ones  for  Shade  and  Fruit ;  no  ami- 

P  ^  able 


214  77)e  WisTiOM  of  GOD  Part  IL 
able  Verdure  of  Herbs,  befpangled  with  an  in- 
finite Variety  of  fpecious  and  fragrant  Flowers  ; 
for  thofe  Plants  that  grow  at  the  bottom  of  the 
Sea,  are  for  the  moft  part  of  a  dull,  fullen,  and 
dirty  Olive  Colour,  and  bear  no  Flowers  at  all ; 
inftead  of  the  elegant  Shapes  and  Colours,  the 
Sagacity  and  Docility  of  ingenious  Beafts  and 
Birds,  the  mufical  Voices  and  Accents  of  the 
aereal  Chorifters,  there  had  been  nothing  but 
mute,  and  ftupid,  and  indocil  Fifhcs,  which  feem 
to  want  the  very  Senfe  of  Difcipline,  as  may  be 
gathered  from  that  they  are  not  vocal,  and  that 
there  appear  in  them  no  Organs  of  hearing,  it 
being  alfo  doubtful  whether  the  Element  they 
live  in  be  capable  of  tranfmitting  Sounds^  the 
beft  Senfe  they  have,  even  their  Sight,  can  be  but 
dull  and  imperfed:,  the  Element  of  Water  being 
femi-opake,  and  reflecting  a  good  part  of  the 
Beams  of  Light ;  the  moft  noble  and  ingenious 
Creatures  that  live  there,  the  Cetaceous  Kind, 
being  near  a-kin  to  terreftrial  Animals,  and 
breathing  in  the  fame  Element,  the  open  Air. 
Had,  I  fay,  all  been  Water,  there  had  been  no 
Place  for  fuch  a  Creature  as  Man,  as  we  fee  there 
is  no  fuch  there  i  there  is  no  Bufinefs  for  him, 
no  Subjedl  to  employ  his  Art  and  Faculties,  and 
confequently  there  could  be  no  Effeds  of  them ; 
no  fuch  Things  as  Houfes  and  Cities,  and  (late- 
ly Edifices ;  as  Gardens  and  Orchards,  and  Walks, 
and  Labyrinths  j  as  Corn-Fields  and  Vineyards, 
and  the  reft  of  thefe  Ornaments,  wherewith  the 

Wit 


Part  II.        /;^  /y^^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  215 

Wit  and  Induflry  of  Man  hath  embelifli'd  the 
World. 

Thefe  are  great  things,  and  worthy  the  Care 
and  Providence  of  the  Creator;  which  whofo 
confidereth,  and  doth  not  difcern  and  acknow- 
ledge, muft  needs  be  as  ftupid  as  the  Earth  he 
goes  upon. 

But  becaufe  Mountains  have  been  look'd  upon 
by  fome  as  Warts,  and  fuperfiuous  Excrefcen- 
cies,  of  no  Ufe  or  Benefit,  nay,  rather  as  Signs 
and  Proofs  that  the  prefent  Earth  is  notliing  elfe 
but  a  Heap  of  Rubbifh  and  Ruins,  I  ihall  reduce 
and  demonftrate  in  Particulars  the  great  Ufe, 
Benefit,  and  NecefTity  of  them. 

I.  They  are  of  eminent  Ufe  for  the  Produdion 
and  Original  of  Springs  and  Rivers;  without 
Hills  and  Mountains  there  could  be  no  fuch 
things,  or  at  leafl:  but  very  few,  no  more  than 
we  now  find  in  plain  and  level  Countries,  that  is, 
fo  few,  that  it  was  never  my  hap  to  fee  one ;  in 
Winter-time  indeed  we  might  have  Torrents 
and  Land-floods,  and  perhaps  fomecimes  great 
Inundations;  but  in  Summer  nothing  but  ftag- 
nating  Water,  referv'd  in  Pools  and  Cifterns,  or 
drawn  up  out  of  deep  Wells;  but  as  for  a  great 
Part  of  the  Earth  (all  lying  within  or  near  the 
Tropicks)  it  would  neither  have  Rivers,  nor  any 
Rain  at  all ;  we  jQiould  confequently  lofe  all  thofe 
Conveniences  and  Advantages  that  Rivers  aftbrd 

P  4  u^ 


2i6     Tie  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  II. 

us,  ofFiftiing,  Navigation,  Carriage,  driving  of 
Mills,  Engines,  and  many  others.  This  End  of 
Mountains  I  find  affign'd  by  Mr.  Edmund  Hally^ 
a  Man  of  great  Sagacity  and  deep  Infight  into 
the  Natures  and  Caufes  of  Things,  in  a  Dif- 
courle  of  his  publifli'd  in  .the  Philojhph,  '^franf- 
aBionSy  Numb.  192.  in  thefe  Woids:  l^his,  if 
njoe  may  allow  final  Caufes  [Hardime?it,  the  thing 
is  clear,  pronounce  boldly,  without  any  Ifs  or 
ji?2ds]  nisfeems  to  be  one  Defgnofthe  Hills,  that 
their  Ridges  being  placd  through  the  midft  of  their 
Continents,  might  ferve  as  it  were  fir  Alembicks, 
to  d'fiilfrefj  Water  for  the  Ufe  of  Man  and  Beaji ; 
and  their  Heights  to  give  a  Defcent  ofthofe  Strea?r.s ; 
to  run  gently,  like  fo  many  Veins  of  the  Microcofn, 
to  be  the  more  beneficial  to  the  Creation, 

II.  They  are  of  great  Ufe  for  the  Generation, 
and  convenient  digging  up  of  Metals  and  Mine- 
rals; which  how  neceffary  Inflruments  they  are 
of  Culture  and  Civility,  I  have  before  ihewn ; 
thefe  we  fee  are  all  digg'd  out  of  Mountains,  and 
I  doubt  whether  there  is  or  can  be  any  Genera- 
tion of  them  in  perfedly  plain  and  level  Coun- 
tries j  but  if  there  be,  yet  could  not  fuch  Mines, 
without  great  Pains  and  Charges,  if  at  all,  be 
wrought;  the  Delfs  would  be  fo  flown  with 
Waters  (it  being  impoflible  to  make  any  ^^i/if^ 
or  Soughs  to  drain  them)  that  no  Gins  or  Ma- 
chines could  fufSce  to  lay  and  keep  them  dry. 


III.  They 


Part  11.         in  t^e  Great  ION.  217 

III.  They  are  ufeful  to  Mankind  in  affording 
them  convenient  Places  for  Habitation,  and  Si- 
tuations of  Houfes  and  Villages ,  ferving  as 
Skreens  to  keep  off  the  cold  and  nipping  Blafts 
of  the  Northern  and  Bajierly  Winds,  and  reflect- 
ing the  benign  and  cheriihing  Sun-beams,  and  fo 
rendring  their  Habitations  both  more  comforta- 
ble and  more  chearly  in  Winter ;  and  promoting 
tfie  Growth  of  Herbs  and  Fruit-Trees,  and  the 
Maturation  of  their  Fruits  in  Summer ;  belides 
cafting  off  the  Waters,  they  lay  the  Gardens, 
Yards,  and  Avenues  to  the  Houfes  dry  and  clean, 
and  fo  as  well  more  falutary  as  more  elegant ; 
whereas  Houfes  built  in  Plains,  unlefs  fhaded 
with  Trees,  lie  bleak,  and  expos'd  to  Wind  and 
Weather,  and  all  Winter  are  apt  to  be  grievoufly 
annoy'd  with  Mire  and  Dirt. 

IV.  They  are  very  ornamental  to  the  Earth, 
affording  pleafant  and  delightful  Profpedts,  both, 
I.  To  them  that  look  downwards  from  them 
upon  the  fubjacent  Countries,  as  they  muft  needs 
acknowledge  w^ho  have  been  but  on  the  Downs 
of  Sujfex^  and  cnjoy'd  that  ravifliing  Profpedl  of 
the  Sea  on  oijc  hand,  and  the  Country  far  and 
wide  on  the  other.  And,  2.  To  thofe  th.ic  look 
upwards,  and  behold  them  from  the  Plains  and 
low  Grounds,  which  what  a  Refrefliing  and 
Pleafure  it  is  to  the  Eye,  they  are  beft  able  to 
judge  who  have  liv'd  in  the  Ifle  of  £/)',  or  other 

level 


2i8     T'he  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  I L 

level  Countries,  extending  on  all  Sides  further 
than  one  can  ken;  or  have  been  out  far  at  Sea, 
where  they  can  fee  nothing  but  Sky  and  Water. 
That  the  Mountains  are  pleafant  Objects  to  be- 
hold, appears,  in  that  the  very  Images  of  them, 
their  Draughts  and  Landlkips,  are  fo  much 
efteem'd. 

V.  They  ferve  for  the  Produftion  of  great  Va- 
riety of  Herbs  and  Trees ;  for  it  is  a  true  Obfer- 
vation,  that  Mountains  do  efpecially  abound 
with  different  Species  of  Vegetables,  becaufe  of 
the  great  Diverfity  of  Soils  that  are  found  there, 
every  Vertex  or  Eminency  almoft  affording  a  new 
Kind.  Now  thefe  Plants  ferve  partly  for  the 
Food  and  Suftenance  of  fuch  Animals  as  are  pro- 
per to  the  Mountains,  partly  for  medicinal  Ufes, 
the  chief  Phyfick  Herbs  and  Roots,  and  the  beft 
In  their  Rinds,  growing  there ;  it  being  remark- 
able that  the  greateft  and  moft  luxuriant  Species 
in  moft  Genera  of  Plants  are  native  of  the  Moun- 
tains; partly  alfo  for  the  Exercife  and  Diverfion 
of  fuch  ingenious  and  induftrious  Perfons  as  are 
delighted  in  fearching  out  thefe  natural  Rarities, 
and  obferving  the  outward  Form,  Growth,  Na- 
tures and  Ufes  of  each  Species^  and  reflecting 
upon  the  Creator  of  them  his  due  Praifes  and 
Benedid:ions. 

VI.  They  ferve  for  the  Harbour,  Entertain- 
ment, and  Maintenance  of  various  Animals, 
Birds,  Beafts,  and  Infefts,  that  breed,  feed,  and 

frequent 


Part  II.       ////^^  C  REATioN.  219 

frequent  there ;  for  the  higheft  Tops  and  Pikes 
of  the  Alps  themfelves  are  not  deftitute  of  their 
Inhabitants ;  the  Ibcx^  or  Steift-Buck^  the  Riipi- 
capra  or  Chamois  among  Quadrupeds ;  the  La- 
gopus  among  Birds  ^  and  I  my  felf  have  obferv'd 
beautiful  Papilios^  and  Store  of  other  Infedts, 
upon  the  Tops  of  fome  of  the  Alpine  Mountains; 
nay,  the  higheft  Ridges  of  many  of  thofe  Moun- 
tains ferve  for  the  Maintenance  of  Cattel  for  the 
Service  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Valleys ;  the 
Men  there,  leaving  their  Wives  and  younger 
Children  belov^,  do  not  without  fome  difficulty 
clamber  up  the  Acclivities,  dragging  their  Kine 
with  them,  where  they  feed  them,  and  milk 
them,  and  make  Butter  and  Cheefe,  and  do  all 
the  Dairy- Work,  in  fuch  forry  Hovels  and  Sheds 
as  they  build  there  to  inhabit  in  during  the  Sum- 
mer Months ;  this  I  my  felf  have  feen  and  ob- 
ferv'd in  Mount  Jura^  not  far  from  Geneva^ 
which  is  high  enough  to  retain  Snow  all  the 
Winter. 

The  fame  they  do  alfo  in  the  Grifons  Country, 
which  is  one  of  the  higheft  Parts  of  the  AlpSy 
travelling  through  which  I  did  not  fet  Foot  off 
Snow  for  four  Days  Journey,  at  the  latter  End 
of  March. 

VII.  Thofe  long  Ridges  and  Chains  of  lofty 
and  topping  Mountains  which  run  through  the 
whole  Continents  Eajl  and  Weji  (as  I  have  elfe- 

where 


220     The  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  If. 

where  obferv'd)  ferve  to  flop  the  Evagation  of 
the  Vapours  to  the  North  and  South  in  hot  Coun- 
tries, condenfing  them,  like  Alemhick  Heads, 
into  Water,  and  fo  by  a  kind  of  external  Diftil- 
lation  giving  Original  x.o  Springs  and  Rivers ; 
and  likewife  by  amaffing,  cooling,  and  conftipa- 
ting  of  them,  turn  them  into  Rainj  by  thofe 
means  rendring  the  fervid  Regions  of  the  Torrid 
Zone  habitable. 

This  Difcourfe  concerning  the  Ufe  of  Moun- 
*  The  Diffo'     t^ii^s,  I  have  made  ufe  of  in  ano- 
luiion  of  the     ther  *  Treatife ;  but  becaufe  it  is 
World.  proper  to  this  Place,  I  have  (with 

fome  Alterations  and  Enlargements)  here  re- 
peated it. 

I  had  almoft  forgotten  that  Ufe  they  are  of 
to  Mankind,  in  ferving  for  Boundaries  and  De- 
fences to  the  Territories  of  Kingdoms  and  Com- 
monwealths. 

A  fecond  Particular  I  have  made  choice  of 
more  exadtly  to  furvey  and  confider,  is  the  Body 
of  Man ;  wherein  I  ihall  endeavour  to  difcover 
fomething  of  the  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs  of  God : 
Firft,  by  making  fome  general  Obfervations 
concerning  the  Body.  Secondly,  by  running 
over  and  difcourfing  upon  its  principal  Parts  and 
Members. 

I.  Then, 


Part  II.         i7t  ^>6^  C  R  E  AT  I  O  N.  2  21 

I.  Then,  in  general,  I  fay,  the  Wifdom  and 
Goodnefs  of  God  appears  in  the  ereB  Pojlure  of 
the  Body  of  Man,  which  is  a  Privilege  and  Ad- 
vantage giv^en  to  Man  above  other  Animals;  but 
tho'  this  be  fo,  yet  I  would  not  have  you  think 
that  all  the  Particulars  I  (hall  mention  are  pro- 
per only- to  the  Body  of  Man,  divers  of  them 
agreeing  to  many  other  Creatures.  It  is  not  my 
Bufinefs  to  confider  only  the  Prerogatives  of 
Man  above  other  Animals,  but  the  Endowments 
and  Perfedtions  which  Nature  hath  conferr'd  on 
his  Body,  tho*  comm.on  to  them  with  him.  Of 
this  EreBion  of  the  Body  of  Man  the  Ancients 
have  taken  notice,  as  a  particular  Gift  and  Fa- 
vour of  God, 

Fronaq\  climfpeclent  Animalia  cater  a  terram^ 

Os  homini  fublime  dedit^  ccelumque  tueri 

Jicffit^  &  eredfos  ad  Sydera  tollere  vultus, 

Ovid.  Metam.  i. 

And  before  him,  ^idly  in  his  Second  Book, 
De  Nat.  Deorum ; 

Ad  banc  providentiam  jjatura  tarn  diligentem 
tarnque  Jolertem  adjiingi  multa  poffunty  e  quibus  in- 
teiUgatur  quanta  res  hominibiis  a  Deo^  quamque 
eximia  trtbutce  J'unt^  qui  primiim  ecs  humo  exi:ita' 
toSy  celjbs  &  ereBos  conjlituit^  lit  Deorum  cognitio" 
nem  cerium  intuentes  capcre  pojfent.  Sunt  enltn  e 
terra  hojiiines^  non  iit^iiKolc^  citque  kabitatores^  fed 

quafi 


222     T/je  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  11. 

qua/i  fpedtatores  fup^rariim  reriim  atque  ccelejiium^ 
quaruni  fpeBaculum  ad  nullum  aliiid  genus  ani- 
mantium  pertinet. 

Man  being  the  only  Creature  in  this  fublunary 
World  made  to  contemplate  Heaven,  it  was  con- 
venient that  he  ihould  have  fuch  a  Figure,  or 
Situs  of  the  Parts  of  his  Body,  that  he  might 
conveniently  look  upwards.  But  to  fay  the 
Truth  in  this  refpedt,  of  contemplating  the  Hea- 
vens, or  looking  upwards,  I  do  not  fee  what 
Advantage  a  Man  hath  by  this  Eredion  above 
other  Animals,  the  Faces  of  moft  of  them  being 
more  fupine  than  ours,  which  are  only  perpen- 
dicular to  the  Horizon^  v>rhereas  fome  of  theirs 
ftand  reclining  5  but  yet  two  or  three  other  Ad- 
vantages we  have  of  this  Ercftion,  which  I  fhall 
here  mention. 

Firjl^  It  is  more  commodious  for  the  fuftain- 
ing  of  the  Flead,  which  being  full  of  Brains,  and 
very  heavy  (the  Brain  in  Man  being  far  larger,  in 
proportion  to  the  Bulk  of  his  Body,  than  in  any 
other  Animal)  would  have  been  very  painful  and 
wearifom  to  carry,  if  the  Neck  had  lain  parallel 
or  inclining  to  the  Horizon. 

Seccndhy  This  Figure  is  moft  convenient  for 
Profped]:,  and  looking  about  one;  a  Man  may 
fee  further  before  him,  which  is  no  fmall  Advan- 
tage for  avoiding  Danger,  and  difcovering  what- 
ever he  fearches  after, 

mrdl)\ 


Part  II.        in  ^h  Cre  ATioN.  223 

nirdly.  The  Convenkncy  of  this  Site  of  our 
Bodies  will  more  clearly  appear,  if  we  confider 
what  a  pitiful  Condition  we  had  been  in,  if  we 
had  been  conftantl)^  neceffitated  to  ftand  and 
walk  upon  all  Four ;  Man  being,  by  the  Make 
of  his  Body,  of  all  Quadrupeds  (for  now  I  mufl 
compare  him  with  them)  the  moft  unfit  for  that 
kiijd  of  InceJJas^  as  I  ihall  fliew  anon ;  and  be- 
fides  that,  we  fhould  have  wanted,  at  leaft  in  a 
great  meafure,  the  Ufe  of  our  Hand,  that  inva- 
luable Inftrument,  without  which  he  had  want- 
ed moft  of  thofe  Advantages  we  enjoy  as  reafon- 
able  Creatures,  as  I  (hall  mors  particularly  de- 
monftrate  afterwards. 

But  it  may  be  perchance  objefted  by  fome, 
that  Nature  did  not  intend  this  Ereftion  of  the 
Body,  but  that  it  is  fuperinduc'd  and  artificial ; 
for  that  Children  at  firft  creep  on  all  four,  ac- 
cording to  that  of  the  Poet  -, 

M(>x  ^ladrupeSy  rituque  tulit  Jua  memhra  fe- 
7"  arum.  Ovid. 

To  which  I  anfwer,  that  there  is  fo  great  an 
Inequality  in  the  Length  of  our  Legs  and  Arms, 
as  w^ould  make  it  extreamly  inconvenient,  if  not 
impoffible  for  us  to  walk  upon  all  four,  and  fee 
us  almoft  upon  our  Heads ;  and  therefore  we  fee 
that  Children  do  not  creep  upon  their  Hands 
and  Feet/  but  upon  their  Hands  and  Knees;  fo 

that 


224  The  Wisdom  of  GO D  Part  IL 
that  it  is  plain  that  Nature  intended  us  to  walk 
as  we  do,  and  not  upon  all  four. 

2.  I  argue  from  the  SifuSy  or  Pofition  of  our 
F^ces ;  for  had  we  been  to  walk  upon  all  four, 
we  had  been  the  moft  prone  of  all  Animals,  our 
Faces  being  parallel  to  the  Horizon,  and  look- 
ing diredtly  downwards. 

3.  The  Greatnefs  and  Strength  of  the  Mufcles 
of  the  Thighs  and  Legs  above  thofe  of  the  Arms, 
is  a  clear  Indication  that  they  were  by  Nature  in- 
tended for  a  more  difficult  and  laborious  Adion, 
even  the  moving  and  transferring  the  whole  Bo- 
dy, and  that  Motion  to  be  fometimes  continued 
for  a  great  while  together. 

As  for  that  Argument  taken  from  the  contrary 
Flexure  of  the  Joints  of  our  Arms  and  Legs  to 
that  of  Quadrupeds,  as  that  our  Knees  bend  for- 
ward, whereas  the  fame  Joint  of  their  hind  Legs 
bends  backward  ;  and  that  our  Arms  bend  back- 
ward, whereas  the  Knees  of  their  fore  Legs  bend 
forward ;  although  the  Obfervation  be  as  old  as 
Jrijlotle,  becaufe  I  think  there  is  a  Miftake  in  it, 
in  not  comparing  the  fame  Joints  (for  the  firft 
and  uppermoft  Joint  in  a  Quadruped's  hind  Legs 
bends  forward  as  well  as  a  Man's  Knees,  which 
anfwer  to  it,  being  the  uppermoft  Joint  of  our 
Legs,  and  the  like  mutatis  mutandh  may  be  faid 
of  the  Arms)  I  fl:iall  not  infift  upon  it. 

Another 


Part  II.        m  tie  Creation.  225 

Another  Particular  which  may  ferve  to  demon- 
flrate  that  this  ered:  Pofture  of  the  Body  of  Man 
was  intended  and  defign'd  by  the  wife  and  good 
Author  of  Nature,  is  the  faftning  of  the  Cone  of 
the  Pericardium  to  the  Midriff,  an  Account 
whereof  I  (hall  give  tiie  Reader  out  of  the  inge- 
nious Dr.  Tyfons  Anatomy  of  the  Orang-Outang^ 
or  Pig7nic\  p.  49. 

Vefalius  (faith  he)  and  others  make  it  a  Peculi- 
arity to  Man,  that  the  Pericardium^  or  Bag  that 
inclofes  the  Heart,  {l:iould  be  faften  d  to  the  Dia^ 
phragm,     Vefalius  tells  us  (De  Corporis  Humani 
fabric  a  y  lib.  6.  cap.  8.)  Cateriim  i?2voliicri  miicro^ 
.&  dextri  ipfius  lateris  egregia  portio  Septi  traiif- 
"verji  nerveo  circulo  validi/Jime  amploqiie  admodicm 
Jpatio  counafcitur,    quod  Hominibus  ejl  peculiars, 
T'he  Point  of  the  Pericardium,  and  a  vefj  conjide" 
rable  Portion  of  its  right  Side^  is  77ioft  jirjnly  fajl^ 
end  to  the  nervous  Circle  of  the  Midriff  for  a  large 
Space ^  which  is  peculiar  to  Mankind,     So  B Lin- 
ear dius^  An  at,  P,eformat.  cap.  2.  p.  8.  Homo  pr^s 
cceteris  Ammalibus  hoc  peculiare  habet^  quod  ejus 
Pericardium  Septi  tranjherji  medio  femper  accref- 
cat^  ciun  idem  in  '^ladrupedum  genere  liberum  & 
aliquanto  Jpatio  ab  ipjb  remotumfit :  Man  hath  this 
peculiar  to  him^  and  differ eiit  from  other  Animals^ 
that  his  Pericardium  doth  always  grow  to  the  mid- 
dle of  the  Midriff',  whereas  in  the  ^adrupedKind 
it  is  free  ^  and  remov'd  Jbme  diftance  fro7n  it- 


The  Pericardium  in  Man  is  therefore  thu5  faft- 

t  mieht  affift  the  Dia^ 
Q_^        .  ftok 


.en*d,  that  in  Expiration  it  mieht  affift  the  Dia 


226     "The  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  II. 

Hole  of  the  Diaphragm^  for  otherwife  the  Liver 
and  Stomach  being  fo  weighty,  they  would  draw 
it  down  too  much  towards  the  Abdomen^  fo  that 
upon  the  Relaxation  of  its  Fibres  in  its  Diajlole 
it  would  not  afcend  fufficiently  into  the  'Thorax, 
fo  as  to  caufe  a  Subfidency  of  the  Lungs,  by  lef- 
fening  the  Cavity  there.  In  ^ladrupeds  there  is 
no  need  of  this  Adhefion  of  the  Pericardium  to 
the  Diaphragviy  for  in  them  in  Expi-ratio?i,  when 
the  Fibres  of  the  Diaphragm  are  relax'd ,  the 
weight  of  the  Vifcera  of  the  Abdomen  will  eafily 
prefs  the  Diaphragm  up  into  the  Cavity  of  the 
Thorax ,  and  fo  perform  that  Service ;  befides, 
were  the  Pericardium  faften'd  to  the  Diaphragm 
in  ^ladriipeds^  it  would  hinder  its  Syftole  in  /;?- 
fpiration,  or  its  Defcent  downwards  upon  the 
Contradtion  of  its  mufcular  Fibres,  and  the  more, 
becaufe  the  Diaphragm  being  thus  ty'd  up,  it 
could  not  then  fo  freely  force  down  the  weight 
of  the  Vifcera,  which  are  always  preffing  upon  it, 
and  confequently  not  fufficiently  dilate  the  Cavi- 
ty of  the  Thorax,  and  therefore  muft  hinder  their 
Infpiration.  Thus  we  fee  how  neceffary  it  is  that 
in  Ma?i  the  Pericardiu?n  fhould  be  faften'd  to.  the 
Diaphragm,  and  in  ^ladrupeds  how  inconvenient 
it  would  be.  And  Jince  %ve  find  this  difference  be- 
tween the  Hearts  of  Brutes  and  Men  in  this  Parti- 
cular, how  can  we-  imagiiie  but  that  it  miifi  needs 
be  the  Effect  of  Wifdom  and  Defign,  and  that  Man 
was  intended  by  N atiire  to  walk  creel,  and  not  upon 
all  four,  as  ^adrupcds  do  ? 

IL  The 


Part  II.       i?t  thz  Creation.  227 

II.  The  Body  of  Man  may  thence  be  proved  to 
be  the  Effedt  of  Wifdom,  becaufe  there  is  nothing 
in  it  deficient,  nothing  fuperfluous,  nothing  but 
hath  its  Ei)d  and  Ufe.  So  true  are  thofe  Maxims 
we  have  ah"eady  made  ufe  of ;  Natura  nihil  fa  cit 
Jriiftra,  and  Natura  non  abundat  infiiperjhiis^  nee 
deficit  in  necejfariii^  no  Part  that  we  can  well 
fpare.  T^he  Eye  cannot  fay  to  the  Handy  I  have 
710  need  of  thee ;  nor  the  Head  to  the  Feet^  I  have 
no  need  of  you,  i  Cor.  xii.  21.  that  I  may  ufurp 
the  Apodle's  Simihtude. 

The  Belly  cannot*  quarrel  with  the  Members, 
nor  they  with  the  Belly  for  her  feeming  Sloth ; 
as  they  provide  for  Meat  for  her,  fo  fhe  concodts 
and  diftributes  it  to  them  ;  only  it  may  be  doubt- 
ed to  what  Ufe  the  Paps  in  Men  (hould  ferve.  I 
anfwer,  partly  for  Ornament,  partly  for  a  kind 
of  Conformity  between  the  Sexes,  and  partly  to 
defend  and  cherifh  the  Heart ;  in  fome  they  con- 
tain Milk,  as  in  a  Danijh  Family  we  read  of  in 
Bartholines  Anatotnical  Obfervatiom ;  however,  it 
follpws  not  that  they  or  any  other  Parts  of  the 
Body  are  ufclefs  becaufe  we  are  ignorant. 

I  have  lately  met  with  a  Story  in  Signior  Paulo 
Boccones  natural  Obfervaiions,  printed  at  Bologna 
in  Italy  1684,  well  attefted,  concerning  a  Coun- 
tryman call'd  Billardirio  di  Billo,  living  in  a  Vil- 
lage belonging  to  the  City  of  Nocera  in  Umb7^iay 
call'd  Scwareggio,  whofe  Wife  dying,  and  leaving 
a  young  Infant,  he  nouriih.'d  it  with  his  own 
Milk.     This  Man,,  citfer  becaufe  in  the  fmall 

Q^jj  Village 


228  ^njeWisDouof  GOD  Part  I L 
Village  where  he  liv'd  there  was  not  a  wet  Nurfe 
to  be  had,  or  becaufe  he  was  not  able  to  hire  one, 
took  the  Child,  and  applying  it  to  his  own  Bo- 
fom,  and  putting  the  Nipples  of  his  Breafls  into 
its  Mouth,  invited  it  to  luck,  which. the  Infant 
did,  and  after  divers  times  drawing,  fetch'd  fome 
Milk  s  whereat  the  Father  encouraged,  continued 
to  apply  it,  and  fo  after  a  while  it  brought  dov^n 
the  Milk  fo  plentifully  as  to  nourifh  it  for  many 
Months,  till  it  was  fit  to  be  wean'd.  Hereupon 
my  Author,  having  prov'd  by  fufficient  Autho- 
riry  of  able  Anatomifts,  fuch  as  Fra72cifcus  Ma- 
ria Florentinus  J  and  Marcellus  Malpighius^  that 
the  Paps  of  Men  have  the  fame  Strudlure  and  the 
iame  Veffels  with  thofe  of  Women,  conclude?, 
that  Nature  hath  not  given  Paps  to  Men  either 
to  no  putpofe,  or  for  meer  Ornament,  but,  if 
need  requires,  to  fupply  the  Defedt  of  the  Fe- 
male, and  give  Suck  to  the  Young. 

Had  we  been  born  with  a  large  Wen  upon  our 
Faces,  or  a  Bavarian  Poke  under  our  Chins,  or 
a  great  Bunch  upon  our  Backs  like  Camels^  or  any 
the  like  fuperfiuous  Excrefcency,  which  fhould 
be  not  only  ufelefs  but  troublefome ,  not  only 
Hand  us  in  no  ftead,  but  alfo  be  ill-favour'd  to 
behold  and  burdenfome  to  carry  about,  then  we 
might  have  had  fome  Pretence  to  doubt  whether 
an  intelligent  and  bountiful  Creator  had  been  our 
Archited:  ;  for  had  the  Body  been  made  by 
Chance,  it  muft  in  all  likelihood  have  had  ma- 
ny of  thefe  fuperfiuous  and  unnecellary  Parts. 
I 

But 


Part  11.       in  the  Creation.  229 

But  now  feeing  there  is  none  of  our  Members 
but  hath  its  Place  and  Ufe,  none  that  we  could 
fpare,  or  conveniently  live  without,  were  it  but 
thofe  we  account  Excrements,  the  Hair  of  our 
Heads,  or  the  Nails  on  our  Fingers  ends,  we 
mull:  needs  be  mad  or  fottifh,  if  we  can  conceive 
any  other  than  that  an  infinitely  good  and  wife 
Qod  was  our  Author  and  -Former. 

III.  We  may  fetch  an  Argument  of  the  Wil- 
dom  and  Providence  of  God  from  the  convenient 
Situation  and  Difpofition  of  the  Parts  and  Mem- 
bers of  our  Bodies ;  they  are  feated  mioil:  conve- 
niently for  Ufe,  for  Ornament,  and  for  mutual 
Alfiftance. 

F/r/?,  For  Ufe.  So  we  fee  the  Senfes,  of  fuch 
eminent  Ufe  for  our  well-being,  iituate  in  the 
Head,  as  Sentinels  in  a  Watch-Tower,  to  receive 
and  convey  to  the  Soul  the  Impreffions  of  exter- 
nal Objed:s.  Sen  jus  autem  interpretes  ac  nuntii 
rerum  in  capite  tanqiiam  in  arce  mirifce  ad  itjia 
7teceffarios  &  faBi  &  collocati  fant.  Cic.  de  Nat. 
Deorum.  The  Eye  can  more  eafily  fee  Things 
at  a  diflance,  the  Ear  receive  Sounds  from  afar ; 
how  could  the  Eye  have  been  better  placed,  ei- 
ther for  Beauty  and  Ornament,  or  for  ihe  Gui- 
dance and  Direction  of  the  whole  Body  ?  As  CV- 
cero^  proceeds  well.  Nam  Oculi  tanquam  fpecula- 
tores  altijjimiim  locum  ohtinent^  ex  quo  plurima  coji- 
Jpicienfes  fungu7itur  Jko  munere :  Et  Aures  qu£  fo- 

Q_.3  num 


2 30     rhe  WisGo  M  of  GOD    Part  ll. 

nuw  recipere  debent^  qui  naturci  in  Jublime  fertufy 
reBe  in  altis  corpcriim  par'tibus  collccatce  funt ; 
itemque  Nares^  eo  quod  omnis  odor  ad  Jiiperiora 
fertiir^  re5te  fiirfumjuiit.  For  the  Eyes^  like  Scu- 
tinelsj  occupy  the  higheji  Place,  from  ^vhetice feeing 
many  things,  they  perform  their  FunBiciis  5  and  the 
Ears,  which  are  made  jor  the  Reception  of  Sounds ^ 
which  naturally  are  carrfd  upwards,  are  rightly 
placed  in  the  uppcrmofi  Tarts  of  the  Body ;  aljo  the 
Nofrils,  becauje  all  Odours  afcend,  are  fitly  fituate 
in  the  fuperior  Farts,  I  might  inftance  in  the 
other  Members  \  how  could  the  Hands  have  been 
more  conveniently  placed  for  all  Sorts  of  Exerci- 
fes  and  Works,  and  for  the  Guard  and  Security 
of  the  Head  and  principal  Parts  ?  the  Heart,  to 
difpenfe  Life  and  Heat  to  the  whole  Body,  viz, 
near  the  Center  ?  and  yet  bccaufe  it  is  harder  for 
the  Blood  to  afcend  than  defcend,  fomewhat 
nearer  the  Head?  It  is  alfo  obfervable,  that  the 
Sinks  of  the  Body  are  removed  as  far  from  the 
Nofe  and  Eyes  as  may  be,  which  Cicero  takes 
notice  of  in  the  fore-mention'd  Place  :  Vt  in 
Mdificis  ArchiteBi  avertunt  ab  Oculis  &  Naribus 
Dominorum  ea  quce  profuentia  necefdrio  efjhit  tetri 
aliquid  habitura,fic  natura  resfitmlesprocul  aman- 
davit  afenfibus, 

Secondly,  For  Ornament :  What  could  have 
been  better  contriv'd,  than  that  thofe  Members 
which  are  Pairs,  iliouid  ftand  by  one  another  in 
equal  Altitude,  and  anfwer  on  each  Side  one  to 

another  ?  And, 

-        ■      T^hirdly^ 


Part  II.        m  t/>e  Creation.  231 

T^hirdly^  For  mutual  Affiftance.    We  have  be- 
fore ihew'd  how  the  Eye  ftands  moft  convenient- 
ly for  guiding  the  Hand,  and  the  Hand  for  de- 
fending the  Eye  ♦,  and  the  like  might  be  faid  of 
the  other  Parts,  they  are  fo  fituate  as  to  afford 
Direction  and  Help  one  to  another;  this  will  ap- 
pear more  clearly,  if  we  imagine  any  of  the  Mem- 
bers fituate  in  contrary  Places  or  Pofitions.    Had 
a  Man's  Arms  been  fitted  only  to  bend  back- 
wards behind  him,  or  his  Legs  only  to  move  back- 
wards, what  Diredlion  could  his  Eyes  then  have 
afforded  him  in  working  or  walking?  or  how 
could  he  then  have  fed  himfelf  ?  na}^  had  one 
Arm  been  made  to  bend  forward,  and  the  other 
diredly  backward,  we  had  then  loft  half  theUfe 
of  them,  fince  they  could  not  have  aliifted  one 
the  other  in  any  Adion.     Take  the  Eyes,  or  any 
other  of  the  Organs  of  Senfe,  and  fee  if  you  can 
find  any  fo  convenient  a  Seat  for  them  in  the 
whole  Body  as  that  they  now  poffefs. 

IV.  From  the  ample  Provifion  that  is  made 
for  the  Defence  and  Security  of  the  principal 
Parts;  thofe  are,  i.  The  Hearty  which  is  the 
Fountain  of  h\ic  and  Vegetation,  OJpchia  Spi?-i- 
tuiim  vitalium,,  Prindpium  <^  Pons  Caloris  nativi^ 
Liicerna  hiuuidi  radicdh ;  and  that  I  may  fpeak 
with  the  Chymifts,  Ipfe  Sol  Microcofmi^  the  very 
Sun  of  the  Microcofm^  or  little  World,  in  which  is 
contained  that  vital  Flame,  or  heavenly  Fire, 
which  Pr^/WtYZw/i^  is  fabled  to  have  ftole  from 


232     He  Wisdom  (?/ GOD    Part  IL 

Jupiter  \  or,  as  Arijlotle  phrafes  it,  that  'AixM- 
-yv  TSif  ¥  d^XoLV'2v  9^i'^l'^>  Divimim  quid  refpon- 
de72S  Ektnejito  Stellarum,  This  for  more  Security 
is  iituate  in  the  Center  of  the  Trunk  of  the  Bo- 
dy, covered  firft  with  its  own  Membrane,  call'd 
Tericardium^  lodg'd  within  the  foft  Bed  of  the 
Lungs,  encom.pafs'd  round  with  a  double  Fence, 
(i.)  Of  firm  Bones  or  Ribs,  to  bear  off  Blows: 
(2.)  Of  thick  Mufcles  and  Skins,  befides  the  Arms 
conveniently  plac'd,  to  fence  off  any  Violepce 
at  a  diftance,  before  it  can  approach  to  hurt  it. 
2.  The  Brairij  which  is  the  Principal  of  all  Senfe 
and  Motion,  the  Fountain  of  the  animal  Spirits, 
the  chief  Seat  and  Palace  Royal  of  the  Soul, upon 
whofe  Security  depends  whatever  Privilege  be- 
longs to  us  as  fenfitive  or  rational  Creatures; 
this,  I  fay,  being  the  prime  and  immediate  Organ 
of  the  Soul,  from  the  right  Conftitution  whereof 
proceeds  the  Quicknefs  of  Apprehenfion,  Acute- 
nefs  of  Wit,  Solidity  of  Judgment,  Method  and 
Order  of  Invention,  Strength  and  Power  of  Me- 
mory (which  if  once  weaken'd  and  diforder'd, 
there  follows  nothing  but  Confufion  and  Diilur- 
bance  in  our  Apprehenfions",  Thoughts  and  Judg- 
ment) is  environed  round  about  with  fuch  a  po- 
tent Defence,  that  it  mull  be  a  mighty  Force 
indeed  that  is  able  to  injure  it. 

I.  A  Skull,  fo  hard,  thick  and  tough,  that  it 
is  almofi:  as  eafy  to  fplit  a  Helmet  of  Iron  as  to 
make  a  Fradure  in  it.     2.  This  is  cover'd  with 
jSkin  and  Hair,  which  ferve  to  keep  it  warm,  be- 
ing 


Part  II.         /;/  //6^  C  R  E  AT  I  o  N.  233 

ing  naturally  a  very  cold  Part,  and  alfo  to  quench 
and  diffipate  the  force  of  any  Stroke  that  fliall  be 
dealt  it,  and  retund  the  Edge  of  any  Weapon. 
3.  And  yet  more  than  all  this,  there  is  ftill  a 
thick  and  tough  Membrane,  which  hangs  loofcr 
about  it,  and  doth  not  fo  clofely  embrace  it  (that 
they  call  Dura  Mater)  and  in  cafe  the  Skull  hap- 
pens to  be  broken,  doth  often  preferve  it  from 
Injury  and  Diminution.  And  laftly,  a  thin  and 
fine  Membrane,  ftrait,  and  clofely  adhering,  to 
keep  it  from  qua(hing  and  fliaking.  The  many- 
Pairs  of  Nerves  proceeding  from  it,  and  after- 
wards diftributing  and  branching  themfelves  to 
all  the  Parts  of  the  Body,  either  for  Nutrition  or 
Motion,  are  wonderful  to  behold  in  prepared 
Bodies,  and  even  in  the  Schemes  and  Figures  of 
Dr.  Willis  and  Vieuffens, 

I  might  inftance  (3.)  in  the  Lungs,  which  are 
fo  ufeful  to  us  as  to  Life  and  Senfe,  that  the  Vul- 
gar think  our  Breath  is  our  very  Life,  and  that 
we  breathe  cut  our  Souls  from  thence;  fuitable 
to  which  Notion  both  A?iima  and  Spiritus  in 
Latin^  and  'zd-v^jj^  in  Greek,  are  derived  from 
Words  that  fignify  Breath  and  Wind  -,  and  effiare^ 
or  exhalare  Animam^  fignify  to  die.  And  the  old 
Romajis  ufed  to  apply  Mouth  to  Mouth  and  re- 
ceive the  lafi;  Gafps  of  their  dying  Friends,  as  if 
their  Souls  had  come  out  that  way  ;  from  hence 
perhaps  might  firft  fpring  that  Opinion  of  the 
Vehicles  of  Spirits ;  the  Vulgar,  as  I  hinted  be- 
forej  conceiving  that  the  Breath  v/as,  if  not  the 
Soul  it  felf,  yet  that  .wherein  it  was  wafted  and 

carry 'd 


2  34    72^  Wi  s D o M  of  GOD  Part  II. 

carry 'd  away.  Theft  Liings^  I  fay,  are,  for  their 
better  Security  and  Defence,  iliut  up  in  the  fame 
Cavity  with  the  Heart. 

V.  In  the  abundant  Provifion  that  is  made 
againft  evil  Accidents  and  Inconveniences.  And 
the  Liberality  of  Nature  as  to  this  Particular  ap- 
pears, I.  In  that  {he  hath  given  many  Members 
(which  are  of  eminent  Ufe)  by  Pairs,  as  two  Eyes, 
two  Ears,  twoNoflrils,  two  Hands,  two  Feet, 
two  Breafts  \Mamm(z\  tv/o  Reins ;  that  fo,  if  by 
any  crofs  or  unhappy  Accident  one  fliould  be  dis- 
abled or  rendered  ufelefs,  the  other  might  ferve 
us  tolerably  well;  whereas  had  a  Man  but  one 
Hand  or  one  Eye,  ©f .  if  that  were  gone,  all  were 
gone,  and  we  left  in  an  evil  Cafe.  See  then  and 
acknowledge  the  Benignity  of  the  Deity,  who 
hath  beftow'd  upon  us  two  Hands  and  two  Eyes, 
and  other  the  like  Parts,  not  only  for  our  Necef- 
lity  but  Conveniency  fo  long  as  we  enjoy  them, 
and  for  our  Security  in  cafe  any  Mifchance  de- 
prive us  of  one  of  them.  2.  In  that  all  the  Veffels 
of  the  Body  have  many  Ramifications,  which 
particular  Branches,  tho'  they  ferve  mainly  for 
one  Member  or  Mufcle,  yet  fend  forth  fome 
Twigs  to  the  neighbouring  Mufcles,  and  fo  in- 
terchangeably the  Branches  that  ferve  thefe  fend 
to  them ;  fo  that  if  one  Branch  chance  to  be  cut 
off  or  obftruded,  its  Defeat  may  in  fome  meafure 
be  fupply'd  by  the  Twigs  that  come  from  the 
neighbouring  Veffels.  3.  In  that  fhe  hath  pro- 
vided fo  many  ways  to  evacuate  what  might  be 

hurtful 


Part  11.        in  /^^  C  r  e  at  i  b  n.  235 

hurtful  to  us,  or  breed  Difeafes  in  our  Bodies; 
if  any  thing  opprefs  the  Head,  it  hath  a  Power 
to  free  it  felf  by  fneezing ;  if  any  thing  fall  into 
the  Lungs,  or  if  any  Humour  be  difcharg'd  upon 
them,  they  have  a  Faculty  of  clearing  themfelves 
and  carting  it  up  by  coughing  ;  if  any  thing  clog 
or  burden  the  Stomach,  it  hath  an  Ability  of  con- 
trading  itfelf  and  throwing  it  up  by  Vomit.  Be- 
fic^es  thefe  ways  of  Evacuation,  there  are  Siege, 
Urine,  Sweating,  Hamorrhaiges  from  the  Nofe, 
and  hc^morrhodialV tm%,  Fluxes  of  Rheum.  Now 
the  reafon  why  Nature  hath  provided  fo  many- 
ways  of  Evacuation  is,  becaufe  of  the  different 
Humours  that  are  to  be  voided  or  cafl  out ;  when 
therefore  there  is  a  Secretion  made  of  any  noxious 
Humour,  it  is  carry'd  off  by  that  Emundlory, 
whofe  Pores  are  fitted  to  receive  and  tranfmit  the 
minute  Parts  of  it ;  if  at  leaft  this  Separation  be 
made  by  Percolation,  as  we  will  now  fuppofe, 
but  not  affert,  yet  I  doubt  not  but  the  fame  Hu- 
mour may  be  cafl  off  by  divers  Emundories,  as 
is  clear  in  Urine  and  Sv>^eat,  which  are  for  the 
main- the  fame  Humour  carry'd  ofFfeveral  ways. 

To  this  Head  of  Provifion  againfl  Inconveni- 
ences, I  fhall  add  an  Obfervation  or  two  concern- 
ing  Sleep. 

I.  Sleep  being  neceffary  to  Man  and  other 
Ani^mals  for  their  Refreflimeiit,  and  for  the  Re- 
paration of  that  great  Expence  of  Spirits  which 
is  made  i^i  the  Day-time  by  the  conftant  Exercife 

of 


236     Hje  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  I L 

of  the  Senfes  and  Motions  of  the  Mufcles,  that  it 
might  cafe  and  refrefh  us  indeed.  Nature  hath 
provided,  that  tho*  we  He  long  upon  one  Side, 
we  {hould  have  no  Senfe  of  Pain  or  Unealinefs 
during  our  Reft,  no,  nor  when  we  awake ;  where- 
as in  reafon  one  would  think,  that  the  whole 
Weight  of  the  Body  preffing  the  Mufcles  and 
Bones  on  which  we  lie,  jQiould  be  very  burden- 
fome  and  uneafy,  and  create  a  grievous  Senfe  of 
Pain  ;  and  we  find  by  Experience  that  it  doth  fo 
when  we  lie  long  awake  in  the  Night,  we  being 
not  able  (efpecially  if  never  fo  little  indifpofed) 
to  reft  one  Quarter  of  an  Hour  in  the  fame  Po- 
fture,  without  (hif ting  of  Sides,  or  at  leaft  etch- 
ing this  way  and  that  way,  more  or  lefs.  How 
this  may  be  effedled,  is  a  great  Queftion.  To  me 
it  feems  moft  probable  that  it  is  done  by  an  In- 
flation of  the  Mufcles,  whereby  they  become 
both  foft,  and  yet  renitent,  like  fo  many  Pillows, 
diffipating  the  Force  of  the  Preffure,  and  fo  pre- 
venting or  taking  away  the  Senfe  of  Pain.  That 
the  Mufcles  are  in  this  manner  inflated  in  time 
of  Reft,  appears  to  the  very  Eye  in  the  Faces  of 
Children,  and  may  be  prov'd  from  that,  when 
we  reft  in  our  Cloaths  we  are  fain  to  loofen  our 
Garters,  Shoe-ftrings,  and  other  Ligatures,  to 
give  the  Spirits  free  Paflage,  elfe  we  iliall  expe- 
rience Pain  and  Uneafinefs  in  thofe  Parts,  which 
when  we  are  waking  we  find  not. 


The 


Part  II.       in  the  Cke  ATio-^.  237 

The  reafon  of  this  Pkdemmcnoji  ^  viz,  that 
dvct'Kyymot^  or  want  of  Pain  we  experience  in  Sleep, 
during  and  after  a  long  decubitus  on  one  Side, 
'Dv,  Lifter  in  his  Journey  to  Paris,  p.  113.  and 
Dr.  Jo72es  in  his  Treatife  of  ^he  Myjieries  of 
Opium  reveal' d,  attribute  to  the  Relaxation  of  the 
Nerves  and  Mufcles  in  time  of  Sleep ;  and  the 
Sepfe  of  Pain  and  Uneafinefs  when  we  lie  awake, 
to  the  Teniion  of  them  during  that  time:  This 
I  do  not  deny,  but  yet  I  think  the  Reafon  I  have 
affign'd  hath  a  great  Intereft  in  that  Reft  and 
Ealinefs  we  enjoy  when  afleep. 

2.  Becaufe  Sleep  is  inconfiftent  with  the  Senfe 
of  Pain ,  therefore  during  Reft ,  thofe  Nerves 
which  convey  that  Motion  to  the  Brain,  which 
excites  in  the  Soul  a  Senfe  of  Pain,  are  obftrud;- 
ed  i  this  I  my  felf  have  had  frequent  Experience 
of  fince  I  have  been  troubled  with  Sores  on  my 
Legs ;  upon  fudden  awaking  finding  my  felf  at 
perfed  Eafe,  and  void  of  all  Senfe  of  Pain  for  a 
Minute's  time  or  more,  the  Pain  then  by  degrees 
returning  ;  which  I  could  attribute  to  nothing 
but  the  diffipating  that  Vapour,  or  whatever  elfe 
it  were,  which  obftruded  the  Nerves,  and  giving 
the  dolorifick  Motion  free  Paffage  again. 

Upon  fecond  Thoughts,  and  reading  what 
Dr.  Lijler  and  Dr.  Jones  have  written  concerning 
this  Subjed,  I  rather  incline  to  believe,  that  the 
Motion  caufing  a  Senfe  of  Pain,  is  convey 'd  to 

the 


238     ne  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  IJ. 

the  Brain  by  the  Nerves  themfelves  in  Tenfion, 
as  we  fee  in  Cords,  any  the  leaft  touch  at  one 
end,  pafTes  fpeedily  to  the  other  when  they  are 
ftretch'd,  which  it  doth  not  when  they  are  re- 
lax'd ,  and  not  by  the  Spirits  paffing  thro'  them ; 
and  on  the  other  fide,  the  Infenliblenefs  of  Pain 
proceeds  rather  from  the  Relaxation  of  the  Nerves 
than  their  Obftrudion ;  but  yet  this  Tenfion  of 
the  Nerves  and  Mufcles  is  owing  to  the  Spirits 
flowing  down  into  them  and  diftending  them. 

VI.  From  the  Conftancy  that  is  obferv'd  in  the 
Number,  Figure,  Place,  and  Make  of  all  the 
principal  Parts,  and  from  the  Variety  in  the  lefs. 
Man  is  always  mending  and  altering  his  Works, 
but  Nature  obferves  the  fame  Tenor,  becaufe  her 
V^orks  are  fo  perfedt,  that  there  is  no  place  for 
Amendments,  nothing  that  can  be  reprehended  -, 
the  moil  fagacious  Men  in  fo  many  Ages  have 
not  been  able  to  find  any  Flaw  in  thefe  divinely 
contrived  and  form'd  Machines,  m  Blot  or  Error 
in  this  great  Volume  of  the  Worlds  as  if  any  thing 
had  been  an  imperfeB  Efay  at  the  fr'Ji  (to  ufe  the 
Bifnop  of  Chejiers  Words)  nothing  that  can  be 
alter'd  for  the  better,  nothing  but  if  it  were  al- 
tered would  be  marr'd  ;  this  could  not  have  been 
had  Man's  Body  been  the  Work  of  Chance,  and 
not  Council  and  Providence  :  Why  fhould  there 
be  conilantly  the  fame  Parts  ?  why  fhould  they 
retain  conilantly  the  fame  Places?  why  fhould 
they  be  endu'd  with  the  fame  Shape  and  Figure  ? 
Nodiing  fo  contrary  as  Conilancy  and  Cliance. 

Should 


Part  II.        in  the  Cv.e  a  t  i  o  n.  239 

Should  I  fee  a  Man  throw  the  fame  Number  a 
thoufand  times  together  upon  but  three  Dice, 
could  you  perfuade  me  that  this  were  accidental, 
and  that  there  was  no  neceflary  Caufe  of  it  ? 
How  much  more  incredible  then  is  it,  that  Con- 
ftancy  in  fuch  a  Variety,  fuch  a  Multiplicity  of 
Parts,  fhould  be  the  Refult  of  Chance  ?  Neither 
yet  can  thefe  Works  be  the  Effefts  of  Neceffity 
or  pafe,  for  then  there  would  be  the  fame  Con- 
ftancy  obferv'd  in  the  fmaller  as  well  as  the  larger 
Parts  and  Veflels ;  whereas  there  we  fee  Nature 
doth  ludere^  as  it  were  fport  it  felf,  the  minute 
Ramifications  of  all  the  VeiTels,  Veins,  Arteries, 
and  Nerves ,  infinitely  varying  in  Individuals  of 
the  fame  Species,  fo  that  they  are  not  in  any  two 
alike. 

VII.  The  great  Wifdom  of  the  divine  Creator 
appears,  in  that  there  is  Pleafure  annexed  to  thofe 
Adlions  that  are  neceflfary  for  the  Support  and 
Prefervation  of  the  Individuum ^  and  the  Conti- 
nuation and  Propagation  of  the  Species  j  and  not 
only  fo,  but  Pain  to  the  Ncgledt  or  Forbearance 
of  them.  For  the  Support  of  the  Perfon,  it  hath 
annexed  Pleafure  to  eating  and  drinking,  which 
elfe,  out  of  Lazinefs  or  Multiplicity  of  Bufinefs, 
a  Man  would  be  apt  to  neglccl,  or  fometimes 
forget;  indeed  to  be  oblig'd  to  chew  and  fwallow 
Meat  daily  for  two  Hours  Space,  and  to  find  no 
Relifh  or  Pleafure  in  it,  would  be  one  of  the 
moft  burdenfom  and  ungrateful  Talks  of  a  Man's 
whole  Life ,;  but  becaufc  this  Adion  is  abfolutely 

neceflary. 


240     TZeWisDOM  of  GOD     PartIL 

neceffary,  for  abundant  Security  Nature  hath  in- 
lerted  in  us  a  painful  Senfe  of  Hunger,  to  put  us 
in  mind  of  it ;  and  to  reward  our  Performance 
hath  adjoin'd  Pleafure  to  it  5  and  as  for  the  Con- 
tinuation of  Kind,  I  need  not  tell  you  that  the 
Enjoyments  which  attend  thofe  Ad:ions  are  the 
higheft  Gratifications  of  Senfe. 

VIII.  The  wonderful  Art  and  Providence  of 
the  Contriver  and  Former  of  our  Bodies,  appears 
in  the  Miiltitude  of  Intentions  he  muft  have  in 
the  Formation  of  the  feveral  Parts,  or  the  Qua- 
lifications they  require  to  fit  them 
*  Bijipop  of  for  their  feveral  Ufes.  *  Galen  in 
^^j^g^''^-J^  his  Book  de  Formatione  F(Etus,  takes 
€.  6,  notice,  "  That  there  are  in  a  human 

"  Body  above  Six-hundred  feveral 
"  Mufcles,  and  there  are  at  leaft  Ten  feveral  In- 
"  tentions  or  due  Qualifications  to  be  obferv'd 
"  in  each  of  thefe ;  proper  Figure,  juft  Mag- 
"  nitude,  right  Difpofition  of  its  feveral  Ends, 
''  upper  and  lower,  Pofition  of  the  whole,  the 
"  Infertion  of  its  proper  Nerves,  Veins,  and 
''  Arteries,  which  are  each  of  them  to  be  du- 
''  ly  placed  J  fo  that  about  the  Mufcles  alone 
''  no  lefs  than  Six  thoufand  feveral  Ends  or 
''  Aims  are  to  be  attended  to.  The  Bones  are 
"  reckon'd  to  be  284.  The  diflincft  Scopes  or 
''  Intentions  in  each  of  thefe  are  above  40 ;  in 
"  all  about  looooo.  And  thus  it  is  in  Ibme 
''  Proportion  with  all  the  other  Parts,  the 
"  Ski/7y  Ligaments,  Feffe/s,  Glandules,  Uimours :  " 

■  ''  But 


Part  11.       in  the  C  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  241 

"  But  more  efpecially  with  the  feveral  Members 
"  of  the  Body,  which  do,  in  regard  of  the  great 
"  Variety  and  Multitude  of  thofe  feveral  Inten- 
"  tions  required  to  them,  very  much  exceed  the 
*'  homogeneous  Parts ;  and  the  failing  in  any  one 
"  of  thefe  would  caufe  Irregularity  in  the  Body, 
*'  and  in  many  of  them  fuch  as  would  be  very 
*^  notorious/*     Now  to  imagine  that  fuch  a  Ma- 
chine ,  composed  of  fo  many  Parts,  to  the  right 
Form,  Order  and  Motion  whereof  fuch  an  infi- 
nite Number  of  Intentions  are  required,  could  be 
made  without  the  Contrivance  of  fome  wife 
Agent,  muft  needs  be  irrational  in  the  higheft 
degree. 

This  wonderful  Mechanifm  of  human  Bodies, 
next  to  viewing  the  Life,  may  be  k^n  at  large  in 
the  excellent  Figures  of  Spigelius  and  Bidloo^  their 
Situation,  Order,  Connexion,  and  manner  of  fe- 
parating  them,  in  Lyferus  his  Cult,  Anatom,  The 
almoft  infinite  Ramifications  and  Inofculations 
of  all  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Veflels,  the  Structures 
of  the  Glands,  and  other  Organs,  may  eafily  be 
detefted  by  Glaffes,  and  trac'd  by  blowing  in  of 
Air  and  drying  them,  or  by  injedling  thro'  pecu- 
liar Syringes  melted  Wax  or  Quickfilver,  the 
Operations  whereof  may  be  learned  out  of  Swam* 
merdamy  Cafpar  Bartholiney  ^nd  Antonio  Nuck. 

IX.  Another  Argument  of  Wifdom  and  Pe- 
lign  in  Contrivance  of  the  Body  of  Man  and  o- 
ther  Animals,  is  the  fitting  of  fome  Parts  to  di- 
vers Offices  and  Ufes^  whereby  Nature  doth  (as 

R  the 


242     77j^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  II. 

the  Proverb  is)  Una  Jidelid  duos  parietes  dealbare, 
Jiop  two  Gaps  with  one  Bujh ;  fo  (for  inftance)  the 
T'ongiie  ferves  not  only  for  tailing,  but  alfo  to  af- 
fift  the  Maftication  of  the  Meat  and  Deglutition, 
by  turning  it  about,  and  managing  it  in  the 
Mouth,  to  gather  up  the  Food,  in  Man  by  lick- 
ing ♦,  in  the  Dog  and  Cat-Kind  by  lapping ;  in 
Kine  by  pkicking  up  the  Grafs  j  particularly  in 
Man  it  is  of  admirable  Ufe  for  the  Formation  of 
Words  and  fpeaking. 

The  Dlaphragmy  and  Mufcles  o^  th&  Abdomen^ 
or  lower  Belly,  are  of  ufe  not  only  for  Refpira- 
tion,  but  alfo  for  compreffing  the  Inteftines,  and 
forcing  the  Chyle  into  the  ladeal  Veins,  and  like- 
wife  out  of  the  faid  Veins  into  the  thoracick  Chan- 
nel ;  and  here  (to  note  that  by  the  way)  appears 
the  ufe  of  a  common  Receptacle  of  Chyle,  that 
by  the  Motion  of  the  Mufcles  of  Refpiration  it 
being  prefs'd  upon,  the  Chyle  might  with  more 
Facility  be  impelFd  into  the  fore- mentioned 
Dudt ;  befides ,  this  Adion  of  Refpiration  and 
Motion  of  the  faid  Diaphragm  and  Mufcles,  may 
ferve  alfo  for  the  Comminution  and  Concodlioa 
of  the  Meat  in  the  Stomach  (as  fome,  not  with- 
out reafon,  think)  by  their  conftant  Agitation 
and  Motion  upwards  and  downwards,  refembling 
the  pounding  or  braying  of  Materials  in  a  Mor- 
tar. 

And  to  inftance  in  no  more,  the  mufcular  Con- 

:  adlion  and  Pulfe  of  the  Heart  ferves  not  only 

for  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  but  alfo  for  the 

more 


Part  If.       in  the  Creation.  243 

more  perfedl  Mixture  of  its  Parts,  preferving  its 
due  Crafis  and  Fluidity,  and  incorporating  the 
Chyle,  and  other  Juices  it  receives,  with  it. 

X.  The  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs  too  of  the  di- 
vine Former  of  our  Bodies,  appears  in  the  Nou- 
rifliment  of  them ;  for  that  Food  which  is  of  a 
wholfome  Juice,  and  proper  to  nourifli  and  pre- 
ferve  them  in  a  healthful  State,  is  both  pleafant 
t(5  the  Tafte  and  grateful  and  agreeable  to  the 
Stomach,  and  continues  to  be  fo  till  our  Hunger 
and  Thirft  be  well  appeased,  and  then  begins  to 
be  lefs  pleafant,  and  at  laft  even  naufeous  and 
loathfome.  The  full  Stomach  loaths  the  Honey- 
Comb, 

On  the  other  fide,  that  which  is  unwholfome 
and  unfit  for  Nourifhment,  or  deftru6live  of 
Health,  is  alfo  unpleafant  to  the  Tafte  and  un- 
grateful and  difagreeable  to  the  Stomach,  and 
that  more  or  lefs,  according  as  it  is  more  or  lefs 
improper  or  noxious ;  and  though  there  be  fome 
Sorts  of  Food  lefs  pleafant  to  the  Tafte,  which 
by  ufe  may  be  render'd  grateful,  yet  to  Perfons 
that  are  in  health,  and  in  no  neceffity  of  ufing 
fuch  Viands,  I  think  it  were  better  to  abftain 
from  them,  and  follow  Nature,  in  eating  fuch 
things  as  are  agreeable  to  their  Palate  and  Sto- 
mach ;  for  fuch  unpleafant  Diet  muft  needs  alter 
the  Temper  of  the  Body  before  it  can  become 
acceptable,  and  doubtlefs  for  the  worfe. 

R  2  I  might 


244  TheWisDouofGOD  PartIL 
I  might  add  hereto,  that  even  Pain,  which  is 
the  moll  grievous  and  affli<ftive  thing  that  v^e  are 
fenfible  of,  is  of  great  Ufe  to  us.  God  hath  an- 
nexed a  Senfe  of  Pain  to  all  Difeafes  and  Harms 
of  the  Body,  inward  and  outward  (and  there  is 
no  Pain  but  proceed^  from  fome  Harm  or  Dif- 
eafe)  to  be  an  effeftual  Spur  to  excite  and  quick-* 
en  us  to  feek  for  fpeedy  Help  or  Remedy ;  and 
hath  fo  order'd  it,  that  as  the  Difeafe  heals,^  fo 
the  Pain  abates.  Neither  doth  Pain  provoke  us 
only  to  feek  Eafe  and  Relief  when  we  labour  un- 
der it,  but  alfo  makes  us  careful  to  avoid  for  the 
future  all  fuch  things  as  are  produdive  of  it ; 
that  is,  fuch  things  as  are  hurtful  to  our  Bodies, 
and  deftrudtive  of  the  Health  and  Well-being  of 
them,  which  alfo  are  for  the  moft  part  prohibi- 
ted by  God,  andfo  fmful  and  injurious  to  our 
Souls.  So  we  fee  what  Care  the  divine  Provi- 
dence hath  taken,  and  what  effedual  Means  it 
hath  us'd  for  the  healing  of  our  Difeafes,  and  the 
Maintenance  and  Prefervation  of  our  Health. 
This 'is  the  true  reafon  of  our  Painj  howbeit,  I 
will  not  deny  but  that  God  doth  fometimes  him- 
felf  immediately  inflia  Difeafes,  even  upon  his 
own  Children,  for  many  good  Confiderations, 
which  I  fhall  not  here  enumerate ;  neither  fliall 
I  mention  the  Ufes  that  Parents  and  Mafters 
make  of  it,  for  the  correding  their  Children  and 
Servants ;  or  Magiftrates,  for  the  punifhing.  of 
Malefaftors,  they  being  beyond  my  Scope  >  only 
I  cannot  but  take  notice,  that  it  is  a  'OTAwjj/pMpr, 
a  thing  of  manifold  Ufes,  and  neceflary  for  the 

Govern- 


Part  II.       7/^  //5^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  245 

Government  both  of  Commonwealths  and  Fa- 
milies. 

XI.  Some  fetch  an  Argument  of  Providence 
from  the  Variety  of  Lineaments  in  the  Faces  of 
Men,  which  is  fuch,  that  there  are  not  two  Faces 
in  the  World  abfolutely  alike ;  which  is  fome- 
what  ftrange,  fmce  all  the  Parts  are  i?i  Specie  the 
fame.  Were  Nature  a  blind  Architeft,  I  fee  not 
but  the  Faces  of  fome  Men  might  be  as  like  as 
Eggs  laid  by  the  fame  Hen,  or  Bullets  caft  in  the 
fame  Mould,  or  Drops  of  Water  out  of  the  fame 
Bucket.  This  Particular  I  find  taken  notice  of 
by  Pliny  in  his  Seventh  Book,  cap.  i.  in  thefe 
Words :  Jam  in  facie  vultuque  nojiroy  ciimjint  de- 
cern aut  paulo  plura  membra^  ?iiillas  duas  in  tot  mil'* 
lihus  hominum  indifcretas  ejigies  exiftere^  quod  Jlrs 
nulla  in  paucis  numero  prajlet  affedlando.  To 
which,  among  other  things,  he  thus  prefaces : 
Jslaturce  vero  rerum  vis  atque  majejias  in  omnibus 
momentis  fide  caret. 

Tho'  this  at  firft  may  feem  to  be  a  Matter  of 
fmall  moment,  yet,  if  duly  confider'd,  it  will 
appear  to  be  of  mighty  Importance  in  all  human 
Affairs ;  for  fhould  there  be  an  undifcernable  Si- 
militude between  divers  Men,  what  Confufion 
and  Difturbance  would  neceffarily  follow?  What 
Uncertainty  in  all  Sales  and  Conveyances,  in 
all  Bargains  and  Contrads?  What  Frauds  and 
Cheats,  and  fuborning  of  Witneffes  ?  What  a 
Subverfion  of  all  Trade  and  Commerce  ?  What 
hazard  in  all  judicial  Proceedings,  in  all  Affaults 

R  3  and 


246     r^^  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  11. 

and  Batteries,  in  all  Murders  and  Affaffinations  ? 
In  Thefts  and  Robberies  what  Security  would 
there  be  to  Malefadlors  ?  who  could  fwear  that 
fuch  and  fuch  were  the  Perfons  that  committed 
the  Fafts,  tho'  they  faw  them  never  fo  clearly  ? 
Many  other  Inconveniences  might  be  inftanc'd 
in  5  fo  that  we  fee  this  is  no  contemptible  Argu- 
ment of  the  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs  of  God. 

Neither  is  the  difference  of  Voices  lefs  confi- 
derable,  for  the  diflinguifliing  of  Sexes  and  par- 
ticular Perfons,  and  Individuals  of  all  Animals, 
than  that  of  Faces ;  as  Dr.  Cockburn  makes  out, 
EJfay,  &c.  Part  II.  Pag,  68.  &c.  Nay,  in  fome 
Cafes  more ;  for  hereby  Perfons  in  the  dark  and 
thofe  that  are  blind  may  know  and  diftinguilh 
one  another,  which  is  of  great  Importance  to 
them,  for  otherwife  they  might  be  moft  grofly 
cheated  and  abus'd. 

Farther  we  may  add  out  of  the  fame  Author, 
f.  J  I,  ''  And  to  no  other  Caufe  [than  the  wife 
"  Providence  of  God]  can  be  referr'd  the  no  lefs 
*'  ftrange  Diverfuy  of  Hand-writings.  Common 
<«  Experience  fhews,  that  though  Hundreds  and 
*'  Thoufands  were  taught  by  one  Mailer,  and 
<*  one  and  the  fame  Form  of  Writing,  yet  they 
*'  ftiould  all  write  differently:  Whether  Men 
"  write  Court  or  Ro7nan  Hand,  or  any  other, 
"  there  is  fomething  peculiar  in  every  one*s  Wri- 
"  ting  which  diftinguiflieth  it.  Some  indeed  can 
"  counterfeit  another's  Charadter  and  Subfcrip- 
"  tion,  but  the  Inftances  are  rare,  nor  is  it  done 
*^  without  Pains  and  Trouble  5    nay,  the  moft 

"  Expert 


€i 


<C 


Part  II.       /;/  //5^  Creation.  247 

*'  Expert  and  Skilful  cannot  write  much  fo  ex- 
**  aftly  like  as  that  it  cannot  be  known  whether 
*'  it  be  genuine  or  counterfeit ;  and  if  the  Pro- 
**  vidcnce  of  God  did  not  fo  order  it,  what  Cheats 
**  and  Forgeries  too  would  daily  be  committed, 
which  would  not  only  juftle  private  Men  out 
of  thtiv  Rights,  but  alfo  unhinge  States  and 
Governments,  and  turn  all  into  Confufion? 
The  Diverfity  of  Hand-writings  is  of  mighty 
great  Ufe  to  the  Peace  of  the  World ;  it  pre- 
*'  vents  Frauds,  and  fecures  Mens  Property;  it 
*'  obligeth  the  Living  and  Prefent  to  Honefty  and 
*'  Faithfulnefs ;  it  importeth  the  Mind  of  the 
**  Abfent,  and  iheweth  the  Will  of  the  Dead, 
*'  which  ought  to  be  facredly  obferv'd:.  And 
"  what  is  fo  very  ufeful,  is  not  the  Effed  of  any 
*'  human  Concert  -,  Men  did  not  of  themfelves 
"  agree  to  it,  they  are  only  carry*d  to  it  by  the 
"  fecret  Providence  of  God,  who  underftandeth 
"  and  mindeth  what  is  for  the  Good  and  Intereft 
*'  of  Mankind  in  general,  and  of  every  particu- 
"  lar  Perfon. 

Add  farther  to  all  this,  that  whereas  there  are 
feveral  Parts  peculiar  to  Brutes  which  are  want- 
ing in  Man ;  as  for  Example,  the  feventh,  or  fuf- 
penfory  Mufcle  of  the  Eye,  the  nidtating  Mem- 
brane, the  ftrong  Aponeurofes  on  the  fides  of  the 
Neck,  caird  by  fome  Packwax^  it  is  very  remark- 
able that  thefe  Parts  are  of  eminent  and  conftant 
Ufe  to  them,  as  I  fliall  particularly  fliew  hereaf- 
ter, but  to  M^n  would  have  been  altogether  ufe- 
lefs  and  fuperfluous; 

R  4  I  have 


248     Hoe  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  IL 

I  have  done  with  my  general  Obfervations,  I 
proceed  now  more  accurately  and  minutely  to 
confider  fome  particular  Parts  or  Members  of  the 
Body  5  and  firft,  the  Heady  becaufe  it  was  to  con- 
tain a  large  Brain,  made  of  the  moft  capacious 
Figure,  as  near  as  could  be  to  a  fpherical ;  upon 
this  grows  the  Hair,  which,  tho'  it  be  efteem*d 
an  Excrement,  is  of  great  Ufe  (as  I  fliew'd  before) 
to  cherifti  and  keep  warm  the  Brain,  and  to 
quench  the  Force  of  any  Stroke,  that  might 
otherwife  endanger  the  Skull  5  it  ferves  alfo  to 
difburden  the  Brain  of  a  great  deal  of  fuperfluous 
Moifture,  wherewith  it  abounds. 

I  find  it  remarked  by  Machettty  a  famous  Ana-? 
tomift  in  Padua,  that  the  Caufe  of  Baldnefs  in 
Men  is  the  drynefs  of  the  Brain,  and  its  fhrinking 
from  the  Crarthim,  or  Skull  5  he  having  obferv'd, 
that  in  bald  Perfons,  under  the  bald  Part  there 
was  always  a  Vacuity  or  empty  Space  between 
the  Skull  and  the  Brain :  and  laftly,  to  name  no 
more,  it  ferves  alfo  for  a  graceful  Ornament  to 
the  Face,  which  our  prefent  Age  is  fenfible  e-^ 
nough  of,  beft owing  fo  much  Money  upon  falfc 
Hair  and  Perriwigs. 

Secondly-,  Another  Member  which  I  fhall  more 
particularly  treat  of,  is  the  Eye,  a  Part  fo  artifici- 
ally composed  and  commodioufly  fituate,  as  no- 
thing can  be  contrived  better  for  Ufe,  Ornament, 
or  Security ;  nothing  to  Advantage  added  thereto 
or  altered  therein.  Of  the  Beauty  of  the  Eye  I 
ihall  fay  little,  leaving  that  to  Poets  and  Orators  j 

that 


Part  II.        in  /^^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  249 

that  It  is  a  very  pleafant  and  lovely  Objedl  to  be- 
hold, if  we  confider  the  Figure,  Colours,  and 
Splendc^  of  it,  is  the  leaft  that  I  can  fay.     The 
Soul,  as  it  is  more  immediately  and  ftrongly  mo- 
ved and  afFed;ed  by  this  Part  than  any  other,  fo 
doth  it  manifeft  all  its  Paffions  and  Perturbations 
by  this.     As  the  Eyes  are  the  Windows  to  let  in 
the  Species  of  all  exterior  Objedts  into  the  dark 
Cells  of  the  Brain  for  the  Information  of  the 
Soul,  fo  are  they  flaming  Torches  to  reveal  to 
thofe  abroad  how  the  Soul  within  is  moved  or 
affeded.     Thefe  Reprefentations  made  by  the 
Impreffions  of  external  Objeds  upon  the  Eye  arc 
the  moft  clear,  lively,  and  diftind:  of  any  others. 
Now  to  this  Ufe  and  Purpofe  of  informing  us 
what  is  abroad  round  about  us  in  this  afpedable 
World,  we  fhall  find  this  Strufture  and  Mecha- 
nifm  of  the  Eye,  and  every  Part  thereof,  fo  well 
fitted  and  adapted,  as  not  the  leaft  Curiofity  can 
be  added  5  for  firft  of  all,  the  Humours  and  Tu- 
nicles  are  purely  tranfparent,  to  let  in  the  Light 
and  Colours  unfoiFd  and  unfophifticated  by  any 
inward  Tindure.     It  is  ufually  faid  by  the  Peri^ 
fateticksy  that  the  cryftalline  Humour  of  the  Eye 
(which  they  eneptly  fancy'd  to  be  the  immediate 
Organ  of  Vifion,  wherein  all  the  Species  of  ex- 
ternal Objeds  were  terminated)  is  without  all 
Colour,  becaufe  its  Office  was  to  difcern  all  Co- 
lours, or  at  leaft  to  receive  the  Species  of  fevcral 
Colours,  and  convey  them  to  the  common  Senfe. 
.  Now'  if  it  felf  had  been  coloured,  it  would  have 
tranfmitted  all  vifible  Objeds  tindur'd  with  the 

famt- 


2^0    He  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  II. 

fame  Colour ;  as  we  fee  whatever  is  beheld  thro' 
a  coloured  Glafs,  appears  of  the  fame  Colour 
with  the  Glafs ;  and  to  thofe  that  have  the  Jaun- 
dice, or  the  like  SufFufion  of  Eyes,  Objects  ap>- 
pear  of  that  fame  Colour  wherewith  their  Eyes 
are  infedted  j  this,  they  fay,  is  in  a  great  meafure 
true,  altho*  they  are  much  miftaken  about  the 
Organ  and  Manner  of  Vifion,  and  the  Ufes  of  the 
Humours  and  Membranes  of  the  Eye.  Two 
Reafons  therefore  may  be  affign'd  why  all  the 
Membranes  and  Humours  of  the  Eye  are  perfeft- 
ly  pellucid,  and  void  of  Colour :  Firfi^  For  the 
Clearnefs.  Secondly  ^  For  the  JJiftindnefs  of 
Vifion. 

Firjiy  The  Clearnefs; 'for  had  the  Tunicles  and 
Humours  of  the  Eye,  all,  or  any  of  them,  been 
colorate,  many  of  the  Rays  proceeding  from  the 
vifible  Objedt  would  have  been  ftopt  and  fufFoca- 
ted  before  they  could  come  to  the  bottom  of  the 
Eye,  where  the  formal  Organ  of  Vifion  is  fituate; 
for  it  is  a  moft  certain  Rule,  how  much  any  Bo- 
dy hath  of  Colour,  fo  much  hath  it  of  Opacity; 
and  by  fo  much  the  more  unfit  it  is  to  tranfmit 
the  Species. 

Secondly^  For  the  Diftindnefs  of  Vifion :  For, 
as  I  faid  before,  and  the  Peripateticks  obferve 
well,  were  the  Humours  of  the  Eye  tinftur'd 
with  any  Colour,  they  would  refund  that  Colour 
upon  the  Objed,  and  fo  it  would  not  be  repre- 
fented  to  the  Soul  as  in  it  felf  it  is ;  fo  we  fee  that 

thro' 


Part  II.       7;^/^^  Great  I  ON.  251 

thro'  a  coloured  Glafs  things  appear  as  well  more 
dim  and  obfcure  as  tindtur'd  with  the  Colour 
thereof. 

Secondly,  The  Parts  of  the  Eye  are  made  con- 
vex, and  efpecially  the  cryftalline  Humour,  which 
is  of  a  lenticular  Figure,  convex  on  both  fides, 
that  by  the  Refractions  there  made,  there  might 
be  %  Direction  of  many  Rays  coming  from  one 
Point  in  the  Objeft,  viz,  as  many  as  the  Pupil  can 
receive,  to  one  Point  anfwerable  in  the  bottom  of 
the  Eye,  without  which  the  Senfe  would  be  very 
obfcure,  and  alfo  confused.  There  would  be  as 
much  difference  in  the  Clearnefs  and  Diftindtion 
of  Vifion,  were  the  outward  Surface  of  the  Tu^ 
7iica  Cornea  plain,  and  the  cryftalline  Humour 
remov'd,  as  between  the  Pidture  received  on  white 
Paper  in  a  dark  Room  thro'  an  open  or  empty 
Hole,  and  the  fame  received  through  a  Hole  fur- 
nifh'd  with  an  exaftly  polifli'd  lenticular  Cryftal ; 
which,  how  great  it  is,  any  one  that  hath  but 
feen  this  Experiment  made,  knows  wxll  enough ; 
indeed,  this  Experiment  doth  very  much  explain 
the  manner  of  Vifion,  the  Hole  anfwering  to  the 
Pupil  of  the  Eye,  the  cryftalline  Humour  to  the 
lenticular  Glafs,  the  dark  Room  to  the  Cavity 
containing  the  vitreous  Humour,  and  the  white 
Paper  to  the  T'unica  Retina. 

Thirdly y  The  uveous  Coat^  or  Iris  of  the  Eye, 
hath  a  mufculous  Power,  and  can  dilate  and  con- 
trail that  round  Hole  ^ia  it  call'd  the  Pupil,  or 

Sight 


252     T^he  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  If. 

Sight  of  the  Eye  5  it  contrafts  it,  for  the  exclu- 
ding fuperfluous  Light,  and  preferving  the  Eye 
from  being  injured  by  too  vehement  and  lucid  an 
Objedt,  and  again  dilates  it,  for  the  apprehending 
Objedls  more  remote,  or  plac'd  in  a  fainter  Light; 
iam  miro  artificio  (faith  Scheiner)  quam  muntfica 
natures  largitate.  If  any  one  defires  to  make  Ex- 
periment of  thefe  Particulars,  he  may,  following 
Scheiner  and  Des  Cartes  their  Dired:ion,  take  a 
Child,  and  fetting  a  Candle  before  him,  bid  him 
look  upon  it,  and  he  fhall  obferve  his  Pupil  con- 
traft  it  felf  very  much,  to  exclude  the  Light, 
with  the  Brightnefs  w^hercof  it  would  otherwife 
be  dazzled  and  offended  5  as  we  are,  when  after 
we  have  been  fome  time  in  the  dark,  a  bright 
Light  is  fuddenly  brought  in  and  fet  before  us, 
till  the  Pupils  of  our  Eyes  have  gradually  con- 
trafted  themfelves  j  let  the  Candle  be  withdrawn 
or  remov'd  afide,  he  {hall  obferve  the  Child's 
Pupil  by  degrees  to  dilate  it  felf;  or  let  him  take 
a  Bead,  or  the  like  Objeft,  and  holding  it  near 
the  Eye,  command  the  Child  to  look  at  it,  the 
Pupil  will  contradt  much  when  the  Objeft  is 
near;  but  let  it  be  withdrawn  to  a  greater  di- 
ftance  in  the  fame  Light,  and  he  {hall  obferve 
the  Pupil  to  be  much  enlarged. 

Fourthly^  The  uveous  Coat,  and  alfo  the  infide 
of  the  Chorides,  are  blackened,  like  the  Walls  of  a 
Tennis-Court,  that  the  Rays  may  be  there  fufFo- 
cated  and  fuppreffed,  and  not  refledted  back- 
wards ,  to  confound  the  Sight  -,  and  if  any  be  by 

the 


Part  II.      in  tbe  C^E  ATio^.  253 

the  fetiforfn  Coat  reflefted,  they  are  foon  choak'd 
in  the  black  infide  of  the  Uvea-,  whereas  were 
they  reflefted  to  and  fro,  there  could  be  no  di- 
ftindt  Vifion  ;  as  we  fee  the  Light  admitted  into 
the  dark  Room  we  even  now  fpeak  of,  oblite- 
rates the  Species  which  before  were  {Qcn  upon  the 
white  Cloth  or  Paper. 

Fifthly,  Becaufe  the  Rays  from  a  nearer  and 
from  a  more  remote  Objedt  do  not  meet  ju  ft  in 
the  fame  diftance  behind  the  cryftalline  Humour 
(as  may  eafily  be  obferv'd  in  lenticular  Glafs, 
where  the  Point  or  Concourfe  of  the  Rays  from 
a  nearer  Objeft  is  at  a  greater  diftance  behind  the 
Glafs,  and  from  a  farther  at  a  lefler)  therefore 
the  ciliary  Procejes,  or  rather  the  Ligaments  ob- 
ferv'd  in  the  infide  of  the  fclerotick  Tunicles  of 
the  Eye  by  a  late  ingenious  Anatomift,  do  ferve 
inftead  of  a  Mufcle,  by  their  Contraftion  to  alter 
the  Figure  of  the  Eye,  and  make  it  broader,  and 
confequently  draw  the  Retina  nearer  to  the  cry- 
ftalline Humour  5  and  by  their  Relaxation  fuffer 
it  to  return  to  its  natural  diftance,  according  to 
the  Exigency  of  the  Objed,  in  refpeft  of  Diftance 
or  Propinquity;  and  befides,  poflibly  the  ciliary 
Proceffes  may,  by  their  Conftriftion  or  Relaxa- 
tion, render  the  Cryftalline  it  felf  more  gibbofe 
or  plain,  and  with  the  help  of  the  Mufcles  a  lit- 
tle alter  the  Figure  of  the  whole  Eye  for  the  fame 
reafon.  To  what  I  have  faid  might  be  ^dded, 
that  the  retiform  Tunicle  is  whitifli,  for  the  bet- 
"Ter  and  more  trup  Reception  of  the  Species  of 

Things ; 


254     TieWisDoM  of  GOD    Part  II- 

Things  J  that  there  being  a  diftance  neceiTarily 
required  for  the  CoUedion  of  the  Rays  received 
by  the  Pupil,  viz,  thofe  that  proceed  from  one 
Point  of  the  Objedl  to  one  Point  again  in  the  bot- 
tom of  the  Eye,  the  Retiita  muft  needs  be  fet  at 
a  diftance  from  the  cryftalline  Humour  j  and 
therefore  Nature  hath  provided  a  large  Room, 
and  fiird  it  with  the  pellucid  vitreous  Humour, 
moft  fit  for  that  purpofe. 

I  muft  not  omit  a  notable  Obfervation  concern- 
ing the  Place  of  the  Infertion  of  the  optick  Nerve 
into  the  Bulb  of  the  Eye,  and  the  reafon  of  it ; 
which  I  owe  to  that  learned  Mathematician  Pe^ 
ter  Herigon :  Ncrvus  opticus  (faith  he  in  his  O/- 
tica)  ad  latus  ponitur^  ne  pars  imaginis  in  ejus  fo-^ 
ramen  incidens  piBurd  car  eat:  The  Optick  Nerve 
is  notftuate  directly  behind  the  Eye,  but  on  one  fide ^ 
lefi  that  Part  of  the  Image  that  falls  upon  the  Hole 
of  the  optick  Nerve  Jhould  want  its  PiBure,  This 
I  do  not  conceive  to  be  the  triie  Reafon  of  this 
Situation  y  for  even  now  as  it  is  fituate,  that  Part 
of  the  Objeft  whofe  Rays  fall  upon  the  Center, 
or  Hole  of  the  optick  Nerve,  wants  its  Pifture, 
as  we  find  by  Experience,  that  Part  not  being 
feen  by  us,  tho'  we  heed  it  not ;  but  the  reafon 
is,  becaufe  if  the  optick  Axis  fhould  fall  upon 
this  Center  (as  it  would  do  were  the  Nerve  feated 
juft  behind  the  Eye)  this  great  Inconvenience 
would  follow,  that  the  middle  Point  of  every 
Objedt  we  view'd  would  be  invifible,  or  there 
would  be  a  dark  Spot  appear  in  the  midft  of  it  j 
Z  thus 


Part  11.       7';^ /^^  Creation.  255 

thus  we  fee  the  admirable  Wifdbm  of  Nature  in 
thus  placing  the  optick  Nerve  in  refped  of  the 
Eye,  which  he  that  did  not  confider  or  under- 
fland,  would  be  apt  to  think  more  inconvenient- 
ly fituate  for  Vifion  than  if  it  had  been  right 
behind. 

Another  thing  alfo  concerning  Vifion  is  moft 
remarkable,  that  tho'  there  be  a  Decuffation  of 
the  Rays  in  the  Pupil  of  the  Eye,  and  fo  the 
Image  of  the  Objecft  in  the  Retina  or  bottom  of 
the  Eye  be  inverted,  yet  doth  not  the  Objed  ap- 
pear inverted,  but  in  its  right  or  natural  Poflure ; 
the  reafon  whereof  is,  becaufe  the  vifual  Rays 
coming  in  ftraight  Lines  by  thofe  Points  of  the 
Senfory  or  Retina  which  they  touch,  affed:  the 
common  Senfe  or  Soul,  according  to  their  Dire- 
diion ;  that  is,  fignify  to  it,  that  thofe  feveral  Parts 
of  the  Objed:  from  whence  they  proceed  lie  in 
ftraight  Lines  (Point  for  Point)  drawn  thro'  the 
Pupil  to  the  feveral  Points  of  the  Senfory,  where 
they  terminate,  and  which  they  prefs  upon> 
whereupon  the  Soul  muft  needs  conceive  the 
Objed,  not  in  an  inverted,  but  a  right  Pofture ; 
and  that  the  Nerves  are  naturally  made,  not  only 
to  inform  the  Soul  of  external  Objeds  which 
prefs  upon  them,  but  alfo  of  the  Situation  of  fuch 
Objeds,  is  clear;  becaufe  if  the  Eyes  be  diftort- 
ed,  the  Objed,  will  we  nill  we,  will  appear  dou- 
ble ;  fo  if  the  fore  and  middle  Fingers  be  crois'd, 
and  a  round  Body  put  between  them,  and  mov'd, 
it  will  feem  to  be  two;  the  reafon  is,  becaufe  in 

that 


:256     i:U  WisBOM  of  GOD    PartU. 

that  Pofture  of  the  Fingers  the  Body  touches  the 
outfides  of  them,  which  in  their  natural  Site  are 
diftant  one  from  another,  and  their  Nerves  made 
to  fignify  to  the  Soul  Bodies  feparate,  and  diftant 
in  like  manner,  two  Fingers  lying  between  them ; 
and  tho'  our  Reafon,  by  the  help  of  our  Sight, 
correds  this  Error,  yet  cannot  we  but  fancy  it 
to  be  fo. 

Neither  is  the  aqueous  Hiimoury  as  fome  may 
fupinely  imagine,  altogether  ufelefs  or  unpro- 
fitable as  to  Vifion,  becaufe  by  its  Help  the 
Uvea  tunica  is  foftained,  which  elfe  would 
fall  flat  upon  the  cryftalline  Humour ;  and 
fluid  it  muft  be  to  give  way  to  the  Contraction 
and  Dilatation  of  the  uveous ;  and  becaufe 
the  outermoft  Coat  of  the  Eye  might  chance 
to  be  wounded  or  pricked,  and  this  Humour, 
being  fluid,  let  out,  therefore  Nature  hath  made 
Provifion  fpeedily  to  repair  it  again  in  fuch  a 
Cafe,  by  the  help  of  certain  Water-Pipes ,  or 
Lymphaedufts ,  inferted  into  the  Bulb  of  the 
Eye,  proceeding  from  Glandules  defign^d  by 
Nature  to  feparate  this  Water  from  the  Blood 
for  that  Ufe.  Antontm  Nuck  afiirms,  that  if 
the  Eye  of  an  Animal  be  pricked,  and  the 
aqueous  Humour  fqueez'd  out,  in  ten  Hours 
Space  the  faid  Humour  and  Sight  fhall  be  te- 
ftored  to  the  Eye,  if  at  leaft  the  Creature  be 
kept  in  a  dark  Place.  And  that  he  did  pub- 
lickly  demonftrate  the  fame  in  the  Anatomical 
Theatre  at  Leyden,  in  a  Dog,  out  of  whofe 
Eye,  being  wounded,  the  aqueous  Humour  did 
2  fo 


Part  II.        in  the  C  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  25  7 

fo  copioufly  flow,  that  the  Membranes  appeared 
flaccid,  and  yet  in  fix  Hours  Space  the  Bulb  of 
the  Eye  was  again  replete  with  its  Humour,  and 
that  without  the  Application  of  any  Medicines. 
Antoniui  Niick  dc  Duclu  novofaUvaliy  &c. 

Moreover,  it  is  remarkable,  that  the  Cornea 
T^iinica  [horny  or  pellucid  Coat  of  the  Eye]  doth 
i\pi  lie  in  the  fame  Superficies  with  the  White  of 
the  Eye,  but  rifeth  up,  as  it  were  a  Hillock,  a- 
bove  its  Convexity,  and  is  of  an  hyperbolical  or 
parabolical  Figure  5  fo  that  tho'  the  Eye  feems 
to  be  perfectly  round,  in  reality  it  is  not  lb,  but 
the  Iris  thereof  is  protuberant  above  the  White ; 
and  the  reafon  is,  becaufe  that  if  the  Cornea  tu- 
nica, or  cryftalline  Humour,  had  been  concen- 
trical  to  the  Selerodes^  the  Eye  could  not  have 
admitted  a  whole  Hemifphere  at  one  View,  &  fie 
Aniraalis  incolumitati  in  multis  rebus  minus  caiitum 
ejfet^  as  Scheiner  well  obferves.  In  many  things 
there  had  not  been  fufficient  Caution  or  Care  ta- 
ken for  the  Animal's  Safety. 

And  now  (that  I  may  ufe  the  ^^-  MoreV  ^/?- 
Words  of  a  late  Author  of  our  'l^^L'^""-^  ^' 
own)  xhe  Eye  is  already  fo  perfedt, 
that  I  believe  the  Reafon  of  a  Man  would  eafily 
have  refl:ed  here,  and  admir'd  at  his  own  Contri- 
vance. For  he  being  able  to  move  his  whole 
Body  upward  and  downward,  and  on  every  fide, 
might  have  unawares  thought  himfelf  fufiicient- 
ly  well  iprovided  for;  but  Nature  hath  added 
Mujcles  alfo  to  the  Eyes,    that  no  Perfedion 

S  .  mi^hc 


258     7%eWisjyou  of  GOD     Part  II, 

might  be  wanting ;  for  we  have  often  occalion 
to  move  our  Eyes,  our  Head  being  unmov'd,  as 
in  reading  and  viewing  more  particularly  an  Ob- 
jed:  fet  before  us,  by  transferring  the  ^xes  of  our 
Eyes  all  over  it  -,  and  that  this  may  be  done  with 
the  more  Eafe  and  Accuracy,  {he  hath  furnifh'd 
this  Organ  with  no  lefs  than  fix  Mufcles,  to  move 
it  upward^  downward,  to  the  Right  and  Left, 
obliquely,  and  round  about. 

I  (hall  now  confider  what  Provifion  is  made 
for  the  Defence  and  Security  of  this  moft  excel- 
lent and  ufeful  Part. 

Firji,  The  Eyes  are  funk  in  a  convenient  Val- 
ley, latent  utiliter^  and  are  encompaffed  round 
with  eminent  Parts,  as  with  a  Rampart,  Q?  excel-^ 
Jis  undique  farttbm  Jepiuntur^  *  Cic. 
dcmmTl  ^^  ^^e  defended  from  the  Strokes  of 
any  flat  or  broad  Bodies.  Above  ftand 
the  Eye-brows,  to  keep  off  any  thing  from  run- 
ning down  upon  them,  as  Drops  of  Sweat  from 
the  Forehead,  or  Duft,  or  the  like.  Superiora 
fuperciliis  ohdii5la  fudorem  a  capite  iS  front e  defu- 
entem  repelliint,  •  Cic.  Then  follow  the  Eye-lids ^ 
which  fence  them  from  any  fudden  and  lefler 
Stripes  5  thefe  alfo  round  the  Edges  are  fortified 
with  ftiflF  Briftles,  as  it  were  Palifadoes,  againft 
the  Incurfions  of  importunate  Animals,  ferving 
partly  as  a  Fan  to  ftrike  away  Flies,  or  Gnats,  or 
any  other  troublefome  Infed: ;  and  partly  to  keep 
off  fuperfluous  Light.     Munitceque  Jimt  palpebra 

tanquum 


Part  II.       in  the  Creation.  259 

tanquam  vallo  piloriim^  qiiibus  &  apertis  oculis  Ji- 
quid  infideret  repelleretur.  Idem,  ibid.  And  be- 
caufe  it  was  neceffary  that  Man  and  other  Ani- 
mals fhould  fleep,  which  could  not  be  fo  well 
done  if  the  Light  came  in  by  the  Windows  of  the 
Eyes,  therefore  hath  Nature  provided  thefe  Cur- 
tains to  be  then  drawn  to  keep  it  out.  And  be- 
caufe  the  outward  Coat  of  the  Eye  ought  to  be 
pellucid,  to  tranfmit  the  Light,  which,  if  the 
Efyes  fliould  always  fland  open,  would  be  apt  to 
grow  dry  and  fhrink,  and  lofe  their  Diaphaneity, 
therefore  are  the  Eye-lids  fo  contriv'd  as  often  to 
wink,  that  fo  they  may  as  it  were  glaze  and  var-* 
nifh  them  over  with  the  Moifture  they  contain, 
there  being  Glandules  on  purpofe  to  feparate  a 
Humour  for  that  Ufe,  and  withal  wipe  off  what- 
ever Duft  or  Filth  may  flick  to  them;  and  this, 
left  they  fliould  hinder  the  Sight,  they  do  with 
the  greateft  Celerity.  Cicero  hath  taken  notice, 
that  they  are  made  very  foft,  left  they  fhould  hurt 
the  Sight.  MoliJJime  ta5iu  ni  Icederent  aciem,  ap^ 
tijjime  faBa  &  ad  claudendas  pupillas  ne  quid  i?2ci- 
derety  &  ad  aperiendas,  idque  providit  iit  identic 
demjieri  pojfet  maxima  cum  celeritate. 

Secondly,  If  we  confider  the  Bulb  or  Ball  of  the 
Eye,  the  exterior  Membrane  or  Coat  thereof  is 
made  thick,  tough  and  ftrong,  that  it  is  a  very 
hard  matter  to  make  a  Rupture  in  it,  and  befides 
fo  flippery,  that  it  eludes  the  Force  of  any  Stroke, 
to  which  alfo  its  globular  Figure  gives  it  a  very- 
great  Advantage. 

S  2  Lajilyy 


26o       neWisDouof  GOD    Part  II. 

Lajlly,  Becaufe  for  the  Guidance  and  Dire- 
aion  of  the  Body  in  walking,  and  any  Exercife, 
it  is  neceffary  the  Eye  fliould  be  uncovered  and 
expos'd  to  the  Air  at  all  Times  and  in  all  Wea- 
thers, therefore  the  moft  wife  Author  of  Nature 
hath  provided  for  it  a  hot  Bed  of  Fat,  which  fills 
up  the  Interilices  of  the  Mufcles,  and  be  fides 
made  it  more  patient  and  lefs  fenfible  of  Cold 
than  our  other  Parts  5  and  tho'  I  cannot  fay  with 
Cicero,  abfolutely  free  from  Danger  or  Harm  by 
that  Enemy,  yet  leaft  obnoxious  to  the  Injuries 
thereof  of  any  Part,  and  not  at  all,  unlefs  it  be 
immoderate  and  extreme. 

To  all  this  I  might  add  the  Convenience  of  the 
Situation  of  the  Eye  in  refped:  of  its  Proximity 
to  the  Brain,  the  Seat  of  Apprehenfion  and  com- 
mon Senfe;  whereas  had  it  been  farther  removed, 
the  Optick  Nerves  had  been  liable  to  many  more 
Dangers  and  Inconveniences  than  now  they  are. 

Seeing  then  the  Eye  is  composed  of  fo  great 
Variety  of  Parts,  all  confpiring  to  the  Ufe  of 
Vifion,  whereof  fome  are  abfolutely  neceffary, 
others  very  ufeful  and  convenient,  none  idle  or 
fuperfluous  j  and  which  is  remarkable,  many  of 
them  of  a  different  Figure  and  Confiftency  from 
any  others  in  the  Body  befides,  as  being  tranfpa- 
rent,  which  it  was  abfolutely  neceffary  they 
fhould  be,  to  tranfmit  the  Rays  of  Light ;  who 
can  but  believe  that  this  Organ  was  defign'd  and 
made  purpofely  for  the  Ufe  for  which  it  ferves  ? 
■  Neither 


Part  II.       in  the  C  R  e  a  t  i on.  261 

Neither  is  it  to  be  efteem'd  any  Defedl  or  Im- 
perfection  in  the  Eyes  of  Man,  that  they  want- 
the  feventh  Mufcle,  or  the  nidlating  Membrane, 
which  the  Eyes  of  many  other  Animals  arc  fur- 
nifli'd  withal  i  for  tho'  they  be  very  ufeful,  and 
in  a  manner  neceffary  to  them,  confidering  their 
manner  of  living,  yet  they  are  not  fo  to  Man. 
T*o  fuch  Beads  as  feed  upon  Grafs,  and  other 
Herbs,  and  therefore  are  forc'd  to  hold  their 
Eyes  long  in  a  hanging  Pofture,  and  to  look 
downwards  for  the  chufing  and  gathering  of  their 
Food,  the  feventh  or  fufpenfory  Mufcle  is  very 
ufeful,  to  enable  them  to  do  fo  without  much 
Pain  or  Wearinefs  •,  yet  to  Man,  who  doth  not, 
nor  hath  any  occafion,  indeed  cannot  hold  his 
Head  or  look  long  downwards,  it  would  be  ufe- 
lefs  and  fuperfluous.  As  for  the  nidating  Mem.- 
brane,  or  Periophtkalmiiwt^  which  all  Birds,  and 
I  think  moft  Quadrupeds  are  furnifli'd  with,  I 
have  been  long  in  doubt  what  the  Ufe  of  it  might 
be,  and  have  fometimes  thought  it  was  for  the 
more  abundant  Defence  and  Security  of  the  Eye; 
but  then  I  was  puzzled  to  give  any  tolerable  Ac- 
count why  Nature  fhould  be  more  follicitous  for 
the  Prefervation  of  the  Eyes  of  Brutes  than  Men, 
and  in  this  Refpedt  alfo  to  be  a  Step-mother  to 
the  moft  noble  Creature. 

But  the  honourable  *  Author  ^  *  Boyle  of  final 
formerly  mentioned  gives  a  pro-  ^-^/^j*  p- 53»  54-. 
bable  Account  why  Frogs  and  Birds  are  furnifli'd' 

S  3  with 


262     ne  Wisi>ou  of  GOD    Part  IL 

with  fuch  a  Membrane.  Frogs,  becaufe  being 
amphibious  Animals,  defign'd  to  pafs  their  Lives 
in  watery  Places,  which  for  the  moft  part  abound 
with  Sedges,  and  other  Plants  endow'd  with 
fharp  Edges  or  Points  5  and  the  progreffive  Mo- 
tion of  this  Animal  being  to  be  made  not  by 
walking,  but  by  leaping,  if  his  Eyes  were  not 
provided  of  fuch  a  Sheath,  he  muft  either  (hut 
them,  and  fo  leap  blindly,  and  by  confequence 
dangeroufly,  or  by  leaving  them  open  run  a  ven- 
ture to  have  the  Cornea  cut,  prick'd,  or  other- 
wife  offended  by  the  Edges  or  Points  of  the 
Plants,  or  what  may  fall  from  them  upon  the 
Animal's  Eye;  whereas  this  Membrane  (being 
fomething  tranfparent  as  well  as  ftrong)  is  like  a 
kind  of  Speftacle,  that  covers  the  Eye  without 
taking  away  the  Sight.  Birds  are  likewife  fur- 
nifh'd  with  it,  becaufe  being  deftinated  to  fly 
among  the  Branches  of  Trees  and  Bu(hes,  their 
Prickles,  Twigs,  Leaves,  or  other  Parts,  would 
be  apt  otherwife  to  wound  or  offend  their  Eyes. 
But  yet  flill  v\^e  are  to  feek  why  it  is  given  to 
other  Quadrupeds,  whofe  Eyes  are  in  no  fuch 
danger. 

thirdly,  The  Ear,  another  Organ  of  Senfe, 
Jiow  admirable  it  is  contrived  for  the  receiving 
and  conveying  of  Sounds.  Firjiy  There  is  the 
outward  Ear,  or  Auricula^  made  hollow,  and 
contracted  by  degrees,  to  draw  the  Sound  inward, 
to  take  in  as  much  as  may  be  of  it,  as  we  ufe  a 
fuDBcl  to  pour  Liquor  into  any  VefTely  and 

therefore 


Part  IL        in  the  Ckeatio^.  263 

therefore  if  the  Auricula  be  cut  clear  off  the 
Hearing   is  much   impaired,    and  almoft   quite 
marr'd,  as  hath  been  by  Experience  found.  From 
the  Auricula  is  extended  a  fmall,   long,   round 
Hole  inward  into  the  Head,  to  intend  the  Mo- 
tion, and  fo  augment  the  Force  of  the  Sound,  as 
we  fee  in  a  Shooting-Trunk,  the  longer  it  is  to  a 
certain  Limit,  the  fwifter  and  more  forcibly  the 
Air  paiTes  in  it  and  drives  the  Pellet.    At  the  end 
of  this  Hole  is  a  Membrane  faften'd  to  a  round 
boney  Limb,   and  ftretch'd  like  the  Head  of  a 
Drum,  and  therefore  by  Ana  torn  ifts  call'd  alfo 
Tympanum^  to  receive  the  Impulfe  of  the  Sound, 
and  to  vibrate  or  quaver  according  to  its  recipro- 
cal Motions  or  Vibrations ;  the  fmall  Ear-bones 
being  at  the  end  faften'd  to  the  Tympanum^  and 
furnifh'd  with  a  Mufcle,  ferve  for  the  Tenlion 
of  that  Membrane,  or  the  Relaxation  of  it,  ac- 
cording to  the  Exigency  of  the  Animal,  it  being 
ftretch'd  to  the  utmoft  when  it  would  hearken 
diligently  to  a  lower  or  more  diftant  Sound.   Be- 
hind the  Drum  are  feveral  Vaults  and  anfraduous 
Cavities  in  the  Ear-bone,  fiU'd  only  with  what 
Naturalifts  call  the  implanted  Air,  fo  to  intend 
the  leaft  Sound  imaginable  that  the  Senfe  might 
be  affected  with  it ;  as  we  fee  in  fubterraneous 
Caves  and  Vaults  how  the  Sound  is  redoubled, 
and  what  a  great  Report  it  makes  however  mo- 
derate it  be  ;  and  becaufe  it  was  for  the  behoof 
of  the  Animal^  that  upon  any  fudden  Accident  it 
might  be  awaken'd  out  of  its  Sleep,   therefore 

S  4  were 


264     Tie  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  II. 

were  there  no  Shuts  or  Stopples  made  for  the 
Ears,  that  fo  any  loud  or  fharp  Noife  might 
awaken  it,  as  alfo  a  foft  and  gentle  Voice  of 
Murmur  provoke  it  to  fleep.  Now  the  Ears,  for 
the  Benefit  and  Conveniences  of  the  Animal^  be- 
ing alv^ays  to  ftand  open,  becaufe  there  was  fome 
danger  that  Infeds  might  creep  in  thereat,  and 
eating  their  way  thro'  the  I'ympanum  harbour  in 
the  Cavities  behind  it,  therefore  hath  Nature  lo- 
ricated  or  plaifter'd  over  the  fides  of  the  fore- 
mention'd  Hole  with  Ear-wax,  to  flop  and  en- 
tangle any  Infects  that  ihould  attempt  to  creep 
in  there.  But  I  muft  confefs  my  felf  not  fuffi- 
ciently  to  underftand  the  nature  of  Sounds,  to 
give  a  full  and  fatisfaftory  Account  of  the  Stru- 
dxire  and  Ufes  of  all  the  Parts  of  the  Ear^  they 
who  have  a  mind  to  fearch  into  the  curious  Ana- 
tomy and  Ufe  of  this  Part,  may  confult  Mon- 
fieur  du  Verney. 

Fourthly,  The  next  Part  I  fhall  take  notice  of 
fhall  be  the  'Teethy  concerning  which  I  find  feven 
Obfervations  in  the  honourable  Mr.  Boyle's  Trea- 
tife  of  filial  Caufes,  which  I  fhall  briefly  recapitu- 
late, and  add  one  or  two  more. 

I.  That  the  Teeth  alone,  among  the  Bones, 
continue  to  grow  in  length  during  a  Man's  whole 
Life,  as  appears  by  the  unfightly  Length  of  one 
Tooth,  when  its  Oppofite  happens  to  fall  or  be 
puU'd  out,  which  was  mofl  providently  defign'd 
to  repair  the  Wafte  that  is  daily  made  of  them 

by 


Part  11.         in  the  Ck  EAT  I  on.  265 

by  the  frequent  Attrition  in  Maftication.  Here, 
by  the  by,  I  inight  advife  Men  to  be  careful  how 
they  attempt  to  cure  this  Blemifh,  by  filing  or 
cutting  off  the  head  of  fuch  an  overgrown  Tooth, 
left  that  befal  them  which  happen'd  to  a  certain 
Nun  in  Padua,  who  upon  cutting  off  a  Tooth  in 
that  manner,  was  prefen^y  convulfed,  and  fell 
into  an  Epilepfy,  as  Bartholine  in  his  Anatomy 
reports. 

II.  That  that  Part  of  the  Teeth  which  is  ex- 
tant above  the  Gums  is  naked,  and  not  inverted 
with  that  fenfible  Membrane  call'd  Periojieuniy 
wherewith  the  other  Bones  are  covered. 


III.  That  the  Teeth  are  of  a  clofer  and  harder 
Subftance  than  the  reft  of  the  Bones,  for  the 
more  eafy  breaking  and  comminution  of  the 
more  folid  Aliments,  and  that  they  might  be 
more  durable,  and  not  fo  foon  worn  down  by 
grinding  the  Food. 

IV.  That  for  the  nourifhing  and  cherifliing 
thefe  fo  neceffary  Bones,  the  all-wife  Author  of 
Things  has  admirably  contrived  an  unfeen  Cavity 
in  each  fide  of  the  Jaw-bone,  in*  which  greater 
Channel  are  lodg'd  an  Artery,  a  Vein,  and  a  Nerve, 
which  thro'  leffer  Cavities,  as  it  were  thro*  Gut- 
ters,, fend  their  Twigs  to  each  particular  Tooth. 

V.  Eecaufe 


266     T^he  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  11. 

V.  Becaufe  Infants  were  for  a  confiderabic 
Time  to  feed  upon  Milk,  which  needs  no  chew- 
ing, and  left  Teeth  {hould  hurt  the  tender  Nip- 
ples of  the  Nurfe,  Nature  hath  dcferr'd  the  Pro- 
ducSion  of  them  for  many  Months  in  a  human 
Fcetus'y  whereas  thofe^of  divers  other  Animals, 
which  are  reduc'd  to  feek  betimes  Food  that 
needs  Maftication,  are  born  with  them. 

VI.  The  different  Figure  and  Shape  of  the 
Teeth  is  remarkable.  That  the  fore  Teeth 
{hould  be  form'd  broad,  and  with  a  thin  and 
(harp  Edge,  like  Chiffels,  to  cut  off  and  take 
away  a  Morfel  from  any  folid  Food,  call'd  there- 
fore Incijores,  The  next,  one  on  each  fide,  ftrong- 
er,  and  deeper  rooted,  and  more  pointed,  call'd 
therefore  Camm^  in  Englijh^  Eye-Teeth,  to  tear 
the  more  tough  and  refifting  fort  of  Aliments. 
The  reft,  call'd  Jaw-teeth,  or  Grinders,  in  Latin^ 
Molares^  are  made  flat  and  broad  a-top,  and  withal 
fomewhat  uneven  and  rugged,  that  by  their 
Knobs  and  little  Cavities  they  may  the  better  re- 
tain, grind,  and  commix  the  Aliments. 

VII.  Becaufe  the  Operations  to  be  performed 
by  the  Teeth  oftentimes  require  a  confiderable 
Firmnefs  and  Strength,  partly  in  the  Teeth  them- 
felves,  partly  in  the  Inftruments  which  move  the 
lower  Jaw,  which  alone  is  moveable,  Nature 
hath  provided  this  with  ftrong  Mufcles,  to  make 
it  bear  forcibly  againft  the  upper  Jaw  5  and  thus 

not 


Part  II.       7/2/^^  Creation.  267 

not  only  plac'd  each  Tooth  in  a  diflinft  Cavity 
of  the  Jaw-bone,  as  it  were  in  a  clofe,  ftrong, 
and  deep  Socket,  but  has  furnifli'd  the  feveral 
Sorts  of  Teeth  with  Holdfafts  fuitable  to  the 
Strefs,  that  by  reafon  of  their  different  Offices 
they  are  to  be  put  to ,  and  therefore,  whereas  the 
Cutters  and  Eye-teeth  have  ufually  but  one  Root 
(which  in  thefe  laft  nam'd  is  wont  to  be  very 
lojig)  the  Grinders,  that  are  employed  to  crack 
Nuts,  Stones  of  Fruit,  Bones,  or  other  hard  Bo- 
dies, are  furniih'd  with  three  Roots,  and  in  the 
upper  Jaw  often  with  four,  becaufe  thefe  are 
pendulous,  and  the  Subftance  of  the.Jaw  fome* 
what  fofter. 

VIII.  The  Situation  of  the  Teeth  is  moft  con- 
venient, viz,  the  Molar es  or  Grinders  behind, 
neareft  the  Center  of  Motion,  becaufe  there  is  a 
greater  Strength  or  Force  required  to  chew  the 
Meat  than  to  bite  a  piece  -,  and  the  Cutters  before, 
that  they  may  be  ready  to  cut  off  a  Morfel  from 
any  folid  Food,  to  be  tranfmitted  to  the  Grin-- 
ders, ' 

IX.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Jaw  in  Men, 
and  fuch  Animals  as  are  furnifh'd  with  Grinders, 
hath  an  oblique  and  tranfverfe  Motion,  which  is 
neceffary  for  chewing  and  comminution  of  the 
Meat,  which  it  is  obferv'd  not  to  have  in  thofe 
Ani/nals  that  want  the  Molares. 

ISiov/ 


268     Tie  Wisdom  of  G OD   Part  11^ 

Now  if  (as  Galen  faith)  he  that  fhall  marfhal 
a  Company  but  of  Thirty-two  Men  in  due  Or- 
der, is  commended  for  a  fkilful  and  induftrious 
Perfon,  fliall  we  not  admire  Nature,  which  hath 
fo  fkilfuUy  rank'd  and  difpos'd  this  Quire  of  our 
Teeth  ? 

Fifthly^  The  Tongue  is  no  lefs  admirable  for 
the  Contexture  and  manifold  Ufes  of  it.  Firjiy 
It  is  the  Organ  of  Tailing  ;  for  being  of  a  fpon- 
gy  Subftance,  the  fmall  Particles  of  our  Meat 
and  Drink  being  mingled  with  the  Saliva^  eafily 
infinuate  themfelves  into  the  Pores  of  it,  and  fo 
do  either  gratefully  affeft  it,  or  harflily  grate  up- 
on it,  accordingly  as  they  are  figured  and  mov'd  ; 
and  hereby  we  difcern  what  is  convenient  or  in- 
convenient for  our  Nourifhment.  It  helps  us 
likewife  in  the  chewing  and  fwallowing  of  our 
Meat.  And  lajilyy  it  is  the  main  Inftrument  of 
Speaking,  a  Quality  fo  peculiar  to  Man,  that  no 
Beaft  could  ever  attain  to  it.  And  altho'  Birds 
have  been  taught  to  form  fome  Words,  yet  they 
have  been  but  a  few,  and  thofe  learn'd  with 
great  difficulty ;  but  what  is  the  chief,  the  Birds 
underftand  not  the  meaning  of  them,  nor  ufe 
them  as  Signs  of  Things,  or  their  own  Concep- 
tions of  them,  tho'  they  may  ufe  them  as  Expref- 
iions  of  their  Paffions;  as  Parrots  having  been 
ufed  to  be  fed  at  the  Prolation  of  certain  Words, 
may  afterwards,  when  they  are  hungry,  pro- 
nounce the  fame.     For  this  Des  Cartes  makes  his 

main 


Part  II.      in  /^^  C  r  e  a  t  i  o n.  269 

main  Argument  to  prove  that  Brutes  have  no 
Cogitation,  becaufe  the  highefh  of  them  could 
never  be  brought  to  lignify  thqir  Thoughts  or 
Conceptions  by  any  artificial  Signs,  either  Words 
or  Geflures  (which,  if  they  had  any,  they  v^ould 
in  all  likelihood  be  forward  enough  to  do;) 
whereas  all  Men,  both  Fools  and  Mutes,  make 
ufe  of  Words  or  other  Signs  to  exprefs  their 
Thoughts  about  any  Subjects  that  prefent  them- 
felves,  which  Signs  alfo  have  no  reference  to  any 
of  their  Pailionsj  whereas  the  Signs  that  brute 
Animals  may  be  taught  to  ufe,  are  no  other  than 
fuch  as  are  the  Motions  of  fome  of  their  Paffions, 
Fear,  Hope,  Joy,  Gfc.  Hence  fome  of  die  jVw- 
ijld  Rabbins  did  not  fo  abfurdly  define 
a  Man  *  Animal  loqiiens^  2l  fpeaking  nn!2^n  * 
Creature.  Having  had  occafion  juit 
now  to  mention  the  Saliva^  or  Spittle,  I  am  put 
in  mind  of  the  eminent  Ufe  of  this  Humour, 
which  is  commonly  taken  for  an  Excrement. 
Becaufe  a  great  Part  of  our  Food  is  dry,  there- 
fore Nature  hath  provided  feveral  Glandules  to 
fepar^te  this  Juice  from  the  Blood,  and  no  lefs 
than  four  Pair  of  Channels  to  convey  it  into  the 
Mouth,  which  are  of  late-  Invention,  and  call'd 
by  Anatomifts  Du6ius  Salivales^  thro'  which  the 
Saliva  diftilling  continually,  ferves  well  to  ma- 
cerate and  temper  our  Meat,  and  make  it  fit  to 
be  chewed  and  fwallow'd.  If  a  copious  Moifture 
did  not  .by  thefe  Conduit-Pipes  inceffantly  flow 
.  down  into  the  Mouths  of  Horjes  and  Kine,  how 
were  it  poilible  they  fliould  for  a  long  time  to- 
I  gether 


270     ne  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  II. 

gether  grind  and  fwallow  fuch  dry  Meat  as  Hay 
and  Straw?  Moreover,  it  is  ufeful  not  only  in 
the  Mouth,  but  in  the  Stomach  too,  to  promote 
Concodiion,  as  we  have  already  noted. 

Sixthly y  To  the  Mouth  fucceeds  the  Windpipe^ 
no  lefs  wonderful  in  its  Conformation ;  for  be- 
caufe  continual  Refpiration  is  neceflary  for  the 
Support  of  our  Lives,  it  is  made  with  annulary 
Cartilages,  to  keep  it  conftantly  open,  and  that 
the  fides  of  it  may  not  flag  and  fall  together ; 
and  left,  when  we  fwallow,  our  Meat  or  Drink 
ihould  fall  in  there  and  obftruft  it,  it  hath  a 
ftrong  Shut  or  Valve,  call'd  Epiglottis^  to  cover  it 
clofe  and  ftop  it  when  we  fwallow:    For  the 
more  convenient  bending  of  our  Necks,  it  is  not 
made  of  one  entire  continued  Cartilage,  but  of 
many  annular  ones,  join'd  together  by  ftrong 
Membranes,   which  Membranes  are  mufcular, 
compounded  of  ftraight  and  circular  Fibres,  for 
the  more  effedlual  Contradion  of  the  Windpipe 
in  any  ftrong  or  violent  Expiration  or  coughing; 
and  left  the  Afperity  or  Hardnefs  of  their  Carti- 
lages ftiould  hurt  the  Oejophagus  or  Gullet,  which 
is  tender,  and  of  a  fkinny  Subftance,  or  hinder 
the  fwallowing  of  our  Meat,  therefore  thefe  an- 
nulary Griftles  are  not  made  round,  or  entire 
Circles ;  but  where  the  Gullet  touches  the  Wind- 
pipe, there  to  fill  up  the  Circle,  is  only  a  foft 
Membrane,  which  may  eafily  give  way  to  the 
Dilation  of  the  Gullet ;   and  to  demonftrate  chat 
this  was  defignedly  done  for  this  End  and  Ufe, 

fo 


Part  11.       m  t/je  C^EA^io]^.  271 

fo  foon  as  the  Windpipe  enters  the  Lungs,  its 
Cartilages  are  no  longer  deficient,  but  perfect 
Circles  or  Rings,  becaufe  there  was  no  necefiity 
they  fhould  be  lb,  but  it  was  more  convenient 
they  {hould  be  entire.  Lajily^  For  the  various 
Modulation  of  the  Voice,  the  upper  end  of  the 
Windpipe  is  endu*d  with  feveral  Cartilages  and 
Mufcles,  to  contrad:  or  dilate  it,  as  we  would 
haye  our  Voice  flat  or  fharp ;  and  moreover,  the 
whole  is  continually  moiften'd  with  a  glutinous 
Humour,  iffuing  out  of  the  fmall  Glandules  that 
are  upon  its  inner  Coat,  to  fence  it  againfl  the 
(harp  Air  received  in,  or  Breath  forc'd  out ;  yet 
is  it  of  quick  and  tender  Senfe,  that  it  may  be 
eafily  provoked  to  caft  out  by  coughing  whatever 
may  fall  into  it  from  without,  or  be  difcharg'd 
into  it  from  within. 

It  is  alfo  very  remarkable  which  Cafpar  Bar^- 
tholine  hath  obferv'd  in  the  Gullet,  that  where  it 
perforateth  the  Midriff,  the  carneous  Fibres  of 
that  mufcular  Part  are  infled:ed  and  arcuate,  as 
it  were  a  Spinier  embracing  and  clofing  it  fafl:^ 
by  a  great  Providence  of  Nature,  left  in  the  per- 
petual motion  of  the  faid  Midriff  the  upper  Ori- 
fice of  the  Stomach  fhould  gape,  and  caft  out  the 
Viduals  as  faft  as  it  receiv'd  it. 

Seventhly,  The  Heart ,  which  hath  been  alvvays 

efteem'd,  and  really  is  one  of  tlie  principal  Parts 

of  the  Body,  the  primum  vivem,  &  ultimum  mo- 

riens^  the  firft  Part  that  quickens,  and  the  laft 

I  that 


272     7^/^^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  II. 

that  dies,  by  its  inceflant  Motion  diftribut;ing  the 
Blood,  the  Vehicle  of  Life,  and  with  it  the  vital 
Heat  and  Spirits,  throughout  the  whole  Body, 
whereby  it  doth  continually  irrigate,  nouriih,  and 
keep  hot,  and  fupple  all  the  Members.  Is  it  not 
admirable  that  from  this  Fountain  of  Life  and 
Heat  there  fhould  be  Channels  and  Conduit-pipes 
to  every,  even  the  leaft  and  m.oft  remote  Part  of 
the  Body  ?  Juft  as  if  from  one  Water-houfe  there 
fhould  be  Pipes  conveying  the  Water  to  every 
Houfe  in  a  Town,  and  to  every  Room  in  each 
Houfe ;  or  from  one  Fountain  in  a  Garden  there 
ihould  be  little  Channels  or  Dikes  cut  to  every 
Bed,  and  every  Plant  growing  therein,  as  we 
have  feen  more  than  once  done  beyond  the  Seas. 
I  confefs  the  Heart  feems  not  to  be  defign'd 
to  fo  noble  an  Ufe  as  is  generally  believ'd,  that 
is,  to  be  the  Fountain  or  Confervatory  of  the  vi- 
tal Flame,  and  to  infpire  the  Blood  therewith 
(for  the  Lungs  ferve  rather  for  the  Accenfion,  or 
maintaining  that  Flame,  the  Blood  receiving  there 
from  the  Air  thofe  Particles  which  are  one  Part 
of  the  Pabuhimy  or  Fuel  thereof,  and  fo  impreg- 
nated, running  back  to  the  Heart)  but  to  ferve 
as  a  Machine  to  receive  the  Blood  from  the 
Veins,  and  to  force  it  out  by  the  Arteries  thro* 
the  whole  Body,  as  a  Syringe  doth  any  Liquor, 
though  not  by  the  fame  Artifice ;  and  yet  this 
is  no  ignoble  Ufe,  the  continuance  of  the  Circu- 
lation of  the  Blood  being  indifpenfably  neceffary 
for,  the  quickning  and  enlivening  of  all  the  Mem- 
bers of  the  Body,  and  fupplying  of  Matter  to 
the  Brain,  for  the  Preparation  of  the  animal  Spi- 
rit^. 


Part  II.       in  /y6^  Great  ion.  273 

rits,   the  Inftrumenrs  of  all  Senfe  and  Motion. 
Now  for  this  Ufe  of  receiving  and  pumping  out 
of  the  Blood,  the  Heart  is  admirably  contrived. 
For,  Firfl^  being  a  mufcular  Part,  the  Sides  of  it 
are  composed  of  two  Orders  of  Fibres,  running 
circularly  or  fpirally  from  Bafe  to  Tip,  contra- 
rily  one  to  the  other,  and  fo  being  drawn  or  con- 
trad:ed  contrary  ways,    do  violently  conftringe 
ai^  ftraiten  the  Ventricles,   and  ftrongly  force 
out  the  Blood,  as  we  have  formerly  intimated ; 
then  the  Veffels  vi^e  call  Arteries^  which  carry 
from  the  Pleart  to  the  feveral  Parts,  have  Valves, 
v^hich  open  outwards,  like  Trap-doors,  and  give 
the  Blood  a  free  Paffage  out  of  the  Heart,  but 
will  not  fufFer  it  to  return  back  again  thither; 
and  tlie  Veins^   which  bring  it  back  from  the 
feveral  Members  to  the  Heart,  have  Valves  or 
Trap-doors,  which  open  inwards,  fo  as  to  give 
way  unto  the  Blood  to  run  into  the  Heart,  but 
prevent  it  from  running  back  again  that  way ; 
befides,  the  Arteries  confift  of  a  quadruple  Coar, 
the  third  of  which  is  made  up  of  annular  or  or- 
bicular carneous  Fibres  to  a  good  thicknefs,  and 
is  of  a  mufcular  nature,  after  every  Pulfe  of  the 
Heart,  ferving  to  contrad  the  Veffel  fucceflively 
with  incredible  Celerity,  fo  by  a  kind  of  periftal- 
tick  Motion  impelling  the  Blood  onwards  to  the 
capillary  Extremities  and  thro'  the  Mufcles  with 
great  Force  and  Swiftnefs  3  fo  the  Pulfe  of  -the 
Arte/ies  is  not  only  caus'd  by  the  Pulfation  of  the 
Heart  driving  the  Blood  thro*  them  in  manner 

T  of 


274-     T'^^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  IL 

of  a  Wave  or  Flufh,  as  Des  Cartes  and  others 
would  have  it,  but  by  the  Coats  of  the  Arteries 

themfelves,  which  the  Experiments 

*  Cartes  Ep.     of  a  Certain  *  Lovai?i  Phyfician  (the 

df  Sep.  ^'  ^'^'     fi^'f*^  whereof  is  Galen  i)  do,  in  my 

Opinion,  make  good  againft  him. 
*'  Firft,  faith  he,  if  you  flit  the  Artery,  and 
"  thruft  into  it  a  Pipe,  fo  big  as  to  fill  the  Cavi- 
"  ty  of  it,  and  caft  a  ftrait  Ligature  upon  that 
*'  Part  of  the  Artery  containing  the  Pipe,  and  fo 
"  bind  it  faft  to  the  Pipe ;  notwithflanding  the 
"  Blood  hath  free  Paffage  thro'  the  Pipe,  yet 
"  will  not  the  Artery  beat  below  the  Ligature; 
^'  but  do  but  take  off  the  Ligature,  it  will  com- 
"  mence  again  to  beat  immediately."  But  be- 
caufe  one  might  be  ready  to  reply  to  this  Expe- 
riment, that  the  reafon  why  v/hen  bound  it  did 
not  beat,  was  becaufe  the  Current  of  the  Blood 
being  ftraiten'd  by  the  Pipe,  when  beneath  the 
Pipe  it  came  to  have  more  liberty,  was  not  fuffi- 
cient  to  ftretch  the  Coat  of  the  Artery,  and  fo 
caufe  a  Pulfe,  but  when  the  Ligature  was  taken 
off  it  might  flow  between  the  inclos'd  Tube  and 
the  Coat  of  the  Artery ;  therefore  he  adds  ano- 
ther, which  clearly  evinces  that  this  could  not  be 
the  reafon,  but  that  it  is  fomething  flowing  down 
the  Coats  of  the  Artery  that  caufes  the  Pulfe  ; 
that  is,  if  you  fl:raiten  the  Artery  never  fo  much, 
provided  the  Sides  of  it  do  not  quite  meet  and 
ftop  all  Paffage  of  the  Blood,  the.  Veffel  will 
notwithfl:anding  continue  ftill  to  beat  below  or 
beyond  the  Coardation.     So  we  fee  fome  Phyfl- 

ciaaS;> 


Part  If.       in  tha  Creation.  275 

cians,  both  ancient  (as  Galen)  and  modern,  were 
of  opinion  that  the  Pulfe  of  the  Arteries  was  ow- 
ing to  their  Coats;  tho'  the  firft  that  I  know  of 
who  obferv'd  the  third  Coat  of  an  Artery  to  be  a 
mufcular  Body,  composed  of  annular  Fibres,  was 
Dn  Willis.  This  mention  of  the  periftaltick 
Motion  puts  me  in  mind  of  an  ocular  Demon- 
ftration  of  it  in  the  Gullet  of  Kine  when  they 
cbew  the  Cud,  which  I  have  often  beheld  with 
Pleafure  ;  for  after  they  have  fwallow'd  one 
Morfel,  if  you  look  ftedfaftly  upon  their  Throat 
you  will  foon  fee  another  afcend,  and  run  pretty 
fwiftly  all  along  the  Throat  up  to  the  Mouth, 
which  it  could  not  do,  unlefs  it  were  impell'd  by 
the  fucceffive  Contradion  or  periftaltick  Mo- 
tion of  the  Gullet  continually  following  ;  and  it 
is  remarkable  that  thefe  ruminant  Creatures  have 
a  Power  by  the  Imperium  of  their  Wills  of  dire- 
(fting  this  periftaltick  Motion  upwards  or  down- 
wards. I  fhall  add  no  more  concerning  the 
Heart,  but  that  it  and  the  Brain  do  mutuus  operas 
tradere^  enable  one  another  to  work ;  for,  firfi^ 
the  Brain  cannot  itfelf  live  unlefs  it  receive  con- 
tinual Supplies  of  Blood  from  the  He:irr,  but  lefs 
can  it  perform  its  Fundlions,  of  preparing  and 
diftributing  the  animal  Spirits,  nor  the  Heart 
Pulfe,  unlefs  it  receives  Spirits  or  fomething  elfe 
that  defcends  from  the  Brain  by  the  Nerves  \  for 
do  but  cut  afunder  the  Nerves  that  go  from  the 
Brain  to  the  Heart,  the  Motion  thereof,  in  moft 
perfed:  and  hot  Creatures,  ceafeth  immediately. 
Which  Part  began  this  Round  is  the  Queftion. 

T  2  ^  I  find 


276       neWisDouof  GOD    PartlL 

I  find  in  the  Philofopbical  T^ranfaBlom^  N<5  280. 
fome  notable  Obiervations  of  the  famous  Anato- 
mift  ^x,  William  Cowper^  concerning  the  Artifice 
of  Nature  in  regulating  the  Motion  of  the  Blood 
in  the  Veins  and  Arteries,  to  aflTift  and  promote 
it  in  the  one,  and  moderate  it  in  the  other,  which 
I  fhall  give  you  in  his  own  \Yords. 

"  As  the  Arteries  (faith  he)  are  known  to  ex- 
port the  Blood,  fo  the  Veim  to  carry  it  back 
again  to  the  Heart ;  but  having  already  defcri- 
bed  their  Extremities,  we  come  now  to  the 
large  Trunks  of  the  Veins-,  and  here,  as  in  the 
Arteries^  we  find  the  common  Pradlice  of  Na- 
ture, in  difpofing  the  Branches  of  Veins  to  dif- 
charge  the  refluent  Blood  into  the  next  adjacent 
Trunk,  and  fo  on  to  the  Heart.  As  the  Arte- 
ries  afford  abundance  of  Inftances  of  Checks 
given  to  the  Velocity  of  the  Current  of  Blood 
thro*  feveral  Parts,  fo  the  Veins  fupply  us  with 
as  many  Artifices  to  afljft  its  regular  Return  to 
the  Hearty  as  well  as  favour  thofe  Contrivan- 
ces in  the  Arteries, 

"  The  carotid,  vertebral,  and  fplenick  Arteries, 
are  not  only  varioufly  contorted,  but  alfo  here 
and  there  dilated,  to  moderate  the  Motion  of 
the  Blood;  fo  the  Veins  that  correfpond  to 
thofe  Arteries  are  alfo  varioufly  dilated.  The 
Beginnings  of  the  internal  Jugular  shawQ  a  bul- 
bous Cavity,  which  are  diverticula  to  the  re- 
fluent Blood  in  the  Si?2us's  of  the  Dura  Mater, 
I  .  "  left 


Part  IL       i7t  the  Creation.  277 

"  left  it  fhould  defcend  too  faft  into  the  ^ugu- 
"  lars.  The  hke  has  been  taken  notice  of  by 
**  Dr.  Lower  in  the  vertebral  Sijtuss.  The  fple- 
"  nick  Vein  has  divers  Cells  opening  into  it  near 
"  its  Extremities  in  human  Bodies,  but  in  Qua- 
"  drupeds  the  Cells  open  into  the  Trunks  of  the 
"  fplenick  Veins. 

"  Thtjpermatick  Veins  do  more  than  equal  the 
"  ^Length  of  the  Arteries  of  the  l^ejies  m  Men ; 
"  their  various  Divifions,  and  feveral  Inofcula- 
"  tions,  and  their  Valves,  are  admirably  contri- 
"  ved  to  fufpend  the  Weight  of  the  Blood,  in  or- 
"  der  to  difcharge  it  into  the  larger  Trunks  of 
"  the  Veins-,  and  were  it  not  that  the  refluent 
"  Blood  from  the  Tejies  is  a  Po?idus  to  the  influ- 
"  ent  Blood  from  the  Arteries,  and  ftill  lellens 
"  its  Current  in  the  Tejies,  thefe  fpermatick  Veins, 
"  like  thofe  of  other  Parts,  might  have  difcharg'd 
"  the  Blood  into  the  next  adjacent  Trunk. 

"  Who  can  avoid  Surprize  at  the  Art  of  Na- 
"  ture,  in  contriving  the  Veins  that  bring  part  of 
**  the  refluent  Blood  from  the  lower  Parts  of  the 
"  Body,  when  they  confider  the  neceflity  of  pla- 
"  cing  the  human  Heart,  as  well  as  that  of  moft 
"  Quadrupeds,  fo  far  from  the  Center  of  the 
"  Body  towards  its  upper  Part;  it  is  for  chat 
"  End  neceflfary  that  the  large  Trunks  of  the 
"  Veins  and  Arteries  {hould  not  afl!bciate  each 
"  other;  for  if  all  the  Blood  fent  to  the  lower 
"  Parts  by  the  defcending  Trunk  of  the  Aorta^ 
"  fhould  return  to  the  Heart  again  by  one  fingle 
"  Trunk  (as  it  is  fent  out  from  thence)  the- 

T  3  "  Weight 


278     ne  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  11. 

Weight  of  fo  much  Blood  in  the  afcending 
Trunk  of  the  Fena  Cava  would  oppofe  all  the 
Force  the  Heart  could  give  it  from  the  Arte- 
ries, and  hinder  its  Afcent ;  for  this  reafon  the 
Vena  Azygos  ox  fine  Pari  is  contriv'd  to  convey 
the  Blood  fent  to  the  Mufcles  of  the  Back  and 
T'horax  into  the  defcending  Trunk  of  the  Vena 
Cava  above  the  Heart  5  hence  it  is  evident  that 
more  Blood  comes  into  the  Heart  by  the  de- 
fcending or  upper  Trunk  of  the  Vena  Cavay 
than  paffes  out  by  the  afcending  Trunk  of  the 
Aorta ;  nor  does  the  Quantity  of  Blood  con- 
veyed to  the  Heart  by  the  fuperior  Trunk  of 
the  Vena  Cava,  feem,  without  fome  other  De- 
fign  in  Nature  befides  tranfporring  it  thither, 
to  free  the  inferior  Trunk  from  its  Weight ; 
but  perhaps  it  was  neceffary  fo  much  Blood 
fhould  be  ready  there  to  join  with  the  Chyle, 
for  its  better  Mixture,  before  it  reaches  the 
right  Auricle  of  the  Heart."  So  far  Mr. 
Cowper. 

Eighthly,  The  next  Part  I  fball  treat  of  fhall 
be  the  Hand,  this  opyzvov  opyximy  or  fuperlative 
Inftrument,  which  ferves  us  for  fuch  a  multitude 
of  Ufes,  as  it  is  not  eafy  to  enumerate  j  whereto, 
if  we  confider  the  Make  and  Structure  of  it,  we 
fhall  find  it  wonderfully  adapted.  Firf,  It  is 
divided  into  four  Fingers  bending  forward,  and 
one  oppofite  to  them  bending  backwards,  and  of 
greater  Strength  than  any  of  them  fingly,  which 
^'e  call  the  Thumb,  to  join  with  them  feverally 

or 


Part  II.        //^  /^^  Creation.  279 

or  united,  whereby  it  is  fitted  to  lay  hold  of  Ob- 
jeds  of  any  Size  or  Quantity  -,  the  lead  things, 
as  any  fmall  fingle  Seed,  are  taken  up  by  the 
Thumb  and  fore  Finger,  thofe  a  Httie  greater 
by  the  Thumb  and  two  Fingers,  which  alfo  we 
chiefly  employ  to  manage  the  Needle  in  fewing 
and  the  Pen  in  writing;  when  we  would  take  up 
a  greater  Quantity  of  any  thing,  we  make  ufe  of 
the  Thumb  and  all  the  Fingers;  fometimes  we 
ufe  one  Finger  only,  as  in  pointing  at  any  thing, 
picking  things  out  of  Holes  or  long  and  narrow 
VefTeb;  fometimes  all  feverally  at  one  time,  as 
in  flopping  the  Strings  when  we  play  upon  any 
mufical  Inilruments.     Secondly^  The  Fingers  are 
ftrengthen'd  with  feveral  Bones,  jointed  together 
for  Motion,  and  furnifli'd  with  feveral  Mufcles 
and  Tendons,  like  fo  many  PuUics,  to  bend  them 
circularly  forwards,   which  is  moft  convenient 
for  the  firm  holding  and  griping  of  any  Objed:^ 
which  of  how  great,  conftant  and  ncceflary  Ufe 
it  is  in  pulling  or  drawing,  but  efpecially  in  ta- 
king up  and  retaining  any  fort  of  Tool  or  Inftru- 
ment  to  work  withal  in  Hufbandry  and  all  me- 
chanick  Arts,  is  fo  obvious  to  every  Man's  Ob- 
fervation,  that  I  need  not  fpend  Time  to  inftance 
in  Particulars ;  m.oreover,  the  feveral  Fingers  are 
furnifli'd  with  feveral  Mufcles,    to  extend  and 
open  the  Hand,  and  to  move  to  the  Right  and 
Left ;  and  fo  this  divifion  and  motion  of  the  Fin- 
gers dQth  not  hinder  but  that  the  whole  Hand 
may  be  employed  as  if  it  were  all  of  a  piece,  as 
we  fee  it  is,  either  expanded,  as  in  flriking  out, 

T  4  fmooth- 


28o     He  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  II. 

fmoothing  and  folding  up  of  Clothes,  and  fome 
mechanick  Ufes ;  or  contraded,  as  in  fighting, 
kneading  of  Dough,  and  the  like ;  it  is  alfo  nota- 
ble, and  indeed  wonderful,  that  the  Tendons 
bending  the  middle  Joint  of  the  Fingers  fliould 
be  perforated,  to  give  Paflage  to  the  Tendons  of 
the  Mufcles  which  draw  the  uppermoft  Joints, 
and  all  bound  down  clofe  to  the  Bone  with 
ftrong  Fillets,  left  they  ihould  ftart  up  and  hin- 
der the  Hand  in  its  Work,  ftanding  like  fo  many 
Bow-ftrings.  Thirdly^  The  Fingers-ends  are 
ftrengthen'd  with  Nails,  as  we  fortify  the  ends 
of  our  Staves  and  Forks  with  Iron  Hoops  or  Fe- 
rules ;  which  Nails  ferve  not  only  for  Defence, 
but  for  Ornament,  and  many  Ufes.  The  Skin 
upon  our  Fingers-ends  is  thin,  and  of  moft  ex- 
quifite  Senfe,  to  help  us  judge  of  any  thing  we 
handle.  If  now  I  fliould  go  about  to  reckon  up 
the  feveral  Ufes  of  this  Inftrument,  Time  would 
fooner  fail  me  than  Matter.  By  the  help  of  this 
we  do  all  our  Works,  we  build  ourfelves  Houfes 
to  dwell  in ,  we  make  ourfelves  Garments  to 
wear,  we  plow  and  fow  our  Grounds  with  Corn, 
drefs  and  cultivate  our  Vineyards,  Gardens  and 
Orchards,  gather  and  lay  up  our  Grain  and  Fruits, 
we  prepare  and  make  ready  our  Victuals ;  Spin- 
ning, Weaving,  Fainting,  Carving,  Engraving, 
and  that  divinely  invented  Art  of  Writing,  where- 
by we  tranfmit  our  own  Thoughts  to  Pofterity, 
and  converfe  with  and  participate  the  Obferva- 
tions  and  Inventions  of  them  that  are  long  ago 
dead,  all  perform'd  by  this  -,  this  is  the  only  In- 

ftrument 


Part  II.         in  the  Ck  EAT  I  oi^.  281 

ftrument  for  all  Arts  whatfoevcr,  no  Improve- 
ment to  be  made  of  any  experimental  Knowledge 
without  it.     Hence  (as  Arijiotle  faith  well)  they 
do  amifs  that  complain  that  Man  is  worfe  dealt 
with  by  Nature  than  any  other  Creatures;  where- 
as they  have  fome  Hair,  fome  Shells,  fome  Wool, 
fome  Feathers,  fome  Scales,  to  defend  themfelves 
from  the  Injuries  of  the  Weather,  Man  alone  is 
bo;*n  naked  and  without  all  Covering ;  whereas 
they  have  natural  Weapons  to  defend  themfelves 
and  offend  their  Enemies,  fome  Horns,  fome 
Hoofs,  fome  Teeth,  fome  Talons,  fome  Claws, 
fome  Spurs  and  Beaks ;  Man  hath  none  of  all 
thefe,  but  is  weak  and  feeble,  and  unarm'd  fent 
into  the  World :  why,  a  Hand,  with  Reafon  to 
ufe  it,  fupplies  the  Ufes  of  all  thefe,  that's  both 
a  Horn  and  a  Hoof,  a  Talon  and  a  Tulk,  &c. 
becaufe  it  enables  us  to  ufe  Weapons  of  thefe  and 
other  fafhions,  as  Swords,  and  Spears,  and  Guns; 
befides,  this  Advantage  a  Man  hath  of  them,  that 
whereas  they  cannot  at   pleafure  change  their 
Coverings,  or  lay  afide  their  Weapons,  or  make 
ufe  of  others  as  Occafion  ferves,  but  muft  abide 
Winter  and  Summer,  Night  and  Day  with  the 
fame  Cloathing  on  their  Backs,  and  fleep  with 
their  Weapons  upon  them  -,  a  Man  can  alter  his 
Cloathing    according   to   the   Exigency   of   the 
Weather,  go  warm  in  Winter  and  cool  in  Sum- 
mer,  cover  up  himfelf  hot  in  the  Night,  and.  lay 
afide  his  Cloaths  in  the  Day,  and  put  on  or  off 
more  or  fewer,  according  as  his  Work  and  Ex- 
ercife  is;  and  can,  as  Occafion  requires,  make 

Ufe 


282     The  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  IL 

Ufe  of  divert  Sorts  of  Weapons,  and  Choice  of 
fuch  at  all  Turns  as  are  mofl  proper  and  conve- 
nient; whereby  we  are  enabled  to  fubdue  and 
rule  over  all  other  Creatures,  and  ufe  for  our 
own  Behoof  thofe  Qualities  wherein  they  excel, 
as  the  Strength  of  the  Ox,  the  Valour  and  Swift- 
nefs  of  the  Horfe,  the  Sagacity  and  Vigilancy  of 
the  Dog,  and  fo  make  them  as  it  were  our  own. 
Had  we  wanted  this  Member  in  our  Bodies  we 
muft  have  liv'd  the  Life  of  Brutes,  without  Houfe 
or  Shelter,  but  what  the  Woods  and  Rocks  would 
have  afforded,  without  Cloaths  or  Covering,  with- 
out Corn,  or  Wine,  or  Oil,  or  any  other  Drink 
but  Water ;  without  the  Warmth  and  Comfort, 
or  other  Ufes  of  Fire,  and  fo  without  any  artifi- 
cial bak'd,  boird,  or  roaft  Meats;  but  muft  have 
fcrambled  with  the  wild  Beafts  for  Crabs,  and 
Nuts,  and  Acorns,  and  fuch  other  things  as  the 
Earth  puts  forth  of  her  own  accord ;  we  had  laid 
open  and  exposed  to  Injuries,  and  had  been  un- 
able to  refift  or  defend  ourfelves  againft  almoft 
the  weakeft  Creature. 

The  remaining  Parts  I  fhall  but  briefly  run 
over. 

That  tht  Back-Bone  (hould  be  divided  into  fo 
many  Vertebres  for  commodious  bending,  and 
not  be  one  entire  rigid  Bone,  which  being  of  that 
Length  would  have  been  often  in  danger  of  fnap- 
ping  in  funder ;  that  it  fhould  be  made  tapering, 
in  form  of  a  Pillar,  the  lower  Vertebres  being  the 
broadeft  and  largeft,  and  the  fuperior  in  order 
lefler  and  leffer,  for  the  greater  Fkmnefs  and  Sta- 
bility 


Part  11.       in  /^^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  2  83 

bility  of  the  Trunk  of  the  Body  5  that  the  feveral 
Vertebres  (hould  be  fo  elegantly  and  artificially 
compacted  and  join'd  together,  that  they  are  as 
ftrong  and  firm  as  if  they  were  but  one  Bone  \  that 
they  (hould  be  all  perforated  in  the  middle,  with 
a  large  Hole  for  the  fpinal  Marrow  or  Pith  to 
pafs  along,  and  each  Particular  have  a  Hole  on 
each  fide  to  tranfmit  the  Nerves  to  the  Mufcles 
of  the  Body,  to  convey  both  Senfe  and  Motion ; 
that  by  reafon  of  the  fore-mention  d  clofe  Con- 
nexion of  the  Vertebres,  it  fhould  be  fo  form'd  as 
not  to  admit  any  great  Flexure  or  Recefs  from  a 
right  Line  any  angular,  but  only  a  moderate  cir- 
cular bending,  left  the  fpinal  Pith  fhould  be  com- 
prefs'd,  and  fo  the  free  Intercourfe  or  Paffage  of 
the  Spirits  to  and  fro  be  ftopt. 

One  Obfervation  relating  to  the  Motion  of 
the  Bones  in  their  Articulations  I  fhall  here  add, 
that  is,  the  Care  that  is  taken  and  the  Provifion 
that  is  made  for  the  eafy  and  expediate  motion  of 
them,  there  being  to  that  purpofe  a  twofold  Li- 
quor .prepared,  for  the  Inundion  and  Lubrifica- 
tion  of  their  Heads  or  Ends.  i.  An  oily  one, 
furni{l:i'd  by  the  Marrow.  2.  A  mucilaginous, 
fupply'd  by  certain  Glandules  feated  in  the  Arti- 
culations, both  which  together  make  up  the  moft 
apt  and  proper  Mixture  for  this  Ufe  and  End 
that  can  be  invented  or  thought  upon  5  for  not 
only  both  the  Ingredients  are  of  a  lubricating  na- 
ture, but  there  is  this  Advantage  gain'd  from  their 
Compofiiion,  that  they  do  mutually  improve  one 

another  \ 


284     I'he  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  11. 

another ;  for  the  Mucilage  adds  to  the  Lubricity 
of  the  Oil,  and  the  Oil  preferves  the  Mucilage 
from  Infpiffation,  and  contracting  the  Coniift- 
ency  of  a  Gelly.  Now  this  Inundlion  is  ufeful, 
indeed  neceffary,  for  three  Ends  chiefly. 

1.  For  the  facilitating  of  Motion.  For  tho' 
the  Ends  of  the  Bones  are  very  fmooth,  yet  were 
they  dry  they  could  not  with  that  Readinefs  and 
Eafe,  nay,  not  without  great  Difficulty,  yield  to 
and  obey  the  Plucks  and  Attraftions  of  the  mo- 
tory  Mufcles ;  as  we  fee  Clocks  and  Jacks,  tho' 
the  Screws  and  Teeth  of  the  Wheels  and  Nuts 
be  never  fo  fmooth  and  polilh'd,  yet  if  they  be 
not  oil'd  will  hardly  move,  tho'  you  clog  them 
with  never  fo  much  Weight ;  but  if  you  apply 
but  a  little  Oil,  they  prefently  whirl  about  very 
fwiftly  with  the  tenth  Part  of  the  Force. 

2.  For  preferving  the  Ends  of  the  Bones  from 
an  Incalefcency,  which  they,  being  hard  and  fo- 
lid  Bodies,  would  necelTarily  contradt  from  a 
fwift  and  long  continuing  Motion  5  fuch  as  that 
of  running,  or  mowing,  or  threfhing,  orfawing, 
and  the  like,  if  they  afe  immediately  touch'd  and 
rubb'd  againft  one  another  with  that  Force  they 
muft  needs  do,  efpecially  in  running,  the  whole 
Weight  of  the  Body  bearing  upon  the  Joints  of 
the  Thighs  and  Knees.  So  we  fee  in  the  Wheels 
of  Waggons  or  Coaches,  the  Hollows  of  the 
Naves,  by  their  fwift  Rotations  on  the  Ends  of 
the  Axle-trees,  produce  a  Heat,  fometimes  fo  in- 

tenfe 


Part  II.       //^ /y6^  Cr  E  ATioN.  285 

tenfe  as  to  fet  them  on  fire ;  to  prevent  which 
they  (land  in  need  to  be  frequently  anointed  or 
belmear'd  with  a  Mixture  of  Greafe  and  Tar, 
imitating  the  fore-mention'd  natural  Compofi- 
tion  of  Oil  and  Mucilage.  Nay,  Bodies  fofter 
a  great  deal  than  Metals  contrad:  a  great  Heat 
by  Attrition,  as  is  evident  from  thofe  black  cir- 
cular Lines  we  fee  on  Boxes,  Diflics,  and  other 
turp'd  Veflels  of  Wood,  which  are  the  EfFed:s  of 
Ignition,  caus'd  by  the  Preffure  of  an  edg'd  Stick 
upon  the  Veffel  turn'd  nimbly  in  the  Lathe.  And 
if  there  had  not  been  a  Provifion  in  the  Joints 
againft  fuch  a  preternatural  Incalefcence  upon 
their  violent  motion,  this  would  have  made  a 
flothful  World,  and  confin'd  us  to  leifurely  and 
deliberate  Movements,  when  there  were  the  moft 
urgent  and  hafty  Occafions  to  quicken  us. 

3.  P'or  the  preventing  of  Attrition,  and  wear- 
ing down  the  ends  of  the  Bones  by  their  motion 
and  rubbing  one  againft  another,  which  is  fo  vio- 
lent and  lafting  fometimes,  that  it  is  a  Wonder 
any  Inundion  fhould  fuffice  to  fecure  their  Heads 
from  wafting  and  confumption.  I  have  often 
feen  the  Tops  of  the  Teeth  (which  are  of  a  hard- 
er Subftance  than  the  reft  of  the  Bones)  worn  off 
by  Maftication,  in  Perfons  who  have  loft  moft  of 
their  Grinders,  and  been  compell'd  conftantly  to 
make  ufe  of  three  or  four  only  in  chevvdng,-.fo 
low^  that  at  laft  the  inward  Marrow  arid  Nerve 
lay  bare,  and  they  could  no  longer  for  Pain  make 
ufe  of  them ;  (o  that  bad  there  not  been  this  Pro- 
vifion 


286     neWisDOM  of  GOD    Part  IL 

vifion  made  for  the  anointing  the  Bones,  the  cu- 
rious Workmanfhip  of  Nature  in  adapting  them 
fo  exadly  one  to  another,  as  was  moft  fit  for  the 
eafy  Performance  of  all  thofe  Motions  to  which 
they  were  deftin  d,  would  not  fuffice  for  Ufe ; 
but  the  ftirring  Part  of  Mankind  would  foon  find 
themfelves  fitter  for  an  Hofpital  than  for  Adion 
and  the  Purfuit  of  Bufinefs. 

Thefe  Obfervations  I  acknowledge  myfelf  to 
*  M   r/  ^^^^  borrowed  of  a  late  ingenious 

Haz^ers,  ^^^"^  *  Writer  of  OJieokgy,  who  thus  con- 
cludes his  Difcourfe  upon  this  Sub- 
jedl.  And  here  we  cannot  avoid  the  Notice  of  the 
vijible  Footjieps  of  an  infinite  Reafon^  which  as  they 
are  deeply  imprefsd  upon  the  Univerje^  fo  more  efpe- 
cially  on  the  fenfible  Farts  of  it  in  thofe  rational 
Contrivances  which  arefoimd  in  Animals:  And  we 
can  never  fufficiently  admire  the  Wifdom  and  Fro* 
vidence  of  our  great  Creator^  who  has  given  all 
Farts  in  thefe  animated  Bei?2gSy  not  only  fuch  a 
StruBure  as  renders  them  fit  for  their  necejfary 
Motions  and  defignd  FunBions^  but  withal  the  Be- 
nefit and  Advantage  of  whatever  may  preferve 
themy  or  facilitate  their  ABion. 

Moreover,  the  Artifice  of  Nature  is  wonderful 
in  the  Conflrudlion  of  the  Bones  that  are  to  fup- 
port  the  Body,  and  to  bear  great  Burdens,  or  to 
be  employed  in  ftrong  Exercifes,  they  being  made 
hollow,  for  Lightnefs  and  StifFnefs.  For  we 
have  before  noted,  a  Body  that  is  hollow  may  be 

demon- 


Part  11.       /;/ /^^  Creation.  287 

demonftrated  to  be  more  rigid  and  inflexible  than 
a  folid  one  of  the  fame  Subilance  and  Weight ; 
fo  that  here  is  Provifion  made  for  the  Stiffnefs 
and  Lightnefs  of  the  Bones.  But  the  Ribs,  which 
are  not  to  bear  any  great  Weight,  or  to  be  ftrong- 
ly  exercis'd,  but  only  to  fence  the  Breaft,  have 
no  Cavity  in  them,  and  towards  the  fore  part  or 
Breaft  are  broad  and  thin,  that  fo  they  might 
bend  and  give  way  without  danger  of  Frailure ; 
when  bent  returning  by  their  elaftick  Property  to 
their  Figure  again.  Yet  is  not  the  Hollow  of  the 
Bones  altogether  ufelefs,  but  ferves  to  contain  the 
Marrow,  which  fupplies  an  Oil  for  the  main- 
taining and  inundion  of  the  Bones  and  Liga- 
ments, and  fo  facilitating  their  Motion  in  the 
Articulations ;  and  particularly  (which  we  men- 
tioned not  before)  of  the  Ligaments,  preferving 
them  from  Drynefs  and  Rigidity,  and  keeping 
them  fupple  and  flexible,  and  ready  to  comply 
with  all  the  Motions  and  Poftures  of  that  move- 
able Part  to  which  they  appertain ;  and  laftly,  to 
fecure  them  from  Difruption,  which,  as  ftrong 
as  they  are,  they  would  be  in  fome  danger  of,  up- 
on a  great  and  fudden  Stretch  and  Contortion,  if 
they  were  dry,  Gfc.  See  more  to  this  Purpofe  in 
the  Treatife  fore  quoted,  ^.183. 

That  whereas  the  Breaft  is  encompafs'd  with 

Ribs,  the  Belly  is  left  free,  that  it  might  give  way 

to  the  motion  of  the  Midriff  in  Refpiration,  and 

to  the  neceffary  Reception  of  Meat  and  Drink, 

I  ^  as 


288     r^^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  II. 

as  alfo  for  the  convenient  bending  of  the  Body ; 
and  in  Females  for  that  extraordinary  Extenfion 
that  is  requifite  in  the  time  of  their  Pregnancy. 

That  the  Lungs  (hould  be  made  up  of  fuch 
innumerable  Air-pipes  and  Veficles,  interwoven 
with  Blood- Veffels,  in  order  to  purify,  ferment, 
or  fupply  the  fanguineous  Mafs  w^ith  Nitro-aerial 
Particles,  which  rufli  in  by  their  elaftick  Power 
upon  the  mufcular  Extenfion  of  the  Thorax,  and 
fo  feed  the  vital  Flame  and  Spirits ;  for  upon  ob- 
flru6ling  this  Communication  all  is  prefently  ex- 
tind,  no  Circulation,  no  Motion,  no  Heat,  nor 
any  Sign  of  Life  remains. 

That  the  Stomach  fhould  be  membranous,  and 
capable  of  Dilatation  and  Contraction,  according 
to  the  Quantity  of  Meat  contained  in  it ;  that  it 
fhould  be  fituate  under  the  Liver,  which  by  its 
Heat  might  cherifli  it,  and  contribute  to  Con- 
cod:ion;  that  it  (hould  be  endu'd  with  an  acid 
or  glandulous  Ferment,  or  fome  corruptive  Qua- 
lity, for  fo  fpeedy  a  DifTolution  of  the  Meat  and 
Preparation  of  Chyle ;  that  after  Concoilion  it 
fhould  have  an  Ability  of  contradting  itfelf,  and 
turning  out  the  Meat. 

That  the  Guts   fhould    immediately  receive 
it  from  the  PhyloruSy    farther  elaborate,   pre- 
pare 


Part  II.       in  2f>5^  C  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  289 

pare  and  feparate  it,  driving  by  their  periftaltick 
Motion  the  Chyle  into  the  Ladteals,  and  the  ex- 
crementitious  Parts  to  the  Podex,  from  whence 
there  is  no  Regrefs,  unlefs  when  the  Valve  of  the 
.  Colon  is  torn  and  relax'd.  But  for  the  curious 
Strudure  of  thefe  Parts  fee  more  in  Kerkringiusy 
Glijfony  Willis^  and  Preyer, 

^That  the  Bladder  {hould  be  made  of  a  mem- 
branous Subftance,  and  fo  extremely  dilatable, 
for  receiving  and  containing  the  Urine  till  oppor- 
tunity of  emptying  it  j  that  it  fliould  have  Shuts 
for  the  Ends  of  the  Ureters,  fo  artificially  con- 
triv'd  as  to  give  the  Urine  free  entrance,  but  to 
flop  all  Paffage  backward,  fo  that  they  will  not 
tranfmit  the  Wind,  tho'  it  be  ftrongly  blown  and 
forc'd  in. 

That  the  Liver  fliould  continually  feparate 
the  Choler  from  the  Blood,  and  empty  it  into  the 
Inteftines,  where  there  is  good  Ufe  for  it,  not 
only  to  provoke  Dejedion,  but  alfo  to  attenuate 
the  Chyle,  and  render  it  fo  fubtile  and  fluid  as  to 
enter  in  at  the  Orifices  of  the  ladeous  Veins. 

That  in  the  Kidneys  there  fliould  be  fuch  innu- 
merable little  Siphons  or  Tubes,  conveying  the 
urinous  Particles  to  the  Pelves  and  Ureters,  firft 
difcover'd  by  Belli??!,  and  illuftrated  by  Malpighi-, 
that  indeed  all  the  Glands  of  the  Body  fliould  be 
Congeries  of  various  Sorts  of  Veflels  cur'd,  cir- 
cumgyrated  and  complicated  together,  whereby 
they. give  the  Blood  time  to  flop  and  feparate 

U  .  thro', 


290     77je  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  11. 

thro*  the  Pores  of  the  capillary  Veffels  into  the 
fecretory  ones,  which  afterwards  all  exonerate 
themfelves  into  one  common  DuBus ;  as  may  be 
feen  in  the  Works  of  Dr.  Whaf^touy  Graaf^  Bar- 
tholiney  Rudback^  Bilfius^  Malpighi^  Nuck^  and 
others.  That  the  Glands  fhoiild  feparate  fuch 
Variety  of  Humours,  all  different  in  Colour, 
Tafte,  Smell,  and  other  Qualities. 

Finally,  That  all  the  Bones,  and  all  the  Muf- 
cles,  and  all  the  Veffels  of  the  Body,  {hould  be  fo 
admirably  contrived,  and  adapted,  and  compact- 
ed together  for  their  feveral  Motions  and  Ufes, 
and- that  moft  geometrically^  according  to  the 
ftrifteft  Rules  of  Mecba?2icks  -,  that  if  in  the  whole 
Body  you  change  the  Figure,  Situation  and  Con- 
junftion  but  of  one  Part,  if  you  diminifh  or  in- 
creafe  the  Bulk  and  Magnitude ;  in  fine,  if  you 
endeavour  any  Innovation  or  Alteration,  you  marr 
and  fpoil  inftead  of  mending ;  how  can  all  thefe 
things  put  together  but  beget  Wonder  and  Afto- 
nifhment  ? 

In  the  Mufcles  alone  there  feems  to  be  more 
Geometry  than  in  all  the  artificial  Engines  in  the 
World  J  and  therefore  the  different  Motions  of 
Animals  are  a  Subjed  fit  only  for  the  great  Ma- 
thematicians to  handle,  amongft  whom  Sleno, 
Dr.  Croo?2,  and  above  all,  Alphofifo  Borelli,  have 
made  their  Effays  towards  it. 

That  under  one  Skin  there  fhould  be  fuch  in- 
finite Variety  of  Parts,  varioufly  mingled,  hard 
with  foft,  fluid  with  fix'd,  folid  with  hollow, 
thofe  in  Reft  with  thofe  with  Motion  ;    fome 

I  with 


Part  II.       in  the  Creation,  29I 

with  Cavities,  as  Morteffes  to  receive,  others  w^ith 
Tenons  to  fit  thofe  Cavities,  all  thefe  fo  packed 
and  thruft  fo  clofe  together,  that  there  is  no  un- 
ncceflary  Vacuity  in  the  whole  Body,  and  yet  fo 
far  from  clafliing  or  interfering  one  with  another, 
or  hindring  each  others  Motions,  that  they  do  all 
friendly  confpire,  all  help  and  aflift  mutually  one 
the  other,  all  concur  in  one  general  End  and  De- 
lign,  the  Good  and  Prefervation  of  the  whole,  are 
certainly  Arguments  and  Effefts  of  infinite  Wif- 
dom  and  Council ;  fo  that  he  muft  need^  be  worfe 
than  mad  that  can  find  in  his  Heart  to  imagine 
all  thefe  to  be  cafual  and  fortuitous,  or  not  pro- 
vided and  defign'd  by  a  moft  wife  and  intelligent 
Caufe. 

Every  Part  is  cloath*d,  join'd  together  and  cor- 
roborated by  Membranes,  which  upon  feveral 
Occafions  (as  Extravafations  of  Humours,  Com- 
preflions  or  Obftrudions  of  Veffels)  are  capable 
of  a  prodigious  Extenfion,  as  we  fee  in  the  Hy- 
datides  of  the  Female  Tefticles  or  Ovaries,  in  hy- 
dropical  Tumors  of  the  LyrnphceduEis^  of  the  Scro^ 
turn  -or  Peritonceum^  out  of  the  laft  of  which  a- 
lone  twenty,  and  even  forty  Gallons  of  Water 
have  been  drawn  by  a  Pm-acentefis,  or  Tapping ; 
for  which  we  have  the  undoubted  Authority  of 
^idpiiis^  Meekren^  Pechlin^  Blaftus  ^  and  other 
medical  Writers.  What  vaft  Sacks  and  Bags  are 
necefl^ary  to  contain  fuch  a  CoUedion  of  Water, 
which  feems  to  ifTue  from  i\\cLy77tph^duffs^  either 
delacerated  or  obftrudled,  and  exonerating  them- 
felves  into  the  Foldings,  or  between  the  Dupli- 
catures  of  the  Membranes  ? 

U  2  ^  Thofe 


292       T^he  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  IL 

Thofe  Parts  which  one  would  think  were  of 
little  Ufe  in  the  Body,  ferving  chiefly  to  fill  up 
empty  Spaces,  as  the  Fat^  if  examined  ftridly, 
will  be  found  very  beneficial  and  ferviceable  to  it. 
I.  To  cherifh  and  keep  it  warm,  by  hindring  the 
Evaporation  of  the  hot  Steams  of  Blood;  as 
Cloaths  keep  us  warm  in  Winter,  by  refleding 
and  doubling  the  Heat.  2.  To  nourifli  and  main- 
tain the  Body  for  fome  time  when  Food  is  want- 
ing, ferving  as  Fuel  to  preferve  and  continue  the 
natural  Heat  of  Blood,  which  requires  an  oily  or 
iulphurous  Pabulum  as  well  as  Fire.  Hence  upon 
long  Abftinence  and  fafting  the  Body  grows  lean. 
Hence  alfo  fome  Beafts,  as  the  Marmotto^  or  Mus 
AlpinuSy  a  Creature  as  big  or  bigger  than  a  Rabbet y 
which  abfconds  all  Winter,  doth  (as  Hildanus  tells 
us)  live  upon  its  own  Fat  -,  for  in  the  Autumn^ 
when  it  fhuts  itfelf  up  in  its  Hole  (which  it  digs 
with  its  Feet  like  a  Rabbet,  making  a  Neft  with 
Hay  or  Straw  to  lodge  itfelf  warm)  it  is  very  fat; 
[Hildanus  took  out  above  a  Pound  and  a  half  of 
Fat  between  the  Skin  and  Mufcles,  and  a  Pound 
out  of  the  Abdome}i\  but  on  the  contrary,  in  the 
Spring-time,  when  it  comes  forth  again,  very  lean, 
as  the  Hunters  experience  in  thofe  they  then  take. 
3.  The  internal  Fat  ferves  for  the  Defence  and 
Security  of  the  Veffels,  that  they  might  lie  foft, 
and  be  fafely  convey'd  in  their  Paffage,  wherefore 
it  is  efpecially  gathered  about  them. 

By  what  Pores,  or  Pafiages,  or  Veffels,  the  Fat 

is  feparated  from  the  Blood  when  it  is  redundant, 

I  and 


Part  11.       in  t&e  Cre AT loi^.  293 

and  again  abforb'd  into  it  when  it  is  deficient,  ia 
a  Matter  of  curious  Enquiry,  and  worthy  to  be 
induftrioufly  fought  out  by  the  moft  fagacious 
and  dextrous  Anatomifts.  The  Veffels  whereinto 
it  is  received,  and  wherein  contain'd,  are  by  the 
Microfcope  detedted  to  be  Bladders,  and  thofe 
doubtlefs  perforated  and  pervious  one  into  ano- 
ther;  and  tho'  for  their  exceffive  Subtilty  and 
TJiinnefs  they  appear  not  in  a  lean  Body,  yet 
feerji  to  have  been  primitively  formed  and  provi- 
ded by  Nature  to  receive  the  Fat  upon  occalion. 
Why  the  Fat  is  collecfled  chiefly  about  fome  par- 
ticular Parts  and  Veifels,  and  not  others;  as  for 
Example,  the  Reins  and  the  Caul,  I  ealily  con- 
fent  with  Galen  and  others  the  Reafon  to  be,  the 
cherifhing  and  keeping  warm  of  thofe  Parts  upon 
which  fuch  Veffels  are  fpread  -,  fo  the  Caul  ferves 
for  the  warming  the  lower  Belly,  like  an  Apron 
or  piece  of  woollen  Cloth.  Hence  a  certain  Gla- 
diator, whofe  Caul  Galen  cut  out,  was  fo  liable 
to  fuffer  from  the  Cold,  that  he  was  conftrain'd 
to  keep  his  Belly  conftantly  cover'd  with  Wool ; 
for  the  Inteftines  containing  a  great  deal  of  Food, 
there  to  undergo  its  laft  Concoftion,  and  no  Vef- 
fels of  Blood  penetrating  it  and  flowing  thro'  it 
to  keep  it  warm,  they  had  need  be  defended  from 
the  Injuries  of  the  external  Air  by  outward  Co- 
verings. Why  there  fhould  be  fuch  copious  Fat 
gathered  about  the  Reins  to  inclofe  them,  i§  not 
fo-eafy  to  difcern,  but  furely  there  is  a  great  and 
conftant  Heat  requir'd  there,  for  the  Separatiori 
pf  the  Urine  from  the  Blood,  the  conftant  Sepa- 

U  3  ration 


294     77)eWisr>ou  of  GOD    Part  IL 

ration  and  Excretion  whereof  is  neceffary  for  the 
Prefervation  of  Life ;  and  we  fee  if  the  Blood  be 
in  any  degree  chill'd,  the  Secretion  of  Urine  is  in 
a  great  meafure  ftopt,  and  the  Serum  caft  upon 
the  Glandules  of  the  Mouth  and  Throat;  and  if 
the  Blood  be  extraordinarily  heated  by  Exercife, 
or  otherwife,  it  calls  off  its  Serum  plentifully  by 
Sweat,  which  may  be  effefted  by  the  fwift  mo- 
tion of  the  Blood  thro'  the  Glandules  of  the  Skin, 
where  its  plentiful  Streams  being  ftrengthen'd 
and  conftipated  into  a  Liquor,  force  their  way 
thro'  thofe  Emundtories,  which  at  other  times 
tranfmit  only  infenfible  Vapours.  Some  fuch 
Effeds  may  be  wrought  upon  the  Blood  by  the 
Heat  of  the  Kidneys.  Certain  it  is  that  the  Hu- 
mours excern'd  by  Sweat  and  Urine  are  near 
a-kin,  if  not  the  fame  5  and  therefore  it  is  wonthy 
the  Confideration,  whether  there  might  not  be 
fome  Ufe  made  of  fweating  in  a  Suppreffion  of 
Urine.     But  I  digrefs  too  far. 

I  {hall  only  add  to  this  Particular,  that  becaufe 
the  Defign  of  Nature  in  coUedting  Fat  in  th^fe 
places  is  for  the  fore-mention  d  Ufe,  it  hath  lor 
the  effeding  thereof  fitted  the  Veffels  there  with 
Pores  or  Paflfages  proper  for  the  Separation  and 
Tranfmiffion  of  it. 

I  (hould  now  proceed  to  treat  of  the  Genera- 
tion and  Formation  of  the  Foetus  in  the  Wpmb> 
but  that  is  a  Subjed  too  difficult  for  me  to  han- 
dle, the  Body  ot  Man  and  other  Animals  being 

formed 


Part  jr.       Z;^  />5^  Creation.  295 

form'd  in  the  dark  Recefles  of  the  Matrix^  or,  as 
the  Ffalmiji  phrafes  it,  PfaL  cxxxix.  14.  made  in 
Jecret^  and  curioujly  wrought  in  the  loivejl  Parts  of 
the  Earth.  This  Work  is  fo  admirable  and  un- 
accountable, that  neither  the  Atheifts  nor  me- 
chanical Philofopher.s  have  attempted  to  declare 
the  Manner  and  Procefs  of  it,  but  have  (as  I  no- 
ted before)  very  cautioufly  and  prudently  broke 
off  their  Syftems  of  natural  Philofophy  here,  and 
left  this  Point  untouch'd  j  and  thofe  Accounts 
which  fome  of  them  have  attempted  to  give  of 
the  Formation  of  a  few  of  the  Parts,  are  fo  ex- 
ceffively  abfurd  and  ridiculous,  that  they  need  no 
other  Confutation  than  ha^  ha^  he.  And  I  have 
already  farther  (hewn,  that  to  me  it  feems  im- 
poffible  that  Matter  divided  into  as  minute  and 
fubtle  Parts  as  you  will  or  can  imagine,  and  thofe 
mov'd  according  to  what  Catholick  Laws  foever 
can  be  devis'd,  fhould  without  the  Prelidency  and 
Diredion  of  fome  intelligent  Agent,  by  the  mere 
Agitation  of  a  gentle  Heat,  run  itfelf  into  fuch  a 
curious  Machine  as  the  Body  of  Man  is. 

Yet  muft  it  be  confefs'd  that  the  Seed  of  Ani- 
mals is  admirably  qualify'd  to  be  failiion'd  and 
form'd  by  the  Plajiick  Nature  into  an  organical 
Body,  containing  the  Principles  or  component 
Particles  of  all  the  leveral  homogeneous  Parts 
thereof;  for  indeed  every  Part  of  the  Body  feems 
ta  club  and  contribute  to  the  Seed,  elfe  why 
{hould  Parents  that  are  born  blind  or  deaf,  or  that 
want  a  Finger  or  any  other  Part,  or  have  one  fu- 
ll 4  periiuous. 


296     "The  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  11. 

perfluous,  fometimes  generate  Children  that  have 
the  fame  Defers  or  Imperfedions  5  and  yet 
(which  is  wonderful)  nothing  of  the  Body  or 
groffer  Matter  of  the  Seed  comes  near  the  firft 
Principle  of  the  Fcetia^  or  in  fome  fo  much  as 
enters  the  Womb,  but  only. fome  contagious  Va- 
pour or  fubtle  RJiuviiims  thereof,  which  feems  to 
animate  the  Gemina  or  Cicatricula  of  the  Egg 
contain  d  in  the  Female  Ovary  before  it  paffes 
thro'  the  T^iihe^  or  Cornua  into  the  Uterus.  How 
far  the  Animalcules  obferv'd  in  the  Seed  of  Males 
may  contribute  to  Generation,  I  leave  to  the  more 
fagacious  Philofophers  to  enquire,  and  (hall  here 
content  myfelf  with  referring  the  Reader  to  the 
feveral  Letters  publifli'd  by  Mr.  Lewenhoek, 

But  to  what  (hall  we  attribute  th^Fatus  its 
Likenefs  to  the  Parents,  or  omitting  them,  to 
the  precedent  Progenitors;  as  I  have  obferv'd, 
fome  Parents  that  have  been  both  black  hair'd, 
to  have  generated  moft  red  hair'd  Children ;  be- 
caufe  their  Anceftors  Hair  hath  been  of  that  Co- 
lour ?  Or  why  are  Twins  fo  often  extremely  a- 
iike  ?  Whether  this  is  owing  to  the  Efficient,  or 
to  the  Matter  ? 

Thofe  Effluvia  we  fpake  of  in  the  Male  Seed, 
as  fubtile  as  they  are,  yet  have  they  a  great,  if  not 
the  greateft  Stroke  in  Generation,  as  is  clearly 
demonftrable  in  a  Mule,  which  doth  more  re- 
femble  the  Male  Parent,  that  is,  the  Afs,  than  the 
Fernale,  or  Horfe.  But  now,  why  fuch  diffe- 
rent 


Part  II.         in  the  Cku  AT  ION.  297 

rent  Species  fliould  not  only  mingle  together,  but 
alfo  generate  an  Animal,  and  yet  that  that  hybri- 
dous Produdion  (hould  not  again  generate,  and 
fo  a  new  Race  be  carry 'd  on,  but  Nature  fhouid 
flop  here,  and  proceed  no  farther,  is  to  me  a 
Myftery,  and  unaccountable. 

One  thing  relating  to  Generation  I  cannot 
omjt  j  that  is,  the  Conftrudion  of  a  Sett  of  tem- 
porary Parts  (like  Scaffolds  in  a  Building)  to  ferve 
a  prefent  End,  which  are  afterwards  laid  afide^ 
afford  a  ftrong  Argument  of  Council  and  Defign. 
Now  for  the  Ufe  of  the  Young  during  its  Inclo-r 
fure  in  the  Womb  there  are  feveral  Parts  form'd, 
as  the  Membranes  inveloping  it,  call'd  the  Secun- 
dineSy  the  umbilical  Veffels,  one  Vein,  and  two 
Arteries;   the  Uracbus^  to  convey  the  Urine  out 
of  the  Bladder,  and  the  Placenta  Uterina-,  part 
whereof  fall  away  at  the  Birth,  as  the  Secundines 
and  Placenta  ;  others  degenerate  into  Ligaments, 
as  the  UrachuSy  and  part  of  the  umbilical  Vein ; 
befides  which,  becaufe  the  F^tus  during  its  abode 
in  the 'Womb  hath  no  Ufe  of  Refpiration  by  the 
Lungs,  the  Blood  doth  not  all,  I  may  fay,  not 
the  greateft  part  of  it,  flow  thro'  them,  but  there 
are  two  Paffages  or  Channels  contrived,  one  call'd 
the  Foramen  Ovale^  by  which  part  of  the  Blood 
brought  by  the  Vena  Cava  paffeth  immediately 
into  the  Left  Ventricle  of  the  Heart,   withput 
entrjng  the  Right  at  all;  the  other  is  a  large  ar- 
terial Channel  paffnig  from  the  pulmonary  Arte- 
ry immediately  into  the  Aortay  or  great  Artery, 

which 


298     7^^  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  11. 

which  likewife  derives  part  of  the  Blood  thither, 
without  running  at  all  into  the  Lungs;  thefe 
two  are  clos'd  up  foon  after  the  Child  is  born, 
when  it  breathes  no  more  (as  I  may  fo  fay)  by  the 
Placenta  Vterina,  but  Refpiration  by  the  Lungs 
is  needful  for  it.  It  is  here  to  be  noted,  that  tho* 
the  Lungs  be  form'd  fo  foon  as  the  other  Parts, 
yet  during  the  abode  of  the  F^stus  in  the  Womb 
they  lie  by  as  ufelefs.  In  like  manner  I  have  ob- 
ferv'd,  that  in  ruminating  Creatures  the  three 
foremoft  Stomachs,  not  only  during  the  conti- 
nuance of  the  Young  in  the  Womb,  but  fo  long 
as  it  is  fed  with  Milk,  are  unemployed  and  ufelefs, 
the  Milk  pafling  immediately  into  the  fourth. 

Another  Obfervation  I  ftiali  add  concerning 
Generation,  which  is  of  fome  moment,  becaufe 
it  takes  away  fome  Conceffions  of  Naturalifts  that 
give  countenance  to  the  Atheifts  fiditious  and  ri- 
diculous Account  of  the  firft  Produftion  of  Man- 
kind and  other  Animals,  viz.  That  all  Sorts  of 
Infeds,  yea,  and  fome  Quadrupeds  too,  as  Frogs 
and  Mice,  are  produc'd  fpontaneoufly.  My  Ob- 
fervation and  Affirmation  is,  that  there  is  no  fuch 
thing  in  nature  as  aequivocal  or  fpontaneous  Ge- 
neration, but  that  all  Animals,  as  well  fmall  as 
great,  not  excluding  the  vileft  and  moid  contemp- 
tible Infed:,  are  generated  by  animal  Parents  of 
the  fame  Species  with  themfelves;  that  noble 
Italian  Virtuofo  Francijco  Redi  haying  experi- 
mented, that  no  putrify'd  Fleih  (which  one 
would  think  were  the  moil  likely  of  any  thing) 

will 


Part  11.       in  /^^^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  299 

will  of  itfelf,  if  all  Infeds  be  carefully  kept  from 
it,  produce  any.  The  fame  Experiment  I  remem- 
ber Dr.  WilkinSy  late  Bifhop  of  Chejier,  told  me 
had  been  made  by  fome  of  the  Royal  Society.  No 
Inftance  againft  this  Opinion  doth  fo  much  puz- 
zle me  as  Worms  bred  in  the  Inteftines  of  Man 
and  other  Animals.  But  feeing  the  round  Worms 
do  manifeftly  generate,  and  probably  the  other 
Kin;is  too,  it  is  likely  they  come  originally  from 
Seed,  which,  how  it  was  brought  into  the  Guts, 
may  afterwards  poffibly  be  difcover'd.  Moreover, 
I  am  inclinable  to  believe  that  all  Plants  too, 
that  themfelves  produce  Seed  (which  are  all  but 
fome  very  imperfed:  ones,  which  fcarce  deferve 
the  Name  of  Plants)  come  of  Seed  themfelves. 
For  the  great  Naturalift  Malpighius^  to  make 
Experiment  whether  Earth  would  of  itfelf  put 
forth  Plants,  took  fome  purpofely  digged  out  of 
a  deep  place  and  put  it  into  a  Glafs  Veffel,  the 
top  whereof  he  cover'd  with  Silk  many  times 
doubled,  and  ftrain'd  over  it,  which  would  ad- 
mit the  Water  and  Air  to  pafs  thro',  but  exclude 
the  leaft  Seed  that  might  be  wafted  by  the  Wind ; 
the  Event  was,  that  no  Plant  at  all  fprang  up  in 
it.  Nor  need  we  wonder  how  in  a  Ditch,  Bank 
or  Grafs-plat  newly  digged,  or  in  the  Fen-Banksv 
in  the  IJle  of  Ely,  Muftard  fhould  abundantly 
fpring  up^  where  in  the  Memory  of  Man  none 
hath  been  known  to  grow,  for  it  might  come  of 
Seed,  which  had  lain  there  more  than  a  Man's 
•^Age,  fome  of  the  Antients  mentioning  fome  Seeds 
that  retain  their  Fecundity  forty  Years ;  and  I 

have 


3©o     77>e  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  If. 

have  found  in  a  Paper  received  from  a  Friend,  but 
whom  I  have  forgotten,  that  Melon-Seeds  after 
thirty  Years  are  beft  for  raifing  of  Melons.  As  for 
the  Muftard  that  fprung  up  in  the  IJJe  of  Ely^  tho' 
there  had  never  been  any  in  that  Country,  yet 
might  it  have  been  brought  down  in  the  Channels 
by  the  Floods,  and  fo  being  thrown  up  the  Banks 
together  with  the  Earth,  might  germinate  and 
grow  there. 

And  indeed  a  fpontaneous  Generation  of  Ani- 
mals and  Plants,  upon  due  Examination,  will  be 
found  to  be  nothing  lefs  than  a  Creation  of  them; 
for  after  the  Matter  was  made,  and  the  Sea  and 
dry  Land  feparated,  how  is  the  Creation  of  Plants 
and  Animals  defcrib'd,  but  by  a  commanding, 
that  is,  effeftually  caufing  the  Waters  and  Earth 
to  produce  their  feveral  Kinds  without  any  Seed  ? 
Now  Creation  being  the  Work  of  Omnipotency, 
and  incommunicable  to  any  Creature,  it  muft  be 
beyond  the  Power  of  Nature  or  natural  Agents 
to  produce  Things  after  that  manner.  And  as  for 
God  Almighty,  he  is  faid  to  have  refted  from  his 
Work  of  Creation  after  the  feventh  Day.  But  if 
there  be  any  fpontaneous  Generation,  there  was 
nothing  done  at  the  Creation  but  what  is  daily 
done  y  for  the  Earth  and  Water  produced  Animals 
then  without  Seed,  and  fo  they  do  ftilL  • 

Becaufe  fome,  I  underftand,  have  been  offend- 
ed at  my  confident  Denial  of  all  fpontaneous  Ge* 
neration,  accounting  it  too  bold  and  groundlefs, 

Ifhall 


Part  II.      //^  />5^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  301 

I  fliall  a  little  enlarge  upon  it,  and  give  my  Rea- 
fons,  in  order  to  their  Satisfadlion. 

Firjl^  Then,  I  fay,  fuch  a  fpontaneous  Gene- 
ration feems  to  me  to  be  nothing  lefs  than  a  Crea- 
tion 5  for  Creation  being  not  only  a  Produdion 
of  a  thing  out  of  nothing,  but  alfo  out  of  indif- 
pos'd  Matter,  as  may  be  clearly  inferr'd  from  the 
Scripture,  and  is  agreed  by  all  Divines,  this  fpon- 
taneous Generation  being  fuch  a  Produdion, 
wherein  doth  it  differ  from  Creation  ?  Or  v^hat 
did  God  Almighty  do  at  the  firft  Creation  of  Ani- 
mals and  Plants  more  than  what  (if  this  be  true) 
we  fee  every  Day  done  ?  To  me,  I  muft  confefs, 
it  feems  almoft  demonftrable,that  whatever  Agent 
can  introduce  a  Form  into  indifpos'd  Matter,  or 
difpofe  the  Matter  in  an  Inftant,  muft  be  fuperior 
to  any  natural  one,  not  to  fay  omnipotent. 

Secondly,  Thofe  who  have  with  the  greateft 
Diligence  and  Application  confider'd  and  fearch'd 
into  this  Matter,  as  thofe  eminent  Virtuofi,  Mar-- 
cellus  Malpighius,  Fr  and  feus  Redi ,  John  Swam- 
merdam,  Lewenhoek,  and  many  others,  are  una- 
nimoufly  of  this  Opinion,  fave  that  Francifcus 
Redi  would  except  fuch  Infeds  as  are  bred  in 
Galls,  and  fome  other  Excrefcencies  of  Plants. 
Now  their  Authority  weighs  more  with  me  than 
the  general  Vogue,  or  the  concurrent  Suffrages 
of  a_  thoufand  others,  who  never  examin'd  the 
^thing  fo  carefully  and  circumfpedly  as  they  have 

done. 


302     T/)eWisDou  of  GOD    Part  11. 
done,  but  run  away  with  the  Cry  of  the  com- 


mon  Herd  of  Philofophers 


Firft  of  all,  Dr.  Swammerdam^  who  hath  been, 
to  the  beft  Purpofe  of  any  Man  I  know  of,  bu- 
fy'd  in  fearching  out  and  obferving  the  Nature  of 
all  Infecfts  in  general ;  all  in  general  I  fay,  for  as 
to  one  particular  Infedt,  to  wit,  the  Silk-Worm, 
I  muft  except  Signior  Malpighi -y  and  to  one 
Genus  of  them,  to  wit.  Spiders,  Dr.  Lifter,  in 
his  general  Hiftory  of  Infefts,  written  in  Low 
Dutch,  and  tranflated  into  Frejich,  p.  47.  hath 
thefe  Words,  Nous  difons  quit nej$fait  dam  toute 
la  nature  aucune  generation  par  accident,  &c.  JVe 
affirm  that  there  is  not  in  all  Nature  any  accidental 
\orJpontaneous\  Generation,  but  all  come  by  Propa^ 
gation ;  wherein  Chance  hath  not  the  leajt  Fart  or 
Inter  eft.  And  in  p,  159.  fpeaking  of  the  Gene- 
ration of  Infefts  out  of  Plants,  in  Contradiction 
I  fuppofe  to  Signior  Redi,  he  faith.  Nous  croyons 
abjolument^  &c.  We  do  abfolutely  believe  that  it  is 
not  pojjible  to  prove  by  Experience  that  any  Infedis 
are  engendered  out  of  Plants-,  but  on  the  contrary, 
we  are  very  well  informed  and  ajfur'd,  that  thefe 
little  Animals  are  not  fjut  up  in  or  inclosd  there 
for  any  other  reafon  tha?i  to  draw  thence  their  Nou- 
rifloment.  It  is  true  indeed,  that  by  a  certain, 
conftant,  and  immutable  Order  of  Nature,  we 
fee  many  Sorts  of  Infedts  affix'd  to  particular 
Species  of  Plants  and  Fruits,  to- which  the  refpe- 
ttive  Kinds  fallen  themfelves  as  \t  were  by  In- 

ftindt ; 


Part  II.       in  the  Cr^  ATioN.  303 

ftincl ;  but  we  are  to  know  that  they  all  come  of 
the  Seed  of  Animalcules  of  their  own  Kind,  that 
were  before  laid  there ;  for  thefe  InfecSs  do  thruft 
their  Seed  or  Eggs  fo  deep  into  the  Plants,  that 
they  come  to  be  afterwards  as  it  were  united 
wich  them,  and  the  Aperture  or  Orifice  by  which 
they  entered  quite  clos'd  up  and  obliterated,  the 
Eggs  being  hatch'd  and  nourifh'd  within.  We 
have  often  found  the  Eggs  of  Infefts  fo  deeply 
funk  into  the  tender  Buds  of  Trees,  that  without 
hurting  of  them  it  was  impoffible  to  draw  them 
out.  Many  Inftances  he  produces  in  feveral  Sorts 
of  Infe(5ts  making  their  way  into  Plants,  which, 
tho'  they  be  well  worth  the  reading,  are  too  long 
to  tranfcribe. 

Secondly,  That  great  and  fagacious  Naturalift, 
and  moft  accurate  Examiner  of  thefe  Things, 
Signior  Malpighi,  in  his  Trcatife  of  Galhy  under 
which  Name  he  comprehends  all  preternatural 
and  morbofe  Tumours  and  Excrefcencies  of 
Plants,  doth  demonftrate  in  particular,  that  all 
fuch  Warts,  Tumours  and  Excrefcencies,  where 
any  Infers  are  found,  are  excited  or  rais'd  up  ei- 
ther by  fome  venenofe  Liquor,  which  together 
with  their  Eggs  fuch  Infeds  fhed  upon  the  Leaves, 
or  Buds,  or  Fruits  of  Plants,  or  boring  with  their 
Terebrcey  inftil  into  the  very  Pulp  of  fuch  Buds  or 
Fruits  y  or  by  the  contagious  Vapour  of  the  very 
Eggs  themfelves,  producing  a  Mortification  or 
Syderation  in  the  Parts  of  Plaurs  on  which  they 

are 


304     7^^  Wis D o M  of  GOD     Part  It 

are  laid;  or  laftly,  by  the  Grubs  or  Maggots 
hatched  of  the  Eggs  laid  there,  making  their  way 
with  their  Teeth  into  the  Buds,  Leaves  or  Fruit/ 
or  even  the  Wood  itfelf  of  fuch  Plants  on  v^hich 
their  Eggs  were  laid.  So  that  at  the  laft  he  con-^ 
eludes :  Erunt  itaque  Gallce  &  reliqui  plant a^ 
rum  tumores  morbofce  excrefcentic^^  vi  depofiti  ovi 
a  turhata  pluiitarum  compage^  &  vitiato  humo^ 
rum  motu  excitatce  ^  quibus  inclufa  ova  &  ani- 
malcula  velut  in  utero  fove7itur  &  augentur^  donee 
manifeftatis  firmatijque  propriis  partibus^  quaji 
exoriantur  nova?n  exoptafitia  auram.  We  con- 
clude therefore  that  Galls^  and  other  Tumors  of 
Plants^  are  nothing  elfe  but  morbofe  Excrefcencies^ 
raisd  up  by  the  Force  of  the  Eggs  there  laid,  di- 
flurbing  the  Vegetation  and  Temper  of  the  Plants^ 
and  perverting  the  Motion  of  their  Humours  and 
Juices-,  wherein  the  inclosed  Eggs  and  Animal- 
cules are  cherijh'd,  nourifh'd,  and  augmented,  till 
their  proper  Parts  being  manifefied,  explicated^ 
and  harden  d,  or  firengthend,  they  are  as  it  were 
new  born,  affeBing  to  come  forth  into  the  open 
Air.  In  the  fame  Treatife  he  defcribes  the  hol- 
low Inftrument  (Terebra  he  calls  it,  and  we 
may  Englijh  it  Piercer)  wherewith  many  Flies 
are  provided,  proceeding  from  the  Womb, 
with  which  they  perforate  the  Teguments  of 
Leaves,  Fruits,  or  Buds,  and  through  the  Hol- 
low of  it  injed  their  Eggs  into  the  Holes,  or 
Wounds  which  they  have  made,  where  in  pro- 
cefs  of  Time  they  are  hatch'd  and  nourifh'd. 

This 


Part  II.       in  the  CK^ATion.  305 

This  he  beheld  one  of  thefe  Infeds  doing  with 
his  own  Eyes  in  the  Bud  of  an  Oak ;  the  man- 
ner whereof  he  defcribes,  p.  47.  which  I  {hall  not 
tranfcribe,  only  take  notice,  that  when  he  had 
taken  off  the  Infedt  he  found  in  the  Leaf  very  lit- 
tle and  diaphanous  Eggs,  exadly  like  to  thofe 
which  yet. remained  in  the  Tubes  of  the  Fly's 
Womb.  He  adds  farther,  that  it  is  probable  that 
there  may  be  Eggs  hidden  in  divers  Parts  of 
Plants,  whereof  no  Footftep  doth  outwardly  ap- 
pear, but  the  Plant  remains  as  entire  and  thrives 
as  well  as  if  there  were  no  Infed:  there ;  nay,  that 
fome  may  be  hidden  and  cherifti'd  in  dry  Places 
(not  wanting  any  Humour  to  feed  them)  as  in 
Sear- Wood,  yea,  in  Earthen  Veflels,  and  Marbles 
themfelves. 

Indeed  to  me  it  feems  unreafonable  that  Plants, 
being  of  a  lower  Form  or  Order  of  Being,  fhould 
produce  Animals ;  for  either  they  muft  do  it  out 
of  indifpos'd  Matter,  and  then  fuch  Producftion 
would  amount  to  a  Creation,  or  elfe  they  mufl 
prepare  a  fit  Matter,  which  is  to  adl  beyond  their 
Strength,  there  being  requir'd  to  the  Preparation 
of  the  Sperm  of  Animals  a  great  Apparatus  of 
Veffels,  and  many  Secretions,  Concodions,  Re- 
fledlions,  Digeftions  and  Circulations  of  the  Mat- 
ter, before  it  can  be  redify'd  and  exalted  into  fo 
noble  a  Liquor;  and  befides,  there  muft  be  an 
Egg  too ;  for  we  know  ex  ovo  omnia ;.  to  the  Per- 
fedlion  whereof  there  are  as  many  Veflels  and  as 
long  a  Procefs  requir'd.    Now  in  Plants  there  are 

X  no 


3o6     T'^^  Wisdom  of  GOD     PartlL 

no  fuch  Veflels,  and  confequently  no  fuch  Pre- 
paration of  Eggs  or  Sperm,  which  are  the  necef- 
fary  Principles  of  Animals. 

Thirdly,    That  worthy  Author  of  our  own 
Country,  I  mean  Dr.  Ltjler^  in  his  Notes  upon 
Geodartius  hifeB,  Numb,  i6.  p,  47.  hath  thefe 
Words :  Non  e7iim  indiicor  tit  credanty  hoc,  vel  alt- 
tid  quodvis  Animal,  modo  quodamfpontaneo  e  Plant  a 
froduci,  &  alii  caufa  cuicunque  originem  fuam  de^ 
here  quam  Farmti  Animali  \  i.  e.  /  cannot  be  fer^ 
fiiaded  or  induced  to  believe,  that  this,  or  any  other 
Animal,  is  for  can  be)  prodiicd  out  of  a  Plant  in  a 
fpontaneous  manner,  or  doth  owe  its  Original  to  any 
other  Caiife  ^whatever,  than  an  Animal  Parent  of  its 
own  Kind.     And  in  his  third  Note  upon  InfeB, 
Numb,  49.  thefe:  .^load  fpontaneam  Ei^ucce  hujus 
aliorumque  Inferior  urn  generatiojiem,  pro  parte  ne- 
gativa  jam fententiam  fneam  tradidi,&cc.  As  to  the 
Jpontaneous  Generation  of  this  Eruca,  and  other  In- 
feBs,  1  have  already  delivered  my  Opinion  for  'the 
Negative,    T'his  is  mof  certain,  that  thefe  Coffi  are 
produced  of  Eggs  laid  by  Animal  Pare?2ts :  It  is  aU 
Jh  alike  clear,  that  thefe  diminutive  Caterpillars  are 
able  by  degrees  to  pierce  or  bore  their  way  into  a 
Tree ,  which  very  [mail  Holes,  after  they  are  fully 
enter  d,  do  perchance  grow  together,  and  quite  dif- 
appear,  at  leaft  become  fofmally  that  they  are  not  to 
be  difcern'd,  unlefs  by  Lynceus'^  Eyes,  Add  more- 
over^ that  phchance  they  imdergo  no  Transfoj'wa- 
iion,  but  continue  under  the  Vizard  of  [Erucae] 
Caterpillars  for  many  Tear s^  which  doth  very  well 

accord 


Part  II.       in  the  Creation.  307 

accord  with  my  Obfervations.  Moreover^  that  this 
Caterpillar  [Eruca]  is  propagated  by  Animal  Pa- 
rentSy  to  wit,  Butterfies^  after  the  common  Origi- 
nation of  all  Caterpillars,  In  all  this  I  fully  con^ 
fent  with  the  Dodtor,  only  crave  Leave  to  differ 
in  his  attributing  to  them  the  Name  of  Cajji 
which  were  accounted  by  the  Antients  a  deli- 
cate Morfel,  and  fed  for  the  Table;  fori  take 
thpfe  to  have  been  the  Hexapods,  from  which 
the  greater  Sort  of  Beetles  come  -,  for  that  that 
Sort  of  Hexapods  are  at  this  Day  eaten  in  our 
American  Plantations,  as  I  am  informed  by  my 
good  Friend  Dr.  Hans  Sloane^  who  alfo  prefented 
me  with  a  Glafs  of  them  preferv'd  in  Spirit  of 
Wine. 

Having  lately  had  an  Opportunity  more  curi- 
oufly  to  view  and  examine  the  great  Flefh-co- 
lour'd,  thin-hair'd,  Englijld  Caterpillar  (which  is 
fo  like  that  fent  me  by  Dr.  Sloane^  that  it  differs 
little  but  in  Magnitude,  which  may  be  owing  to 
the  Climate)  I  obferv'd  that  it  had  a  Power  of 
drawing  its  eight  hind  Legs  or  Stumps  fo  far  up 
in  its-  Body  that  they  did  altogether  difappear,  fo 
that  the  Creature  feem'd  to  want  them,  and  of 
thrufting  them  out  again  at  pleafure ;  whereupon 
I  conjectured,  that  that  Infed:  oi  Jamaica  fenc 
me  by  the  Dodor  (which  I  took  to  be  the  Cojfus 
or  Hexapods  previous  to  fome  large  Beetle)  had 
likewife  the  fame  Power  of  drawing  up  its  hind 
Legs,  fo  that  tho*  to  appearance  it  wanted  them, 
yet  really  it  did  not  fo,  but  had  only  drawn  thenpi 
up  and  hid  them  in  its  Body  when  ic  was  ini«- 

X  2  mcrs'd 


3c8       neWisDouofGOD   FartIL 

mers'd  in  the  Spirit  of  Wine,  and  confequently 
was  not  the  Hexapod  of  a  Beetle,  but  an  Eruca^ 
like  to,  or  indeed  fpecifically  the  fame  with  that 
of  our  own  Country  by  me  obferv*d ;  and  being 
eaten  at  this  Day  by  the  Inhabitants  of  Jamaica^ 
is  in  all  likelihood  the  fame  with  the  Cojjus  of  the 
^ntient  Romans^  which  was  fed  for  the  Table,  as 
Fliny  affures  us ;  efpecialJy  if  we  confider,  that 
Dr.  Lijler  found  this  Eruca  in  the  Body  of  an 
Oak  newly  cut  down  and  faw'd  in  pieces  j  on 
which  Tree  Pliny  faith  they  feed.  Thus  much 
I  thought  fit  to  add .  to  Dr.  Lijier^  and  do  the 
Truth  right,  by  retracing  my  former  Conjedure 
concerning  the  CoJJu 

3.  My  third  Argument  againft  fpontaneous 
Generation  is,  becaufe  there  are  no  Arguments  or 
Experiments  which  the  Patrons  of  it  do  or  can 
produce  which  do  clearly  evince  it.  For  the  ge- 
neral and  vulgar  Opinion,  that  the  Heads  of  Chil- 
dren, or  the  Bodies  of  thofe  that  do  not  change 
their  Linnen,  but  wear  that  which  is  fweaty  and 
fordid,  breeds  Lice  5  or  that  Cheefe  of  itfelf  breeds 
Mites  or  Maggots ;  I  deny,  and  look  upon  it  as  a 
great  Error  and  Miftakej  and  do  affirm,  that  all 
fuch  Creatures  are  bred  of  Eggs  laid  in  fuch  for- 
did Places  by  fome  wandring  Loufe,  or  Mite,  or 
Maggot ;  for  fuch  Places  being  moft  proper  for 
the  hatching  and  exclufion  of  their  Eggs,  and 
for  the  Maintenance  of  their  Young,  Nature  hath 
endued  them  with  a  wonderful  Acutenefs  of 
Scent  and  Sagacity,  whereby  they  can,  tho'  far 
2  diftant^ 


Part  II.      i;^  */^^  Creation.  309 

diftant,  find  out  and  make  towards  them^  and 
even  Lice  and  Mites  themfelves,  as  flow  as  they 
feem  to  be,  can,  to  my  Knowledge,  in  no  long 
time  march  a  confiderable  way  to  find  out  a  con- 
venient Harbour  for  themfelves. 

Here,  by  the  by,  I  cannot  but  look  upon  the 
ftrange  Inftindl  of  this  noifome  and  troublefome 
Cr&aturc  a  Loufe,  of  fearching  out  foul  and  nafty 
Clothes  to  harbour  and  breed  in,  as  an  Eflfed:  of 
divine  Providence,  defign'd  to  deter  Men  and 
Women  from  Sluttiihnefs  and  Sordidnefs,  and  to 
provoke  them  to  Cleanlinefs  and  Neatnefs.  God 
himfelf  hateth  Uncleanlinefs ,  and  turns  away 
from  it,  as  appears  by  Dtv//.  xxiii.  12,  13,  14. 
But  if  God  requires  and  is  pleas'd  with  bodily 
Cleanlinefs,  much  more  is  he  fo  with  the  Pure- 
nefs  of  the  Mind.  Bkjfed  are  the  pure  in  Hearty 
for  they  pall Jie  God^  Matth.  v.  10. 

As  for  the  Generation  of  Infedts  out  of  putrid 
Matter,  the  Experiments  of  Francifcus  Redi,  and 
fome  of  our  own  Vtrtuoji^  give  me  fuflicient  rea- 
fon  to  rejed:  it.  I  did  but  juft  now  mention  the 
quick  Scent  that  Infefts  have,  and  the  great  Sa- 
gacity in  finding  out  a  proper  and  convenient 
Harbour  or  Matrix  to  cherifh  and  hatch  their 
Eggs  and  feed  their  Young ;  they  are  fo  adted  and 
directed  by  Nature,  as  to  caft  their  Eggs  in  fuch 
Places  as  are  moft  accommodated  for  the  Exclu- 
fion  of  their  Young,  and  where  there  is  Food 
ready  for  them  as  foon  as  they  be  harch'd ;  nay, 
it  is  a  very  hard  matter  to  keep  off  fuch  Infedts 

X  -;  ^         from 


3IO      rhe  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  IL 

from  {bedding  their  Seed  in  fuch  proper  Places. 
Indeed  if  an  InjeB  ?nay  be  thus  equivocally  genera-- 
ted^  v)hy  not  fometimes  a  Bird^  a  ^adruped,  a  Man, 
or  even  an  Univerfe  ?  Or^  why  no  new  Species  of 
Animals  now  and  then  ?  As  my  learned  Friend 
Dr,  Tancred  Robinfon  very  well  argues  in  his 
Letters ;  for  there  is  as  much  Art  fhewn  in  the  For- 
mation of  thofe  as  of  thefe. 

A  fourtb  and  mod  efFedual  Argument  againft 
fpontaneous  Generation  is,  that  there  are  no  new 
Species  produced,  which  would  certainly  now 
and  then,  nay,  very  often  happen  were  there  any 
fuch  thing ;  for  in  fuch  pretended  Generations, 
the  generant  or  a6live  Principle  is  fuppos'd  to  be 
the  Sun,  which  being  an  inanimate  Body,  cannot 
aft  otherwife  than  by  his  Heat,  which  Heat  can 
only  put  the  Particles  of  the  paffive  Principle  into 
motion;  the  paffive  Principle  is  putrid  Matter, 
the  Particles  whereof  cannot  be  conceived  to  dif- 
fer in  any  thing  but  Figure,  Magnitude  and  Gra- 
vity ;  now  the  Heat  putting  thefe  Particles  in  mo- 
tion, may  indeed  gather  together  thofe  which  are 
homogeneous,  or  of  the  fame  nature,  andfepa- 
rate  thofe  that  are  heterogeneous,  or  of  a  diffe- 
rent, but  that  it  fhould  fo  fituate,  place  and  con- 
ned: them  as  we  fee  in  the  Bodies  of  Animals,  is 
altogether  inconceivable  \  which  if  it  could,  yet 
that  it  fhould  always  run  them  into  fuch  a  Ma- 
chine as  is  already  extant,  and  not  often  into  fome 
new-falhion'd  one,  fuch  as  was  never  feen  before, 
no  Reafon  can  be  affign'd  or  imagined.  This  the 
Epicurean  Poet  Lucretius  was  fo  fenfible  of,  that 

he 


Part  II.       Z;^  />$^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  N.  311 

he  faw  a  neceflity  of  granting  Seeds  or  Principles 
to  determine  the  Species.  For  (faith  he)  if  all 
Sorts  of  Principles  could  be  connected, 

Fulgo  fieri  portent  a  videres^ 


Semiferas  hominum  Jpecies  exifiere^  G?  alto^ 
Inter dum  rainos  egigni  corpore  vivoy 
Multdque  conneBi  terrejlria  membra  marinis ; 
Turn  fiafnmam  retro  fpir antes  ore  chimaras 
Pa/cere  naturam  per  terras  omniparenteis 
^orum  nil  fieri  manifefium  efi^  omnia  quando 
Seminibus  certis^  certa  genetrice^  creata 
Confervare  genus  crefcentia  pojfe  videmus^  &c. 

That  is Thence  would  rife 

Vafi  Monfiers^  Nature  s  great  Ahjurdities ; 
Something  half  Bea/l,  half  Man,  and  fome  would 
Tall  Trees  above,  and  /mimals  below,  (grow 

Some  joi?id  of  Fijh  and  Beafis,  a?id  every  where 
Frightful  Chimaera's  breathing  Flaines  appear. 
But  fince  we  fee  no  fuch,  and  Things  arife 
From  certain  Seeds,  of  certain  Shape  and  Size^ 
And,  keep  their  Ki?id  as  they  increafe  and  grow ^ 
There  s  fome  fix  d  Reajbn  why  it  pould  be  fo. 

The  raining  of  Frogs,  and  their  Generation  in 
the  Clouds,  tho'  it  may  be  attefled  by  many  and 
great  Authors,  I  look  upon  as  utterly  falfe  and 
ridiculous  j  it  feems  to  me  no  more  likely  that 
Frogs  fliould  be  engend&r'd  in  the  Clouds,  than 
S'panifh  Gennets  begotten  by  the  Wind,  for  that 
hath  good  Authors  too  3  and  he  that  can  fwallow 
the  raining  of  Frogs,  hath  made  a  fair  Step  to- 

X  4  wards 


312     7%e  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  II. 

wards  believing  that  it  may  rain  Calves  alfo,  for 
we  read  that  one  fell  out  of  the  Clouds  in  Avicens 
Time ;  nor  do  they  much  help  the  matter,  who 
fay,  that  thofe  Frogs  that  appear  fometimes  in 
great  Multitudes  after  a  Shower,  are  not  indeed 
engendered  in  the  Clouds,  but  coagulated  of  a 
certain  fort  of  Duft  commix'd  and  fermented 
with  Rain- Water  -,  to  which  Hypothefis  Fromon- 
dus  adheres. 

But  let  us  a  little  confider  the  Generation  of 
Frogs  in  a  natural  way.  i.  There  are  two  diffe- 
rent Sexes,  which  muft  concur  to  their  Genera- 
tion. 2.  There  is  in  both  a  great  Apparatus  of 
fpermatick  VefTels,  wherein  the  nobler  and  more 
fpirituous  Part  of  the  Blood  is  by  many  Dige- 
ilions,  Concoftions,  Refledions  and  Circulations 
exalted  into  that  generous  Liquor  we  call  Sperm ; 
and  likewife  for  the  preparing  of  the  Eggs.  3. 
There  muft  be  a  Copulation  of  the  Sexes,  which 
I  rather  mention  becaufe  it  is  the  moft  remarka- 
ble in  this  that  ever  I  obferv'd  in  any  Animal ;  for 
they  continue  in  complexu  venereo  at  leaft  a  Month 
indefinitely,  the  Male  all  that  while  refling  on 
the  Back  of  the  Female,  clipping  and  embracing 
her  with  his  Legs  about  the  Neck  and  Body,  and 
holding  her  fo  faft,  that  if  you  take  him  out  of 
the  Water  he  will  rather  bear  her  whole  Weight 
than  let  her  go  -,  this  I  obferv'd  in  a  Couple  kept 
on  purpofe  in  a  VeiTel'of  Water  by  riiy  learned 
and  worthy  Friend  Mr.  John  Nid,  Fellow  of 
trinity 'College  J  long  fince  deceas'd  3  after  this  the 
Spawn  muft  be  caft  into  Water,  where  the  Eggs 

lie 


Part  II.         in  the  Cv.n  AT  loi^.  313 

lie  in  the  mldft  of  a  copious  Jelly,  which  ferves 
them  for  their  firft  Nouriihment  for  a  confidera- 
ble  while ;  and  at  laft  the  Refult  of  all  is  not  a 
perfed:  Frog,  but  a  Tadpole,  without  any  Feet, 
and  having  a  long  Tail  to  fwim  withal ;  in  which 
Form  it  continues  a  long  time,  till  the  Limbs  be 
grown  out  and  the  Tail  fallen  away,  before  it 
arrives  at  the  Perfeftion  of  a  Frog. 

Now  if  Frogs  can  be  generated  fpontaneoufly 
in  the  Clouds  out  of  Vapour,  or  upon  the  Earth 
out  of  Duft  and  Rain-Water,  what  needs  all  this 
a-do  ?  To  what  purpofe  is  there  fuch  an  Appara- 
tus of  Veflels  for  the  Elaboration  of  the  Sperm 
and  Eggs  ?  fuch  a  tedious  Procefs  of  Generation 
and  Nutrition?  This  is  but  an  idle  Pomp;  the 
Sun  (for 'he  is  fuppos'd  to  be  the  equivocal  Gene- 
rant  or  Efficient  by  thefe  Philofophers)  could 
have  difpatch'd  the  Bufinefs  in  a  Trice ;  give  him 
but  a  little  Vapour,  or  a  little  dry  Duft  and  Rain- 
Water,  he  will  produce  you  a  quick  Frog,  nay, 
a  whole  Army  of  them,  perfe6lly  form'd,  and  fit 
for  all- the  Fundions  of  Life,  in  three  Minutes, 
nay,  in  the  hundredth  Part  of  one  Minute,  elfe 
muft  fome  of  thofe  Frogs  that  were  generated  in 
the  Clouds  fall  down  half  formed  and  imperfect, 
which  I  never  heard  they  did;  and  the  Procefs  of 
Generation  have  been  obferv'd  in  the  Produdlion 
of  Frogs  out  of  Duft  and  Rain- Water,  which  no 
Man  ever  pretended  to  mark  or  difcern.     But 
that  there  can  be  no  Frogs  generated  in   the 
Clouds,  may  further  be  made  appear,  i.  From 

the 


:j 1 4    "The  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  II. 

the  extreme  Cold  of  the  middle  Region  of  the 
Air,  where  the  Vapours  are  turn'd  into  Clouds, 
which  is  not  at  all  propitious  to  Generation  ;  for 
did  not  fo  great  Men  as  Arijiofle  and  Erajmus 
report  it,  I  could  hardly  be  induced  to  believe 
that  there  could  be  one  Species  of  Infefts  genera- 
ted in  Snow.     2.  Becaufe  if  there  were  any  Ani- 
mals engendered  in  the  Clouds,  they  muft  needs 
be  maim'd  and  dafh'd  in  pieces  by  the  Fall,  at 
leaft  fuch  as  fell  in  the  High- ways  and  upon  the 
Roofs  of  Houfes ;  whereas  we  read  not  of  any 
fuch  broken  or  imperfect  Frogs  found  any  where. 
This  laft  Argument  wasfufficient  to  drive  off  the. 
learned  Fromondus  from  the  Belief  of  their  Gene- 
ration in  the  Clouds ;  but  the  Matter  of  Fad:  he 
takes  for  granted,  I  mean,  the  fpontaneous  Gene- 
ration of  Frogs  out  of  Duft  and  Rain- Warter,from 
an  Obfervation  or  Experiment  of  his  own  at  the 
Gates  of  Tournay  in  Flanders^    to  the  Sight  of 
wliich  Spedacle  he  call'd  his  Friends  who  were 
there  pLefcnc,  .that  they  might  admire  it  with 
him.     Afudden  Shower  (filth*  hS)faili7ig  upon  the 
'■v.cry  dry  Dujiy  there  fuddenly  appear  d  fuch  an  Ar^ 
my  of  little  FrogSy  leaping  about  every  where  upon 
the  dry  hand^  that  there  was  almojl  nothing  elj'e  to, 
he  feen ;  they  were  alfo  of  one  Magnitude  and  Co- 
lour ;    neither  did  it  appear  out  of  what  lurking 
Places  [Latibula]  fo  many  Myriads  could  creep  out^. 
and  fuddenly  difcover  tbemf elves  upon  the  dry  and. 
dufly  Soil^  which  they  hate.     But  faving  the  Reve- 
rence due  to  fo  great  a  Man,  I  doubt  not  but  they 
did  all  creep  out  of  their  Holes  and  Coverts,  in- 
>  vited 


Patt  II.       in  the  C?.^ AT  10^.  315 

vited  by  the  agreeable  Vapour  of  the  Rain- Water; 
this,  however  unlikely  it  may  feem,  is  a  thoufand 
times  more  probable  than  their  inftantaneous  and 
undifcernible  Generation  out  of  a  little  dry  Dufl 
and  Rain- Water,  which  alfo  cannot  have  any 
time  to  mix  and  ferment  together,  which  is  the 
Hypothe/is  ht  2idhcvcs  to 'y  nay,  I  affirm,  that  it  is 
not  at  all  improbable;  for  he  that  fhall  walk  out 
in  Summer  Nights,  when  it  begins  to  grow  dark, 
may  obferve  fuch  a  Multitude  of  great  Toads  and 
Frogs  crawling  about  in  the  High-ways,  Paths 
and  Avenues  to  Houfes,  Yards,  and  Walks  of 
Gardens  and  Orchards,  that  he  will  wonder 
whence  they  came,  or  where  they  lurk'd  all  the 
Winter  and  all  the  Day-time,  for  that  then  it  is  a 
rare  thing  to  find  one. 

To  which  add,  that  in  fuch  Frogs  as  we  are 
fpeaking  of,  Monfieur  Perault  hath  upon  DifTe- 
ftion  often  found  the  Stomach  full  of  Meat,  and 
the  Inteftines  of  Excrement;  whence  he  juftly 
concludes,  ''  that  they  were  not  then  firft  formed, 
"  but-  only  appear'd  of  a  fudden;  which  is  no 
"  great  Wonder,  fmce  upon  a  Shov^er  after  a 
*'  Drought,  Earth-worms  and  Land-Snails  innu- 
*'  merable  come  out  of  their  lurking  Places  in 
"  like  manner. 

In  Confirmation  of  what  I  have  here  written 
aga.infk  the  fpontaneous  Generation  of  Frogs,  ei- 
ther in  the  Clouds  out  of  Vapour,  or  on  the  Earth 
out  of  Dufl  and  Rain- Water  commix'd,  endea- 
vouring 


3i6     "The  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  If. 

vouring  to  prove  by  Force  of  Argument  that  there 
is  no  fuch  thing,  I  have  lately  received  from  my 
learned  and  ingenious  Friend  Mr.  William  Der- 
ham^  Reftor  of  Upminjler,  near  Rumford  in  EJfex^ 
a  Relation  parallel  to  that  oi  FromonduSy  concern- 
ing the  fudden  Appearance  of  a  vaft  Number  of 
Frogs,  after  a  Shower  or  two  of  Rain,  marching 
crofs  a  fandy  Way,  that  before  the  Rain  was  very 
dufty,  and  giving  an  Account  where,  in  all  like- 
lihood, they  were  generated  by  Animal  Parents 
of  their  own  Kind,  and  whence  they  did  proceed. 
The  whole  Narrative  I  (hall  give  the  Reader  in 
his  own  Words. 

Some  Tears  ago^  as  I  was  riding  forth  one  After- 
noon  in  Berks,  /  happened  upon  a  prodigious  Multi- 
tude creeping  crofs  the  Way ;  //  was  a  fandy  Soil, 
a?2d  the  Way  had  been  full  of  Duji^  by  reafon  of  a 
dry  Seafon  that  then  was ;  but  an  Hour  or  two  be- 
fore a  refrefnng  fragrant  Shower  or  two  of  Rain 
had  laid  the  Dujt ;  whereupon  what  I  had  heard  or 
read  of  the  rainifig  of  Frogs,  immediately  came  to 
my  Thoughts,  as  it  eafily  might  do,  there  being  pro- 
bably as  good  reafon  then  for  me,  as  I  believe  any 
ever  bad  before,  to  conclude  that  thefe  came  from  the 
Clouds,  or  were  iizftantaneoufly  generated  \  but  being 
prepofefsd  with  the  contrary  Opinion,  v\z,  that 
there  was  no  equivocal  Generation,  I  was  very  cu- 
rious in  enquiring  whence  this  vaji  Colony  might  pro- 
bably come ;  and  upon  fe  arching  I  found  two  or  three 
Acres  of  hand  cover  d  with  this  black  Regiment, 
and  that  they  a'l  march' d  the  fame  way  towards 

fome 


Part  11.       in  tieCRnATio"^.  317 

fome  Woods^  Ditches^  and  fuch  like  cool  Places  in 
their  Fronts  and  from  large  Ponds  in  their  Rear; 
I  tracd  them  backwards^  even  to  the  very  fide  of 
c?ie  of  the  Po?ids  \  thefe  Ponds  in  fpawning'time  aU 
ivays  usd  to  abound  much  with  Frogs,  whofe  croak- 
ing I  have  heard  at  a  confderable  dijiancc  y  and  a 
great  deal  of  Spawn  I  have  found  there. 

From  thefe  Circumjlances  I  concluded  that  this 
vaji  Colony  was  bred  in  tbofe  Ponds,  from  whence^ 
ward  they  Jieerd  their  Courfe-,  that  after  their  In- 
cubation (if  I  may  fo  call  it)  or  hatching  by  the  Sun^ 
and  their  having  fafs'd  their  Tadpole  State,  they 
had  livd  (till  that  time  of  their  Migration)  in  the 
Waters,  or  rather  on  the  Shore,  among  the  Flags^ 
Rujhes,  and  long  Grafs  5  but  now  being  i?ivited  out 
by  the  refrejhing  Showers,  then  newly  fallen,  which 
made  the  Earth  cool  and  moifi  for  their  March,  that 
they  left  their  old  Latibula,  where  perhaps  they  had 
devour  d  all  their  proper  Food,  and  were  now  in 
purfuit  of  Food,  or  a  more  convenient  Habitation^ 

This  I  think  not  only  reafonable  to  be  concluded^ 

but  withal  fo  eafy  to  have  been  difcoverd  by  any  in- 

quifitive  Obferver,  who  in  former  Times  met  with 

the  like  Appearance,  that  I  cannot  but  admire  that 

fuch  fagacious  Philofophers  as  Ariftotle,  Pliny,  and 

many  other  fnce,  Jhould  ever  imagine  Frogs  to  fall 

from  the  Clouds,  or  be  any  way  injiantaneoufiy^  or 

fpontaneoufly  generated,   efpecially  confidering  how 

^  openly  they  aH  their  Coition,  produce  Spawn^  this 

Spawn  Tadpoles,  and  Tadpoles  Frogs. 

Neither 


3i8      T/jeWisDOM  of  GOD    Part  IL 

Neither  in  Frogs  only^  but  alfo  in  many  other 
Creatures^  as  Lice,  F/eJJj-FlieSy  Silk-Worms,  and 
€ther  Voi^iYio  s>y  an  uniform  regular  Generation  was 
<Dery  obvious ,  which  is  an  Argument  to  me  of  a 
Jirange  Prepofjefjion  of  Fancy  in  the  Ages  fince  Ari- 
ftotle,  not  to  fay  of  CareleJJhefs  and  Sloth.  So  far 
Mr.  Derham. 

In  like  manner  doubtlefs  Fromondus,  had  he 
made  a  diligent  Search,  might  have  found  out  the 
Place  where  thofe  Myriads  of  Frogs,  obferv'd  by 
him  about  the  Gates  oiTournay,  were  generated^ 
and  whence  they  did  prcX:eed. 

As  for  the  Worms  and  other  Animals  bred  in 
the  Inteftines  of  Man  and  Beaft,  I  have  declar'd 
myfelf  not  to  be  fatisfy'd  of  the  Ways  and  Means 
how  their  Seeds  come  to  be  convey'd  into  thofe 
Places,  but  yet  that  their  Generation  is  analo- 
gous to  that  of  other  Creatures  of  thofe  Kinds, 
I  doubt  not ;  the  Conftancy  to  their  Species,  their 
exadt  Agreement  and  perpetual  Similitude  in  the 
Shape  and  Figure  of  their  Bodies  and  all  the  Parts, 
their  Confidence ,  Temper,  Motion,  and  other 
Accidents,  are  to  me  little  lefs  than  a  Demonftra- 
tion  that  they  are  not  the  Effefts  of  Chance,  but 
the  Products  of  a  fettled  and  fpermatick  Princi- 
ple J  I  am  at  prefent,  till  better  informed,  of  opi- 
nion that  their  Eggs  are  fwallow'd  with  the  Meat 
we  eat ;  and  I  am  the  rather  induced  to  think  fo^ 
bccaufe  Children  in  their  firft  Infancy,  and  as 
^  2  long 


Part  II.       in  the  Cri^  at lo^.  319 

long  as  they  are  conftantly  confin'd  to  a  Milk 
Diet,  are  feldom  troubled  with  them. 

After  this  was  written  I  received  a  Letter  from 
my  often  remembered  ingenious  Friend  Dr.  7^?;z- 
cred  RobinJb?i  referring  to  this  Matter,  part  where- 
of I  fhall  tranfcribe,  as  being  very  pertinent,  in- 
ftrudive,  and  confonant  to  my  oAvn  Thoughts. 
/  think  it  may  be  provd^  that  the  <vajl  Variety  of 
Worms  found  in  almof  all  the  Farts  of  differ e7it 
Animals^  as  well  terreftrial  as  aquatick,  are  taken 
into  their  refpedfinje  Bodies  by  Meats  and  Drinks^ 
and  there  either  lie  jiill  for  fome  time ^  or  elfe  grow 
and  alter  by  change  of  Place  and  Food  [not  Jpecifi^ 
cally^  but  accidentally^  in  Magnitude^  Colour^  Fi^ 
gure  of  fome  Farts ^  or  the  like^  We  know  as  yet 
hut  little  of  the  numerous  Infeds  bred  in  Water ^  or 
indeed  of  thofe  in  Roots^  Leaves^  Buds,  Flowers^ 
Fruits  and  Seeds,  which  we  are  conti?iually  f -wal- 
lowing, and  thefe  too  all  "vary  according  to  Climate 
[that  is,  the  fame  Species  0/  Roots,  Leaves,  &c.  da 
in  differefit  Climates  produce  many  different  Species 
oflnfeBs,  tho  Jome  there  be  common  to  all]  the  long 
fender  Worms,  as  f mall  as  Hairs,  that  breed  be^ 
tween  the  Skin  and  the  Flefi  in  the  IJle  of  Ormuz, 
and  in  India,  which  are  generally  twified  out  upon 
Sticks  or  Fowlers,  and  often  break  in  the  Operation^ 
are  without  doubt  taken  in  by  the  Water  they  drink 
in  thofe  Regions,  as  I  could  prove  by  many  and  good 
Experiments  had  I  'Time,  They  who  have  Letfure 
-may  find  them  in  the  GolleBions  of  Voyages  and 
Travels,  ejpecially  in  Monficur  Thevenot.    By  this 

Explication 


320     7'/>eWisDOM  of  GOD     Partll. 

^Explication  we  may  give  a  better  Account  of  the 
VomitingS'Up  of  Tadpolesy  Snails,  ajid  other  Ani- 
mals,  recorded  ifi  medical  Hijlories,  than  by  any 
Hypothefs  of  equivocal  Generation,  As  to  InfeBs 
found  in  finking  Flejh  or  rotten  Vegetables,  I  could 
never  obferve  or  find  any  of  them  different  from  thoj'e 
Parent-Infecis  which  hover  about  or  feed  upon  fuch 
Bodies. 

If  any  (hall  objed  the  infinite  Multitudes  of 
Animalcules  difcover'd  in  Pepper- Water ,  and 
defire  an  Account  of  their  Generation ;  to  him  I 
fhall  fay,  that  it  is  probable  that  fome  few  of 
thefe  Animals  may  be  floating  in  all  Waters,  and 
that  finding  the  Particles  of  Pepper  fwimming  in 
the  Water,  very  proper  for  the  cheriihing  and  ex- 
cluding of  their  Eggs,  by  reafon  of  their  Heat,  or 
fome  other  unknown  and  fpecifick  Quality,  they 
may  faflen  their  Eggs  to  them,  and  fo  there  may 
be  a  fudden  Breed  of  infinite  Swarms  of  them ; 
but  thefe  being  not  to  be  difcern  d  by  the  moft 
piercing  and  Lyncean  Sight  without  the  Affiftance 
of  a  Microfcope,  I  leave  the  Manner  of  their 
Generation  to  future  Difcovery. 

No  lefs  difficult  is  it  to  give  an  Account  of 
the  Original  of  fuch  Infeds  as  are  found,  and 
feem  to  be  bred  in  the  Bodies  of  others  of 
different  Kinds.  Out  of  the  Sides  and  Back  of 
the  moft  common  Caterpillar,  which  feeds 
upon     Cabbage ,     Cole- wort ,     aind    Turnep- 

Leaves,- 


Part  II.        /;/  />^^  C  R  E  A  T  I  o  N.  321 

Leaves,  which  we  have  defcrib'd  in  the  Catalogue 
oi Cambridge  Plants,  we  have  feen  creep  out  fmall 
Maggots  to  the  Number  fometimes  of  Threefcore 
or  more,  which  fo  foon  as  ever  they  came  forth 
began  to  weave  themfelves  filken  Cafes  of  a  yel- 
low {hining  Colour,  wherein  they  chang'd,  and 
after  fome  time  came  out  thence  in  the  form  of 
fmall  Flies  with  four  Wings ;  for  a  full  Defcrip- 
tioHL  and  Hiftory  whereof  I  ihall  refer  the  Reader 
to  the  fore-mention'd  Catalogue,  The  like  I  have 
alfo  obferv'd  in  other  Caterpillars  of  a  different 
Kind,  which  have  produc'd  no  lefler  Number  of 
Maggots,  that  in  like  m.anner  immediately  made 
themfelves  up  in  Cafes.  Others,  inftead  of  change 
ing  into  Aurelias,  as  in  the  ufual  Procefs  of  Na- 
ture they  ought  to  do,  have  turn'd  into  one,  two, 
or  three,  or  more  Flefli-Fly- Cafes,  at  leaft  con- 
tained fuch  Cafes  within  them,  out  of  which  after 
a  while  were  excluded  Flefh-Flies.  Other  Cater- 
pillars, as  that  caird  the /3//V^;j  Maggot,  found 
in  the  dry  Heads  of  Teafel,  by  a  dubious  Meta- 
7norphofn^  fometimes  chang'd  into  the  Aurelia  of 
a  Butterfly,  fometimes  into  a  Fly-Cafe.  You'll 
fay,  how  comes  this  to  pafs  ?  Muft  we  not  here 
neceffarily  have  recourfe  to  a  fpontaneous  Gene- 
ration ?  I  anfwer,  No ;  the  moft  that  c^n  be  in- 
ferred from  hence  is,  a  Tranfmutation  oi  Species -y 
one  Infedl  may,  inflead  of  generating  another  of 
its  own  Kind,  beget  one  or  more  of^a  different; 
but  I  can  by  no  means  grant  this ;  1  do  believe^ 
'that  thefe  Flics  do  either  caft  their  Eggs  -upon  the  '^• 
very  Bodies  of  the  fore-mention'd  Caterpillars, 

Y  or 


322     77j^  Wisdom  of  GOD     PartIL 

or  upon  the  Leaves  on  which  they  feed,  all  in  a 
String ;  which  there  hatching,  eat  their  way  into 
the  Body,  where  they  are  nouriih'd  till  they  be 
come  to  their  full  Growth ;  or  it  may  be  the  Fly 
may  with  the  hollow  and  fharp  Tube  of  her 
Womb  punch  and  perforate  the  very  Skin  of  the 
Erucay  and  caft  her  Eggs  into  its  Body  5  fo  the 
Ichneumon  will  convey  her  Eggs  into  Caterpillars. 

The  Difcovery  of  the  Manner  of  the  Genera- 
tion of  thefe  Sorts  of  Infedts  I  earneftly  recom- 
mend to  all  ingenious  Naturalifts  as  a  Matter  of 
great  moment  -,  for  if  this  Point  be  but  clear'd, 
and  it  be  demonftrated  that  all  Creatures  are  ge- 
nerated univocally  by  Parents  of  their  own  Kind, 
and  that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  fpontaneous 
Generation  in  the  World,  one  main  Prop  and 
Support  of  Atheifm  is  taken  away,  and  their 
ftrongeft  Hold  demolifh'd  -,  they  cannot  then  ex- 
emplify their  foolifh  Hypothejis  of  the  Generation 
of  Man  and  other  Animals  at  firft  by  the  like  of 
Frogs  and  lafedls  at  this  prefent  Day. 

It  will  be  farther  objeded  that  there  have  live 
Toads  been  found  in  the  midft  of  Timber  Trees, 
nay,  of  Stones  when  they  have  been  fawn  afunder. 

To  this  I  anfwer,  that  I  am  not  fully  fatisfy*d 
of  the  Matter  of  Fad ;  I  am  fo  well  acquainted 
with  the  Credulity  of  the  Vulgar,  and  the  Delight 
they,  and  many  of  the  better  Sort  too,  have  in 
telling  of  Wonders  and  ftrange  things,  that  I  muft 
I  have 


Part  IL       in  the  Creation.  323 

have  a  thing  well  attefted  before  I  can  give  a  firm 
Aflent  to  it. 

Since  the  v^riting  hereof  the  Truth  of  thefe 
Relations,  of  live  Toads  found  in  the  midft  of 
Stones,  hath  been  confirm'd  to  me  by  fufficient 
and  credible  Eye-witneffes,  who  have  feen  them 
taken  out ;  fo  that  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  Mat- 
ter of  Fad. 

But  yet,  fuppofe  it  be  true,  it  may  be  account- 
ed for;  thofe  Animals  when  young  and  little 
finding  in  the  Stone  fome  fmall  Hole  reaching  to 
the  middle  of  it,  might,  as  their  nature  is,  creep 
into  it,  as  a  fit  Latibulmn  for  the  Winter,  and 
grow  there  too  big  to  return  back  by  the  Pafiage 
by  which  they  entered,  and  fo  continue  impri- 
fon'd  therein  for  many  Years,  a  little  Air,  by  rea- 
fon  of  the  Coldnefs  of  the  Creature,  and  its  lying 
torpid  there,  fufficing  it  for  Refpiration  5  and  the 
Humour  of  the  Stone,  by  feafon  it  lay  immove- 
able, and  fpent  not,  for  Nouri{hment  -,  and  I  do 
believe  that  if  thofe  who  found  fuch  Toads  had 
diligently  fearch'd,  they  might  have  difcover'd 
and  trac'd  the  way  whereby  they  enter'd  in,  or 
fome  Footfteps  of  it ;  or  elfe  there  might  fall 
down  into  the  lapideous  Matter,  before  it  was 
concrete  into  a  Scone,  fome  fmall  Toad  (or  fome 
Toad-Spawn)  which  being  not  able  to  extricate 
itfelf  and  get  out  again,  might  remain  there  im- 
prifon'd  till  the  Matter  about  it  were  condensed, 
and  compafted  into  a  Stone;    but  however  it 

Y  2  came 


324  T^eWi^t^buof  GOD  PartIL 
came  there,  I  dare  confidently  affirm  it  .was  not 
there  fpontaneoully  generated  ;  for  elfe  either 
there  was  fuch  a  Cavity  in  the  Stone  before  the 
Toad  was  generated,  which  is  altogether  impro- 
bable, and  gratis  diBum^  alTerted"  without  any 
ground,  or  the  Toad  was  generated  in  the  folid 
Stone,  which  is  more  unlikely  than  the  other,  in 
that  the  fo ft  Body  of  fo  fmall  a  Creature  fhould 
extend  itfelf  in  fuch  a  Prifon,  and  overcome  the 
Strength  and  Refiftance  of  fuch  a  great  and  pon- 
derous Mafs  of  folid  Stone. 

And  whereas  the  Aflertors  of  equivocal  Gene- 
ration were  wont  to  pretend  the  Imperfedion  of 
thefe  Animals  as  a  ground  to  facilitate  the  Belief 
of  their  fpontaneous  Generation,  I  do  affirm  that 
they  are  as  perfed:  in  their  Kind,  and  as  much 
Art  {hewn  in  the  Formation  of  them  as  of  the 
greateft,  nay,  more  too  in  the  Judgment  of  that 

great  Wit  and  natural  Hiftorian 
*  Lib.  II.     ^  Pliny,  '  In  magnis  fiquidem  corpo- 

rihiis  (faith  he)  aut  certe  major ibm 
facilis  qfficinafequaci  materia  fuit  -,  in  his  tarn  par^ 
vis  atque  tarn  nullis,  quce  ratio,  quanta  vis,  quam 
inextricabilis  perfeSiio?.  In  the  greater  Bodies  the 
Forge  was  eafy,  the  Matter  being  ducftil  and  fe- 
quacious,  obedient  to  the  Hand  and  Stroke  of 
the  Artificer,  apt  to  be  drawn,  formed  or  mould- 
ed into  fuch  Shapes  and  Machines  even  by  clum- 
fy  Fingers  5  but  in  the  Formation  of  thefe,  fuch 
diminutive  Things,  fuch  Nothings,  what  Cun- 
ning and  Curiofity !   what  Force  and  Strength 


was 


Part  IL       hi  /^^^  G  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  325 

was  requifite,  there  being  in  them  fuch  inextri* 
cable  Perfedtion! 

To  what  Proofs  or  Examples  of  fpontaneous 
Generation  may  be  brought  from  Infed:s  bred  in 
the  Fruits  or  Excrefcencies  of  Plants,  I  have  al- 
ready made  anfwer  in  my  fecond  Particular, 
which  contains  the  Teftimonies  of  our  beft  mo- 
detn  Naturalifts  concerning  thefe  Things. 

In  my  Denial  of  the  fpontaneous  Generation 
of  Plants,  I  am  not  fo  confident  and  peremptory, 
but  yet  there  are  the  fame  Objedions  and  Argu- 
ments againft  it  as  againft  that  of  Animals,  'vix, 
becaufe  it  would  be  a  Produdion  out  of  indif- 
pos'd  Matter,  and  confequently  a  Creation;  or 
if  it  be  faid  there  is  difpos'd  Matter,  prepared  by 
the  Earth,  or  Sun,  the  Heat,  or  whatever  other 
Agent  you  can  aflign  \  I  reply,  this  is  to  make  a 
thing  ad  beyond  its  Strength,  that  is,  an  inferior 
Nature,  which  hath  nothing  of  Life  in  it,  to  pre- 
pare Matter  for  a  fuperior,  which  hath  fome  de- 
gree of  Life,  and  for  the  Preparation  of  which  it 
hath  no  convenient  Veffels  or  Inflruments ;  if  it 
could  do  fo,  what  need  of  all  that  Apparatus  of 
Veffels,  Preparation  of  Seed,  and,  as  I  alfo  fup- 
pofe,  Diftindion  of  Mafculine  and  Feminine  that 
we  fee  in  Plants  ?  I  demand  farther,  whether  any 
of  the  Patrons  of  fpontaneous  Generation  in 
Plants  did  ever  fee  any  Herbs  or  Trees,  except 
thofe  of  the  Grafs-Leav'd  Tribe,  come  up  with- 
out two  Seed-Leaves  ?  which  if  they  never  did  or 

Y  3  could, 


326      Tie  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  IL 

could,  it  is  to  me  a  great  Argument  that  they 
came  all  of  Seed,  there  being  no  reafon  elfe  why 
they  fhould  at  firft  produce  two  Seed-Leaves  dif- 
ferent from  the  fubfequent  >  and  if  all  thefe  Spe^ 
cies  (which  are  far  the  greateft  Number)  come 
from  Seed,  there  is  not  the  leaft  reafon  to  think 
that  any  of  the  reft  come  up  fpontaneoufly ;  and 
this,  with  what  I  have  written  before,  may  fuffice 
concerning  this  Point. 

Whereas  I  have  often  written  in  many  Places 
that  fuch  and  fuch  Plants  are  fpontaneous,  or 
come  up  fpontaneoufly,  I  mean  no  more  by  that 
Expreflion,  but  that  they  were  not  planted  or 
fown  there  induftrioufly  by  Man. 

Having  fpoken  of  the  Body  of  Man,  and  the 
Ufes  of  its  feveral  Parts  and  Members,  I  fhall  add 
fome  other  Obfervations,  giving  an  Account  of 
the  particular  Strudture,  Acftions  and  Ufes  of  fome 
Parts,  either  common  to  whole  Kinds  of  Animals, 
or  proper  to  fome  particular  Species^d^i^^vtm  from 
thofe  of  Man,  and  of  the  reafon  of  fome  Inftinfts 
and  Aaions  of  Brutes. 

Fbjt  of  all,  the  manner  of  Refpiration^  and 
the  Organs  ferving  thereto  in  various  Animals, 
are  accommodated  to  their  Temper  of  Body,  and 
their  Place  and  Manner  of  Living ;  of  which  I 
have  obferv'd  in  more  perfeft  Animals  three  Dif- 
ferences, 

I.  The 


Part  IL       ///  /^^  C R  E  A  T I  o N.  327 

I.  The  hotter  Animals,  which  require  abun- 
dance of  Spirits  for  their  various  Motions  and 
Exercifes,  are  provided  with  Lungs,  which  inde- 
finitely draw  in  and  expel  the  Air  alternately, 
without  Intermiflion,  and  have  a  Heart  furnifh'd 
with  two  Ventricles ;  becaufe  to  maintain  the 
Blood  in, that  degree  of  Heat  which  is  requifite  to 
the  Performance  of  the  Ad:ions  of  all  the  Mufcles, 
there  is  abundance  of  Air  neceffary.  I  (hall  not 
now  take  notice  of  the  difference  that  is  between 
the  Lungs  of  Quadrupeds  and  Birds,  how  the  one 
are  fix'd  and  immoveable,  the  other  loofe  and 
moveable;  the  one  perforated,  tranfmitting  the 

f:  Air  into  large  Bladders,  the  other  inclos'd  with 

'  a  Membrane. 

It  is  here  worth  the  notice  taking,  that  many 
Animals  of  this  Kind,  both  Birds  and  Quadru- 
peds, will  endure  and  bear  up  againft  the  extream- 
ell  Rigor  of  Cold  that  our  Country  is  expos'd 
to ;  Horfe^  Kine,  and  Sheepy  as  I  have  experienc'd, 
will  lie  abroad  in  the  open  Air  upon  the  cold 
Ground  during  our  long  Winter-Nights,  in  the 
fliarpeft  and  fevereft  Frofts  that  ever  happened 
with  us,  without  any  Harm  or  Prejudice  at  all  -, 
whereas  one  would  think,  that  at  leafl  the  Extre- 
mities of  their  Members  (hould  be  bitten,  benum- 
med  and  mortify'd  thereby.  Confidering  with 
myfelf  by  what  means  they  were  enabled  to  do 
this,  and  to  abide  and  refift  the  Cold,  it  occurr'd 
to  my  Thoughts,  that  the  Extremities  of  their 

Y  4  Toes 


328     Tlje  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  IL 

Toes  were  fenc'd  with  Hoofs,  which  in  good 
meafurc  fecur'd  them  ^  but  the  main  thing  wasiy 
that  the  Cold  is,  as  it  were,  its  own  Antidote  j 
for  the  Air  being  fully  charg'd  and  fated  with  ni- 
trous, or  fome  other  fort  of  Particles  (which  are 
the  great  Efficients  of  Cold,  and  no  lefs  alfo  the 
pabulum  of  Fire)  when  infpir'd,  doth  by  means 
of  them  caufe  a  great  Accenfion  and  Heat  in  the 
Blood  (as  we  fee  Fuel  burns  raflily  in  fuch  Wea- 
ther) and  fo  enable  it  to  refift  the  Impreffions  of 
the  Cold  for  fo  fhort  a  time  as  its  more  nimble 
Circulation  expofes  it  thereto,  before  it  comes  to 
another  beating.  From  hence  may  an  Account 
be  given  why  the  Inhabitants  of  hot  Countries 
may  endure  longer  Fafting  and  Hunger  than 
thofe  of  colder ;  and  thofe  feemingly  prodigious, 
and  to  us  fcarce  credible  Stories,  of  the  Faflings 
and  Abftinence  of  the  Egyptian  Monks,  be  ren^ 
der'd  probable, 

2.  Other  Animals,  which  are  of  a  colder  Tem- 
per, and  made  to  endure  a  long  Inedia  or  fafting, 
and  to  lie  in  their  Holes  almoft  torpid  all  Winter, 
as  all  Kinds  of  Serpents  and  Lizards^  have  indeed 
Lungs,  but  do  not  inceffantly  breathe,  or  when 
they  have  drawn  in  the  Air,  neceffarily  expire  it 
again,  but  can  retain  it  at  their  Pleafure,  and  live 
without  Refpiration  whole  Days  together,  as  was 
long  fince  experimented  by  Sir  "Thomas  Brown, 
M.  p.  in  a  Frog  ty'd  by  the  Foot  under  Water 
for  that  purpofe  by  him.  This  Order  of  Crea- 
tures have  but  one  Ventricle  in  their  Hearts,  and 

the 


Part  IL        in  M^  C  r  e  at  i  o n.  329 

the  whole  Blood  doth  not  fo  often  circulate  thro' 
the  Lungs  as  it  doth  thro*  the  reft  of  the  Body ; 
this  manner  of  breathing  is  fufficient  to  maintain 
in  them  that  degree  of  Heat  which  is  fuitable  to 
their  Nature  and  manner  of  living ;  for  to  our 
Touch  they  are  always  cold,  even  in  Summer- 
time, and  therefore  fome  will  then  put  Snakes 
into  their  Bofom  to  cool  them. 
> 

3.  Fifhes,   which  were  to  live  and  converfe 
always  in  a  cold  Element,  the  Water,  and  there- 
fore were  to  have  a  Temper  not  excelling  in 
Heat,  becaufe  otherwife  the  conftant  immediate 
Contrad:  of  the  Water  (unlefs  fome  extraordinary 
Provifion  were  made)  could  not  have  been  fup- 
ported  by  them,  that  they  might  not  be  neceffi- 
tated  continually  to  be  coming  up  to  the  top  of 
the  Water  to  draw  in  the  Air,  and  for  many  other 
Reafons  that  might  be  alledg'd,  perform  their 
Refpiration  under  Water  by  the  Gills,  by  which 
they  can  receive  no  more  Air  than  is  difpers'd  in 
the  Pores  of  the  Water,  which  is  fufficient  to 
preferve  their  Bodies  in  that  Temper  of  Heat  that 
is  fuitable  to  their  Nature  and  the  Place  wherein 
they  live;  thefe  alfo  have  but  one  Ventricle  in 
their  Hearts. 

But  now  tho'  this  be  thus,  the  great  and  moft 
wife  GOD,  as  it  were  purpofely  to  demonfti-ate 
that-  he  is  not  by  any  Condition  or  Quality  of 
Place  neceffarily  determin'd  to  one  manner  of 
Refpiration,  or  one  Temper  of  Body  in  Fifhes, 

he 


330    The  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  II. 

he  hath  endu'd  the  Bodies  of  fome  of  that  Tribe 
of  aquatick  Creatures  with  Lungs  like  viviparous 
Quadrupeds,  and  two  Ventricles  of  the  Heart, 
and  an  Ability  of  breathing  like  them,  by  draw- 
ing in  and  letting  out  the  open  Air,  fo  contriving 
their  Bodies  as  to  maintain  in  the  midft  of  the 
cold  Water  a  degree  of  Heat  anfwerable  to  that 
of  the  fore-mention'd  Quadrupeds. 

Another  remarkable  thing  relating  to  Refpira- 
tion  is,  the  keeping  the  Hole  or  PalTage  between 
the  Arteria  Venofa  and  Vena  Cava,  call'd  Foramen 
ovale,  open  in  fome  amphibious  Quadrupeds,  viz, 
the  Phoca,  or  Vitulus  Marinus,  calFd  in  Rnglijlo, 
Sea-Calf  2inA  Seal -y  and,  as  is  generally  held,  the 
Beaver  too.  We  have  already  given  the  reafon  of 
the  twofold  Communication  of  the  great  Blood- 
Veffels  in  the  Fc^tiis  or  Young  fo  long  as  it  con- 
tinues in  the  Womb ;  the  one  between  the  two 
Veins  entring  the  Heart,  by  a  Hole  or  Window ; 
the  other  between  the  two  Arteries,  by  an  arterial 
Channel  extended  from  the  pulmonary  Artery  to 
the  Aorta,  or  great  Artery  ;  which  was,  in  brief, 
to  divert  the  Blood  from  the  Lungs.     Thefame 
reafon  for  keeping  open  this  Foramen  ovale  there 
is  in  thefe  amphibious  Creatures.     For,   i.  The 
Lungs  probably  being  not  extended,  but  empty'd 
of  Air  when  they  abide  long  under  Water,  and 
flaccid,  it  is  not  eafy  for  the  whole  Blood  every 
Circulation  to  make  its  way  thro'  them.     2.  To 
maintain  that  degree  of  Heat. and  Motion  in  the 
Blood  as  is  fufficient  for  them  while  they  are  un- 
der 


Part  II.       in  /;&^  C  r  e  at  i  o  N.  331 

der  Water,  there  is  not  fo  much  Air  required  as 
is  when  they  are  above,  the  Blood  then  moving 
but  gently,  as  doth  that  of  the  Feetus  in  the 
Womb. 

Farther,  in  reference  to  Refpiration,  it  is  oh- 
ferv'd  by  the  Parifian  Academifts,  that  fome  am- 
phibious Quadrupeds,  particularly  the  Sea-Calf 
or  Sealj  hath  his  Epiglottis  extraordinarily  large 
in»proportion  to  other  Animals,  it  extending  half 
an  Inch  in  length  beyond  the  Glottis^  to  cover  it. 
I  believe  the  Beaver  hath  the  like  Epiglottis^  ex- 
aftly  clofing  the  Larynx  or  Glottis^  and  hindring 
all  Influx  of  Water  -,  becaufe  in  one  difTecSed  by 
WepferuSy   that  fuiFocated  itfelf  in  the  Water, 
there  v^as  not  a  Drop  of  Water  found  in  the 
Lungs ',  it  is  probable  (fay  they)  that  this  is  done 
more  exacftly  to  clofe  the  Entrance  of  the  Afpera 
Arteriay  or  Windpipe,  when  the  Animal  eats  his 
Prey  at  the  bottom  of  the  Sea,  and  to  hinder  the 
Water  from  running  into  his  Lungs.     An  Ele- 
phant (as  is  obferv'd  by  Dr.  Moulins^  I  think,  in 
the  Anatomy  of  that  Creature)  hath  no  Epiglottis 
at  all',  there  being  no  danger  of  any  thing  falling 
into  their  Lungs  from  eating  or  drinking,  feeing 
there  is  no  Communication  between  the  Oefopha- 
gus  and  it  j  for  he  thus  defcribes  the  Oejophagus  or 
Gullet :  The  Tongue  of  this  Creature  (faith  he) 
had  this  peculiar  in  it,  that  the  PafTage  to  the 
Ventricle  was  thro'  it,  for  there  was  a  Hole  near 
the  Root  of  it,  and  exadtly  in  the  middle  of  that 
Part,  which  Hole  was  the  beginning  of  the  Oejo- 
phagus ;  there  was  no  Communication  between 

this 


332     The  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  I L 

this  and  the  Paffage  into  the  Lungs,  contrary  to 
what  we  may  obferve  in  Men,  in  all  Quadrupeds 
and  Fowl,  that  ever  I  had  Opportunity  to  diife(ft ; 
for  the  Membrana  pitiiitaria  anterior  reached  to 
the  very  Root  of  the  Tongue,  below  the  Oejo- 
phagiiSy  and  fo  quite  llopt  the  Paffage  of  the  Air 
into  the  Mouth.  But  tho'  there  be  no  danger  of 
Meat  or  Drink  falling  into  the  Lungs,  yet  were 
they  not  fufficiently  fecur'd  from  fmall  Anirttals 
creeping  in  there ;  for  though,  to  fupply  in  fome 
meafure  the  want  of  an  Epiglottis^  by  leffening 
the  Glottis,  there  grew  to  the  outfide  of  the  Car- 
tilages czWdylrytenoides,  another  capable  of  mo- 
tion up  and  down,  by  the  help  of  fome  Mufcles 
that  were  implanted  in  it,  ftrong  on  both  (ides  of 
the  Afpera  Arteria^  but  on  the  under  fide,  oppo- 
lite  to  that  of  the  Oefophagus,  very  limber,  want- 
ing about  two  Inches  and  a  half  of  coming  round 
the  aforefaid  Cartilages  on  the  upper  fide,  or  the 
next  to  the  Oefophagus  \  yet  did  not  this  Cartilage 
fo  (hut  up  the  way  againft  them,  but  that  even  a 
Moufe  creeping  up  his  Probofcis  might  get  into 
his  Lungs,  and  fo  ftifle  him;  whence  we  may 
guefs  at  the  reafon  why  the  Elephant  is  afraid  of  a 
Motife ;  and  therefore  to  avoid  this  Danger,  this 
Creature  (the  Elephant^  which  this  Author  de- 
fcrib'd)  was  obferv'd  always  when  he  flept  to 
keep  his  Trunk  (Probofcis)  fo  clofe  to  the  Ground 
that  nothing  but  Air  could  get  in  between  them , 
this  is  a  ftrange  Sagacity  and  Providence  in  this 
Animal,  or  elfe  an  admirable  Inftind:. 

Again, 


Part  IL      in  /^^  C r  e  a t  i  on*  333 

Again,  the  Parifian  Academifts  oblerve  of  the 
Sea  Tortoife^  that  the  Cleft  of  the  Glottis  was  ftraic 
and  clofe;  which  exad:  Inclofure  I  do  rather  be- 
lieve is  to  prevent  the  Water  from  entring  into 
the  Windpipe  when  the  Tortoifes  are  under 
Water,  than  to  afTift  the  Effedt  of  the  Compref- 
fion  of  the  Air  in  the  Lungs,  as  they  would  have 
it ;  /or  they  make  the  main  reafon  of  Refpiration 
and  Ufe  of  the  Lungs  in  this  Creature  to  be,  to 
take  in  and  retain  Air,  by  the  Compreffion  and 
Dilatation  whereof,  made  by  the  Mufcles,  it  can 
raife  or  fmk  itfelf  in  the  Water,  as  need  requires ; 
tho'  I  do  not  exclude  this.  But  if  this  be  the 
main  Ufe  of  the  Lungs  and  Refpiration  in  this 
Animal,  what  is  it  in  Land  Animals,  which  have 
a  like  Conformation  of  Lungs  and  manner  of  Re- 
fpiration as  the  Cameliofi,  Serpents^  and  Lixai-ds  ? 

But  before  I  difmifs  the  Tortoife,  I  fhall  add 
two  notable  Obfervations  concerning  him,  bor- 
rowed of  the  faid  French  Academifts^  which  feem 
to  argue  fomething  of  Reafon  in  him,  and  more 
than  a  bare  Liftind.  The  firft  is  in  the  Land 
Tortoije ;  and  it  is  his  manner  of  turning  himfelf, 
and  getting  upon  his  Feet  again  when  he  is  caft 
upon  his  Back,  which  they  defcribe  in  thefe 
Words :  At  the  great  Aperture  of  the  Shell  before^ 
there  was  at  the  top  a  rais'd  Border^  to  grant  mnrc 
liberty  to  the  Neck  and  Head^  for  lifting  them j elves 
^upwards ;  and  this  InfeBion  of  the  Neck  is  of  great 
Vfe  to  the  'J'ortoifes^  for  it  fcrves  them  to  turn  again 

'when 


334     T/^e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  II. 

when  they  are  upon  their  Backs  5  and  their  Indujiry 
upon  this  Account  is  very  admirable.     We  have  ob- 
jervd  in  a  living  Tortoife,  that  being  turned  upon 
its  Backy  and  not  being  able  to  make  tije  of  its  Paws 
for  the  returning  of  itfelfy  becaufe  they  could  but 
only  bend  towards  the  Belly,  it  could  help  itfelf  only 
by  its  Neck  and  Head^  which  it  turn  d  Jbmetimes 
en  one  fide,  fometimes  on  the  other,  by  pufhing  a- 
gainfi  the  Ground,  to  rock  itfelf  as  in  a  Cradle,  to 
find  out  the  fide  towards  which  the  Inequality  of  the 
Ground  might  more  eafily  permit  it  to  rowl  its 
Shell ',  for  when  it  had  found  it,  it  made  all  its  En- 
deavours on  that  fide. 

The  fecond  is  in  the  Sea  tortoife,  as  follows. 
Arifiotle  and  Tliny  have  remarked,  that  when 
T'ortoifes  have  been  a  long  time  upon  the  Water 
during  a  Calm,  it  happens  that  their  Shell  being 
dry'd  in  the  Sun,  they  are  eafily  taken  by  the 
Fifhermen,  by  reafon  they  cannot  plunge  into 
the  Water  nimbly  enough,  being  become  too 
light ',  this  fhews  what  Equality  there  ought  to 
be  in  their  /Equilibrium,  feeing  fo  little  a  Change 
as  this,  which  may  happen  by  the  fole  drying  of 
the  Shell,  is  capable  of  making  it  ufelefs.  This 
Eafinefs  to  be  taken  at  fuch  a  time,  thefe  Aca- 
demifis  do  not  refer  merely  to  the  Lightnefs  of 
this  Creature's  Body  (for  he  could  eafily  let  Air 
enough  out  of  his  Lungs  to  render  it  heavier  than 
the  Water,  and  fo  enable  himfelf  to, fink)  but  to 
a  wonderful  Sagacity  and  Caution  of  this  Animal ; 
for  (fay  they)  it  is  probable  that  the  Tortoife, 

which 


Part  II.       in  ihe  CKtArio^.  335 

which  is  always  careful  to  keep  himfelf  in  this 
/Equilibrium^  fo  as  other  Animals  are  to  keep 
themfelves  on  their  Legs,  in  this  Cafe,  by  the  fame 
Inftind)  dares  not  let  the  Air  out  of  his  Lungs, 
to  acquire  a  Weight  which  might  make  him  fpee- 
dily  to  fink,  becaufe  he  fears  that  his  Shell  being 
wet  it  fhould  become  fo  heavy,  that  he  being 
funk  to  the  bottom  of  the  Water,  might  never 
haye  Power  afterw^ards  to  re-afcend  ;  if  this  may 
be  the  reafon  why  he  expofes  himfelf  to  the  dan- 
ger of  being  taken  at  fuch  a  time,  rather  than  he 
will  defcend  fuddenly  to  the  bottom,  it  is  clear 
that  he  is  endu'd  with  an  admirable  Providence 
and  Forefight,  and  a  Power  of  Argumentation. 

That  Nature  doth  really  defign  the  Preferva- 
tion  and  Security  of  the  more  infirm  Creatures, 
by  the  defenfive  Armour  that  it  hath  given  to 
fome  of  them,  together  with  Skill  to  ufe  it,  is,  I 
think,  demonfl:rable  in  the  common  Hedge-hog^ 
or  Urchin^  and  one  Species  of  T^atou^  or  Arma- 
dillo.  The  Hedge-hog  hath  his  Back,  Sides  and 
Flanks  thick  fet  with  ftrong  and  fliarp  Prickles, 
and  befides,  by  the  help  of  a  Mufcle  given  him 
for  that  purpofe,  is  enabled  to  contradl  himfelf 
into  a  globular  Figure,  and  fo  to  withdraw,  in- 
clofe,  and  hide  his  whole  Under-part,  Head, 
Belly  and  Legs  (which  for  the  Neceflities  and 
Conveniences  of  Life  mufl  be  left  deftitute  of 
thi§  Armour)  within  his  Covert  or  Thicket  of 
Prickles ;  fo  that  Dogs,  or  other  rapacious  Crea- 
tures, cannot  lay  hold  upon  him  or  bite  him 

without 


336     T'he  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  IL 

without  wounding  their  own  Nofes  and  Mouths* 
The  Mufcle  whereby  he  is  enabled  to  draw  him- 
felf  thus  together,  and  gather  up  his  whole  Body 
like  a  Ball,  the  Parijtan  Academijis  defcribe  to  be 
a  diftindt  carnofe  Mufcle,  extended  from  the 
0[fa  imiominata  to  the  Ear  and  Nofe,  running 
along  the  Back-bone ,  without  being  faften'd 
thereto.  Olaus  Borrichius^  in  the  Danick  Tranf- 
adions,  makes  it  to  be  an  almoft  circular  Muf- 
cle, embracing  the  Panniculus  carnofus^  of  a  won-* 
derful  Fabrick,  varioufly  extending  its  Lacinice^ 
or  Procefles,  to  the  Feet,  Tail,  and  Head  of  the 
Creature. 

The  other  Creature  which  doth  thus  contrad: 
and  draw  up  itfelf  into  a  globular  or  oval  Figure 
for  its  Defence,  is  the  fecond  Sort  of  Tatou^  or  Ar- 
madillo^  largely  defcrib^d  by  Marcgrave^  Lib,  6. 
cap.  9.  by  the  Name  of  Tatu  Apara^  which  is  co- 
vered on  its  Back  and  Sides  with  a  ftrong  fcaly 
Cruft  or  Shell,  of  a  hard  or  honey  Subftance,  joint- 
ed like  Armour,  or  the  Scales  of  the  Tail  of  a 
Lobfter,  by  four  tranfverfe  Commiffures  in  the 
middle  of  the  Body,  connected  by  tough  Mem- 
branes. When  it  fleeps  (as  it  doth  for  the  moft 
part  in  the  Day-time,  going  forth  to  feed  in  the 
Night)  or  when  one  goes  about  to  lay  hold  on  it^ 
gathering  up  its  fore  and  hind  Legs  as  it  were  to 
one  Point,  and  drawing  its  Ears  with  its  Head 
inward,  and  bringing  its  Tail  to  its  Head  by 
reafon    of    the    fore-mention'd    Commiflbres, 

it 


Part  II.       in  itie  Creation.  337 

it  bends  its  Back  fo  far  till  its  Head  comes  to 
touch  its  hind  Part,  and  fo  with  Armour  gather 
itfelf  into  a  round  Ball,  the  lateral  Extremities 
of  the  Shell  touching  one  another,  and  inclofing 
the  Body  on  the  Sides,  and  the  fore  and  hind 
Parts  coming  fo  near  together,  that  there  is  no- 
thing to  be  feen  but  the  Armature  of  the  Head 
and  Tail,  which,  like  Doors,  fhut  up  the  Hole 
wfeich  the  Shells  of  the  Body  left  open ;  this  it 
performs  by  the  Acflion  of  a  notable  Mufcle  on 
each  Side,  of  a  great  length,  having  the  form  of 
the  Letter  X,  made  up  of  many  Fibres,  decufla- 
ting  one  another  long- ways,  by  the  help  whereof 
it  can  contraft  its  Shell,  and  hold  it  contracted 
with  fuch  a  mighty  Force,  that  he  muft  be  a 
ftrong  Man  indeed  that  is  able  to  open  it. 

Had  fuch  a  Mufcle  as  this,  and  fuch  an  Abi- 
lity of  Contraction,  been  given  to  any  Creature 
that  was  cover'd  with  foft  Hair  or  Fur,  there 
might  have  been  fome  Pretence  to  fancy  that  this 
was  accidental,  and  not  defign'd  -,  but  feeing  there 
is  not  one  Inftance  of  this  kind  in  Nature,  it 
muft  be  great  Stupidity  to  believe  it,  and  an  Im- 
pudence to  aifert  it;  neither  will  the  Atheifts 
ufual  }cpn(7(pvyi<TjiVy  or  Refuge,  that  there  were  in- 
deed at  Jirjl  fuch  Creatures  producd,  but  being  ob- 
noxious to  thofe  that  werejiroug  and  rapacious^  they 
were  by  degrees  dejlrofd,  a?2d  the  Race  loji,  here 
help  them  out;  becaufe  fuch  a  Mufcle,  and  Fa- 
culty of  ufing  it  to  that  Purpofe,  might  as  likely 
have  fiillen  to  the  Lot  or  Chance  of  a  ilrong  and 

Z  generous 


338     T^e  Wisdom  tf  GOD     Part  II. 

generous  Creature,  which  others  dar'd  not  ap- 
proach to  hurt,  who  might  for  his  own  Difport 
have  thus  contraded  himfelf  into  a  Ball,  of  which 
Kind  we  find  none. 

I  have  before  mentioned  the  Ufe  affign'd  by  the 
honourable  Mr.  Boyle^  of  famous  Memory,  lately 
deceas'd,  to  the  P eriophthalmium  ^  or  negating 
Membrane  in  Brutes,  wherein  I  could  not  fully 
acquiefce  as  to  fome  Quadrupeds,  which  were  in 
no  danger  of  having  their  Eyes  harm'd  by  Buflies 
and  Prickles,  or  Twigs  of  Trees  ^  fince  the  wri- 
ting whereof  I  have  met  with  a  different  Account 
of  the  Ufe  of  that  Membrane,  in  the  Anatomical 
Defcription  of  fever al  Creatures  diJfeBed  by  the^ 
Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris,  Englifli'd  by 
Mr.  Alexander  Pitfeld^  p.  249.  in  the  Defcription 
of  the  Caffowar,  Our  Opinion  (fay  thofe  Aca- 
demifts")  is,  that  the  Membrane  ferves  to  clean  the 
Cornea,  and  to  hinder,  that  by  drying,  it  grow 
no  lefs  tranfparent.  Man  and  the  Ape,  which 
are  the  fole  Animals  wherein  we  have  not  found 
this  Eye-lid,  have  not  wanted  this  Provifion  for 
the  cleanfing  of  their  Eyes,  becaufe  that  they  have 
Hands,  with  which  they  may,  by  rubbing  their 
Eye-lids,  exprefs  the  Humidity  which  they  con- 
tain, and  which  they  let  out  through  the  DuBm 
Lachrymalisy  which  is  known  by  Experience^ 
when  the  Sight  is  darkened,  or  when  the  Eyes 
fuifer  any  Pain  or  itching ;  for  thefe  Accidents  do 
ceafe  when  the  Eyes  are  rubb'd. 

But 


Part  IL       in  the  Creation,  339 

But  the  Diffedion  has  diflindtly  difcover'd  to 
us  the  Organs  which  do  particularly  ferve  for  this 
Ufe,  and  which  are  otherwife  in  Birds  than  in 
Man,  where  the  DuBus  pafles  not  beyond  the 
Glandula  Lachrymalis  -,  for  in  Birds  it  goes  be- 
yond, and  penetrating  above  half  way  on  the  in- 
ternal Eye-lid,  it  is  open'd  underneath  upon  the 
Eye ;  which  is  evidently  done  to  fpread  a  Liquor 
oyer  the  whole  Cornea^  when  this  Eye-lid  pafles 
and  repafles,  as  we  obferv*d  it  to  do  every  Mo- 
ment. 

The  Artifice  and  Contrivance  of  Nature  for  the 
extending  and  withdrawing  of  this  Curtain  of  the 
Periophthalmium  in  Birds  is  admirable ;  but  it  is 
difficult  fo  to  exprefs  it  in  Words  as  to  render  it 
intelligible  to  the  Reader;  for  a  multitude  of 
Words  doth  rather  obfcure  than  illuftrate,  they 
being  a  Burden  to  the  Memory,  and  the  firft  apt 
to  be  forgotten  before  we  come  to  the  lafl: ;  fo 
that  he  that  ufes  many  Words  for  the  explaining 
any  Subjeft,  doth,  like  the  Cuttle-Fijh^  hide  him- 
felf  for  the  mofl  part  in  his  own  Ink ;  and  in  the 
Defcription  of  the  Figure  and  manner  of  the  Ex- 
tenfion  and  Contraction  of  this  Membrane,  the 
Parifian  Academijis  are  confl:rain*d  to  ufe  fo  ma- 
ny Words,  that  1  am  afraid  few  Readers  Patience 
and  Attention  will  lafl:  fo  long  as  to  comprehend 
and  carry  it  away ;  yet  becaufe  it  is  fo  evident  and 
irrefragable  a  Proof  of  Wifdom  and  Defign ,  I 
could  not  omit  it;  rheir  Words  are  thefe :  The 
Particularities  of  the  admirable  Stru(5lure  of  this 
Eye-lid  are  fuch  things  as  do  difl:indly  difcover 

Z  2  the 


340  T'hWisDouof  GOD  Part  II. 
the  Wifdom  of  Nature  among  a  thoufand  others, 
of  which  we  perceive  not  the  Contrivance,  be- 
caufe  we  underftand  them  only  by  the  Effeds,  of 
which  we  know  not  the  Caufes  j  but  we  here  treat 
of  a  Machine,  all  the  Parts  whereof  are  vifible, 
and  which  need  only  to  be  look'd  upon  to  difco- 
ver  the  reafon  of  its  Motion  and  Adion. 

This  internal  Eye-lid  in  Birds  is  a  membranous 
Part,  which  is  extended  over  the  Cornea  when  it 
is  drawn  upon  it  like  a  Curtain  by  a  little  Cord  or 
Tendon,  and  which  is  drawn  back  again  into  the 
great  Corner  of  the  Eye,  to  uncover  the  Cornea^ 
by  the  means  of  the  very  ftrong  Ligaments  that  it 
has,  and  which  in  drawing  it  back  towards  its 
Origin  do  fold  it  up ;  it  made  a  Triangle  when 
extended,  and  it  had  the  Figure  of  a  Crefcent 
when  folded  up;  its  B a/Is  (which  is  its  Origin) 
was  toward  the  great  Corner  of  the  Eye,  at  the 
edge  of  the  great  Circle,  which  the  Sclerotica 
forms  when  it  is  flatted  before,  making  an  Angle 
with  its  anterior  Part,  that  is,  the  Cornea^  which 
is  raised  like  a  Hill  upon  it;  the  Bafis,  which  is 
the  Part  immoveable,  and  faften^'d  to  the  edge  of 
the  Sclerotica^  did  take  up  more  than  a  third  Part 
of  the  Circumference  of  the  great  Circle  of  the 
Sclerotica ;  the  fide  of  the  Triangle,  which  is  to- 
ward the  little  Corner  of  the  Eye,  and  Is  move- 
able, was  reinforced  with  a  Border,  which  fup- 
plies  the  place  of  the  'TarfuSy  and  which  is  black 
in  moft  Quadrupeds  ;  this  fide  of  the  Eye-lid  is 
that  which  is  drawn  back  into  the  Corner  of  the 
2  Eye, 


Part  II.       hi  the  Creation.  341 

Eye,  by  the  Adion  of  the  Fibres  of  the  whole 
Eye-lid,  which  parting  from  its  Origin,  proceed 
to  join  themfelves  to  its  Tiarjus, 

To  extend  this  Eye-lid  over  the  Ccrnea.,  there 
were  two  Mufcles  that  were  feen,  when  fix  were 
taken  away,  which  ferv'd  to  the  Motion  of  the 
whole  Eye ;  we  found  that  the  greateft  of  thefe 
tw^  Mufcles  has  its  Origin  at  the  very  edge  of  the 
great  Circle  of  the  Sclerotica^  towards  the  great 
Corner,  from  whence  the  Eye-lid  takes  its  Ori- 
ginal ;  it  is  very  flefhy  in  its  beginning,  which  is 
a  large  Bajis,  from  whence  coming  infenfibly  to 
contrail  itfelf  by  paffing  under  the  Globe  of  the 
Eye,  like  as  the  Eye-lid  paffes  over  it,  it  ap- 
proaches the  Optick  Nerve,  where  it  produces  a 
Tendon  round  and  (lender,  fo  that  it  paffes  thro' 
the  Tendon  of  the  other  Mufcle,  which  ferves  for 
a  Pulley,  and  which  hinders  it  from  preffing  the 
Optick  Nerve,  upon  which  it  is  bent,  and  makes 
an  Angle,  to  pafs  thro'  it  to  the  upper  Part  of  the 
Eye,  and  coming  out  from  underneath  the  Eye 
to  infert  itfelf  at  the  Corner  of  the  Membrane 
which  makes  the  internal  Eye-lid;  this  fecond 
Mufcle  hath  its  Original  at  the  fame  Circle  of 
the  Sclerotica^  but  oppofite  to  the  firft  towards 
the  little  Corner  of  the  Eye,  and  paffmg  under 
the  Eye  like  the  other,  goes  to  meet  it,  and  em- 
braces its  Tendon,  as  has  been  declar'd. 

The  Aftion  of  thefe  two  Mufcles  is,  in  refped 
to  the  firft,  to  draw,  by  the  means  of  its  Cord  or 

Z  3  Tendon, 


342      T^he  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  11. 

Tendon,  the  Corner  of  the  internal  Eye-lid,  and 
to  extend  it  over  the  Cornea ;  as  to  the  fecond 
Mufcle,  its  Adiion  is,  by  making  its  Tendon  to 
approach  towards  its  Origin,  to  hinder  the  Cord 
of  the  firft  Mufcle,  which  it  embraces,  from 
hurting  the  Optick  Nerve;  but  its  principal  Ufe 
is  to  affift  the  Adion  of  the  firft  Mufcle  ;  and  it 
is  herein  that  the  Mechanifm  is  marvellous  in  this 
Strufture,  which  makes  that  thefe  two  Mufclcs 
join'd  together  do  draw  much  farther  than  if  it 
had  but  one  -,  for  the  Infledlion  of  the  Cord  of  the 
iirft  Mufcle,  which  caufes  it  to  make  an  Angle 
on  the  Optick  Nerve,  is  made  only  for  this  End ; 
and  a  fingle  Mufcle  with  a  ftrait  Tendon  had 
been  fufficient,   if  it   had  Power  to  draw  far 
enough ;  but  the  Tradation  which  muft  make 
the  Eye-lid  extend  over  the  whole  Cornea  being 
neceffarily  great,  it  could  not  be  done  but  by  a 
veiy  long  Mufcle,  and  fuch  a  Mufcle  not  being 
able  to  be  lodg'd  in  the  Eye  all  its  length,  there 
was  no  better  way  to  fupply  the  Adlion  of  a  long 
Mufcle  than  by  that  of  two  indifferent  ones,  and 
by  bending  one  of  them  to  give  it  the  greater 
Length  in  a  little  Space.  Thus  far  the  Academijis^ 
who  themfelves  refleding  on  the  Length  and  Ob- 
fcurity  of  this  Defcription,  tell  us,  that  the  In- 
fpedlion  of  the  Figure  will  ferve  greatly  to  the 
underftanding  of  it,  which  the  Novelty  of  the 
thing  renders  obfcure  in  itfelf,  and  fo  I  fear  it 
will  be  to  moft  Readers ;  howbeit,in  fuch  a  Work 
as  this  I  ought  not  by  any  means,  as  I  faid  before, 
to  leave  out  fuch  a  notable  Liftance,    wherein 

Contrivance 


Part  II.        Z;^  //$^  Creation.  343 

Contrivance  and  Defign  do  fo  clearly  and  unde- 
niably appear. 

The  fame  Academijls^  as  I  remember,  tell  us, 
that  they  have  found  by  Experience  that  the  aque- 
ous Humour  of  the  Eye  will  not  freeze;  which 
is  very  admirable,  feeing  it  hath  the  Perfpicuity 
and  Fluidity  of  common  Water,  and  hath  not 
been  taken  notice  of,  fo  far  as  I  have  heard,  to 
have  any  eminent  Quality  difcoverable  either  by 
Tafte  or  Smell;  fo  that  it  muft  be  of  fome  fm- 
gukr  and  sethereal  nature,  and  deferves  to  be  ex- 
amined and  annaliz'd  by  the  curious  Naturalifts 
of  our  Times. 

The  Providence  of  Nature  is  wonderful  in  a 
Camel  or  Dromedary^  both  in  the  Strufture  of  his 
Body  and  in  the  Provifion  that  is  made  for  the 
Suftenance  of  it ;  concerning  the  firft  I  fliall  in- 
ftance  only  in  the  Make  of  his  Foot,  the  Sole 
whereof,  as  the  Parijian  Academijis  do  obferve, 
is  flat  and  broad,  being  very  fleflay,  and  cover'd 
only  with  a  thick,  fofr,  and  fomewhat  callous 
Skin,  but  very  fit  and  proper  to  travel  in  fandy 
Places,  fuch  as  are  the  Defarts  of  Africk  and  Afia ; 
we  thought  (fay  they)  that  this  Skin  was  like  a 
living  Sole,  which  wore  not  with  the  Swiftnefs 
and  the  Continuance  of  the  March,  for  which 
this  Animal  is  almoft  indefatigable ;  and  it  may 
be  this  Softnefs  of  the  Foot,  which  yields  and  fits 
itfelf  to  the  Ruggednefs  and  Unevennefs  of  the 
Roads,  does  render  the  Feet  lefs  capable  of  being 
worn  than  if  they  were  more  folid. 

Z  4  ^  As 


344     7^e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  II. 

As  to  the  fecond,  the  Provifion  that  is  made 
for  their  Suftenance  in  their  continu'd  Travels 
over  fandy  Defarts,  the  fame  Academifts  obferve, 
that  at  the  top  of  the  fecond  Ventricle  (for  they 
are  ruminant  Creatures,  and  have  fowre  Stomachs) 
there  vv^ere  feveral  fquare  Holes,  which  were  the 
Orifices  of  about  twenty  Cavities,made  like  Sacks, 
placed  between  the  two  Membranes  which  do 
compofe  the  Subftance  of  this  Ventricle;  the 
View  of  thefe  Sacks  made  us  to  think  that  they 
might  well  be  the  Refer vatories,  where  P/iny  fays 
that  Camels  do  a  long  time  keep  the  V/ater, 
which  they  drink  in  great  abundance  when  they 
meet  with  it,  to  fupply  the  Wants  which  they 
may  have  thereof  in  the  dry  Defarts  wherein  they 
are  us'd  to  travel,  and  where  it  is  faid  that  thofe 
that  do  guide  them  are  fometimes  forced,  by  Ex- 
tremity of  Thirft,  to  open  their  Bellies,  in  which 
they  do  find  Water. 

That  fuch  an  Animal  as  this,  fo  patient  of  long 
Thirft,  {hould  be  bred  in  fuch  droughty  and 
parched  Countries,  where  it  is  of  fuch  eminent 
Ufe  for  travelling  over  thofe  dry  and  fandy  De- 
farts, where  no  Water  is  to  be  had  fometimes  in 
two  or  three  Days  Journey,  no  candid  and  con- 
fiderate  Perfon  but  muft  needs  acknowledge  to 
be  an  Effeft  of  Providence  and  Defign. 

Such  Animals  as  feed  naturally  upon  Flefli, 
both  Quadrupeds  and  Birds,  becaufe  fuch  kind  of 

Food 


Part  II.        ^';^ /;&^  Creation.  345 

Food  is  high  and  rank,  do  qualify  it,  the  one  by 
Iwallowing  the  Hair  or  Fur  of  the  Beafts  they 
prey  upon,  the  other  by  devouring  fome  part  of 
the  Feathers  of  the  Birds  they  gorge  themfelves 
with,  not  eledtively,  but  becaufe  they  cannot  or 
will  not  take  the  Pains  fully  to  plume  them ;  and 
therefore  the  F arifian  Academijis  do  rationally  re- 
fer the  Death  of  one  of  the  Lions  whom  they  dif- 
fed^ed,  to  the  feeding  of  him  with  too  fucculent 
and  delicate  Meat ;  for  (fay  they)  we  know  that 
fome  time  before  his  Death  he  was  feveral  Months 
without  going  out  of  his  Den,  and  that  it  was 
hard  to  make  him  eat ;  that  for  this  reafon  fome 
Remedies  were  prefcrib'd  to  him,   and  among 
others  the  eating  only  the  Flefh  of  young  Ani- 
mals,and  thofe  alive ;  and  that  thofe  which  look'd 
to  the  Beafts  of  the  Park  of  Vicennes^  to  make  this 
Food  more  delicate,  did  ufe  a  Method  very  extra- 
ordinary i  which  was,  they  flead  Lambs  alive,  and 
thus  made  him  eat  feveral ;  which  at  the  firft  re- 
vived him,  creating  in  him  an  Appetite,  and  ma- 
king him  brifk  ;  but  it  is  probable  that  this  Food 
engender'd  ^too  much  Blood,  and  which  was  too 
fubtile  for  an  Animal  to  whom  Nature  had  not 
given  the  Induftry  of  flcaing  thofe  which  he  eat ; 
it  being  credible  that  the  Hair,  Wool,  Feathers, 
and  Scales,  which  all  Animals  of  Prey  do  fvval- 
low,  are  a  feafonable  and  neceifary  Corrective, 
to  prevent  their  G reed inefs  from  filling  them- 
felves with  too  fucculent  a  Food. 

Tho'  I  have  declared  in  the  beginning  of  this 
Work   that    the    Means   whereby  cartilaginous 

Fifties 


346     He  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  II. 

Fifties  raife  and  link  phemfclves  in  the  Water,  and 
reft  and  abide  in  what  Depth  they  pleafe,  is  not 
yet  certainly  known,  yet  I  fliall  propound  a  Con- 
jefture  concerning  it,  which  was  firft  fuggefted  to 
me  by  Mr.  Peter  Dent,  late  Phyfician  in  Cam- 
bridge^ viz.  that  it  is  by  the  help  of  Water  which 
they  take  in  and  let  out  by  two  Holes  in  the  low- 
er Part  of  their  Abdomen  or  Belly,  near  the  Vent, 
or  not  far  off  it ;  the  Fleih  of  this  Sort  of  Fifti 
being  lax  and  fpongy,  and  nothing  fo  firm,  folid 
and  weighty  as  that  of  the  honey  Filhes,  and  there 
being  a  good  Quantity  of  Air  contain'd  in  the 
Cavity  of  their  Abdomen,  they  cannot  fink  in  the 
Water  without  letting  in  fome  of  it  by  thefe  Holes 
(the  Orifices  whereof  are  opened  and  fliut  at  plea- 
fure  by  the  help  of  Mufcles  provided  for  that 
purpofe)  into  the  hollow  of  their  Bellies,  whereby 
they  preponderate  the  Water,  and  defcend  j  and 
when  they  would  afcend,    by  a  Compreflion 
wrought  by  the  Mufcles  of  the  Abdomen,  they 
force  out  the  Water  again,  or  at  leaft  fo  much  of 
it  as  may  fuffice  to  give  that  degree  of  Levity 
they  need  or  defire ;  if  it  be  found  by  Experience 
that  the  Bodies  of  thefe  Fifties  without  this  Bal- 
laft  would  naturally  float  in  the  Water,  and  that 
they  do  really  admit  Water  into  their  Bellies,  then 
this  Conjedure  may  have  fome  Probability  or 
Truth  in  it,  otherwife  not. 

Upon  the  Contemplation  and  Confideration  of 
thofe  various  Ways  and  Contrivances  which  Na- 
ture (I  mean  the  divine  Wifdom)  hath  made  ufe 

of 


Part  II.        in  the  Cke at  loi^.  347 

of  for  preparing  the  Chyle,  feparating  the  nutri- 
cious  Juice  from  the  groffer  Parts  of  the  Aliment, 
and  the  feveral  Humours  and  Spirits  from  the 
Blood,  I  cannot  but  admire  her  great  Wifdom, 
Art,  and  Curiofity ;  for  fhe  hath  not  only  em- 
ployed all  thofe  Methods  and  Devices  which  Chy- 
miils  have  either  learn'd  by  Imitation  of  her,  or 
invented  of  themfelves,  for  annalizing  of  Bodies, 
feparating  their  Parts,  the  pure  from  the  impure, 
and  extracting  their  Spirits,  &c.  as  Maceration  in 
the  firft  Stomach  or  Paunch  of  ruminating  Crea- 
tures, and  in  the  Craws  of  Birds;  Comminution^ 
by  grinding  in  the  Mouths  of  viviparous  Quadru- 
peds, and  in  the  Gizzards  of  Poultry;  Fermenta- 
tion in  the  Stomachs  of  moft  terreftrial,  and  all 
aquatick  Animals;   Expre/jion  and  fqueezing  in 
the  Omafus.oi  ruminant  Quadrupeds,  and  in  the 
Inteftines  of  all  Creatures,  by  the  motion  of  the 
Midriff  and  other  Mufcles  of  the  Belly,  forcing 
the  Chyle  out  of  the  Fceces  or  Excrements  into 
the  ladteal  Veins ;  Straining  or  Percolation  by  all 
the  Vifcera  of  the  Body,  which  are  but  as  fo  ma- 
ny Colanders  to  feparate  feveral  Juices  from  the 
Blood;    and  laftly,  Digeftion  and  Circulation  in 
the  fpermatick  Parts  and  Veflels,  and  perhaps  alfo 
in  the  Brain ;  I  fay,  it  hath  not  only  made  ufe  of 
thefe  Operations,  but  it  hath  quite  out-done  the 
Chymifts,  effedling  that  by  a  gentle  Heat  which 
they  cannot  perform  without  great  Strefs  of  Fire  ; 
as  for  inftance,  in  the  Stomach  of  a  Dog,   prepa- 
ring a  Liquor  that  diffolves  Bones;  and  in  the 
Bodies  of  fome  Infeds,  a  Liquor  which  i^^iris  to 

be 


348     "The  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  H. 

be  as  highly  acid  and  corrofive  as  Oil  of  Vitriol  or 
Spirit  of  Nitre,  *viz.  that  which  is  inftill'd  into 
the  Blood  when  they  fling  >  it  is  an  Experiment 
I  have  met  with  in  fome  Books,  and  made  myfelf, 
that  if  you  put  Blue-bottles,  or  other  blue  Flowers 
into  an  Ant-hill,  they  will  prefently  be  ftain'd 
with  red ;  the  reafon  (which  thefe  Authors  render 
not)  is,  becaufe  the  Ants  thruft  in  their  Stings  in- 
to the  Flowers,  and  inftil  into  or  drop  upon  them 
a  fmall  Mite  of  their  flinging  Liquor,  which  hath 
the  fame  Effed:  that  Oil  of  Vitriol  would  have  in 
changing  their  Colour,  which  is  a  fign  that  both 
Liquors  are  of  the  fame  nature. 

Cafper  Bartholine  hath  obferv'd,  that  where  the 
Gullet  perforates  the  Midriff,  the  carneous  Fibres 
of  that  mufcular  Part  are  infleded  and  arcuate, 
as  it  were  a  SphinBe?"  embracing  and  clofing  it 
fafl,  by  a  great  Providence  of  Nature,  lefl  in  the 
perpetual  Motion  of  the  Diaphragm  the  upper 
Orifice  of  the  Stomach  fhould  gape,  and  cafl  out 
the  Victuals  as  fafl  as  it  received  it;  and  Peyena 
thinks  he  hath  obferv'd,  that  in  ruminating  Crea- 
tures the  Connection  of  the  Gullet  with  the  Dia- 
phragm is  far  flraiter  and  flronger  than  in  Man 
and  other  Animals,  to  the  end  that  there  fhould 
not  be  more  than  one  Morfel  forced  out  at  once ; 
for  that  external  Sphincfter  inhibits  a  too  great 
Dilatation  of  the  Gullet,  and  doth  as  it  were  mea- 
fure  out  the  Morfels,  and  fit  them  to.  the  Capa- 
city of  the  Oefopbagia, 

I  fhaU 


Part  II.       in  /^^  C  r  e  a  t  i  o  n.  3  4.9 

I  (hall  conclude  with  a  notable  Relation  of 
Gakfi's,  Lib,  6.  de  locis  effeBis^  cap.  6.  concerning 
a  Kid  taken  by  him  alive  out  of  the  Dam's  Belly, 
and  houriflVd  and  brought  up. 


c)KovoiJi.ict?^  lu^av  'm'n  'f^ovoAov  to  "ifji.Cfvov  AmKvcn  ^dv  i^i  ^'- 

^  Ki'nV  bin   T«T«    XJUffd/l/^OV    Ivi    r    ^aoi'^v   T  *OK^^V^    ^  T 

OTt^T??,  iva^yai  h^avm  omf  'I'tt'ttok^.tK  V^H  ^tV«^  (^«dyy 
et-f)' tfkKToi .  JLcu  ToiyuM  }y  dvidfi'^dfivip  haeivc  fo  iei^(QV  eiefb' 
/j^  71   ns^ff(pi^fj^ov    v^e^v   «   7B    j^i'Art/woj/oi',    d}^a   y^   rtM* 

ciMfMmfMiV  'ewra  fMhttK^i  dKfi[j.Qva4  ^'^vav  7^  xj  ^i/T&Tr,   <y/ 


350      T/}e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  II. 

T  ^  ?  l^y^^^f  «t'C'  ^^^^i'  %Jia-f^'7av,  'AAA a  tht^  f^  'i<mi 
fjuiL^V   C4LHV9  3  (Aycc.   To,  rjj^  ^v>^a.  ty  TiAx  {.cccKcLKvi  aK^ifAOvas 

ftihiv  ^AozL^oi  myjii  a.yiC(i»<7ttv  AK'TrKccyviTtf  ^  r  r  ^coav 
Jhveiiu/iffi'  (iiya.  fjS^  3^  M  ;^  TO  irmliio^v  J^d  re  th  fo^T©-  j^  <r^ 
ccPivTwy  (u^<rpifi^az  r  Ccftyc/VjV'   cfcA\*  on  to  Kg^TttTro^y  «V  -5^  >a- 

^(UjyLA<nov  gj).  Tlct^^^oi  3  '^»•o^^o«  Ttt  rotaxtTtt.  i^i  ^vaias  if^j 
(zoycL  Tct  ^syet  StAfwtT*  ^cw^^ovTii.     That  Is  to  fay. 

Nature  forming,  fa/hiom?2gy  and  perfecting  the 
Parts  of  the  Body,  hath  fo  brought  it  to  pafs,  that 
they  (hould  of  themfehes,  without  any  teaching,  fet 
about  and  perform  their  proper  ABiom ;  and  of  this 
I  once  made  a  great  Experiment,  bringing  up  a  Kid 
without  ever  feeing  its  Dam  ;  for  diffeEling  fome 
Goats  great  with  Toung,  to  refohe  fome  ^ejiions 
made  by  Anatomifis  concerning  the  0 economy  ofNa-^ 
ture  in  the  Formation  of  the  Foetus  in  the  Womb, 
and  finding  a  brisk  Embryon  \young  one]  J  loosed 
it  from  the  Matrix  after  our  ufual  manner,  and 
fhatching  it  away  before  itfaw  its  Dam,  I  brought 
it  into  a  certain  Room,  having  many  Veffels  full, 
fome  of  Wine,  fome  of  Oil,  fo??ie  of  Honey,  fome  of 
Milk,  or  fome  other  Liquor ,  and  others,  not  afeWy 
filtd  with  all  Sorts  of  Grain,  as  alfo  with  feveral 
Fruits^  and  there  laid  it.     T'his  Embryon  we  faw 


Part  11.       in  the  Great  lo^.  351 

Jirji  ^f  all  getting  up  on  its  Feet  and  walkings  as  if 
it  had  heard  that  its  Legs  were  given  it  for  that 
furpofcy  next  Jhaking  off  the  Slime  it  was  befmeard 
with  from  the  Womb-,    and   moreover^    thirdly^ 
fcratching  its  Side  with  one  of  its  Feet ;  then  we 
faw  itfmelling  to  every  one  ofthofe  things  that  were 
Jet  in  the  Room ;  and  when  it  had  [melt  to  them  ally 
it  fupfd  up  the  Milk  j  whereupon  we  all  for  Ad- 
miration cry*d  outy  feeing  clearly  the  Truth  of  what 
Hippocrates  7^/7/6,  that  the  Natures  and  ABiom 
of  Animals  are  not  taught  (but  by  InJlinB.)  Here- 
upon I  nourifjd  and  reard  this  Kidy  and  obfervd 
it  afterwards  not  only  to  eat  Milky  but  fome  other 
things  that  flood  by  it.     And  the  I'ime  when  this 
Kid  was  taken  out  of  the  Womb  being  about  the 
Vernal  Equinox ,    after  fome  two  Months ,  were 
brought  into  it  the  tender  Sprouts  of  Shrubs  and 
PlantSy  and  it  again  fmelling  of  all  of  them y  inflant- 
ly  refusd  fomey  but  was  pleas' d  to  tajle  others -,  and 
after  it  had  tajledy  began  to  eat  of  fuch  as  are  the 
ufual  Food  of  Goats,     Fer chance  this  may  feem  a 
fmall  things  but  what  I  ft: all  now  relate  is  great  \ 
for  eating  the  heaves  and  tender  Sprout Sy  it  jwaU 
low'd  them  downy  and  then  a  while  after  it  began 
to  chew  the  Cud,  which  all  that  faw  cryd  out  again 
with  Admirationy  being  aftoniftdd  at  the  InftinBs 
and  natural  Faculties  of  Animals ;  for  it  was  a. 
great  thing  that  when  the  Creature  was  hungry  it 
ftoould  take  in  the  Food  by  the  Mouthy  and  chew  it 
with  its  Teeth ,  but  that  it ftould  brijigup  again  in- 
"  to  the  Mouth  that  which  it  had  fwallow  d  down  in- 
2  to 


352     T/)eWisDOM  of  GOD     Partll. 

to  itsfirji  Stomachy  and  chewing  if  there  a  long  time> 
it  JJoould  grind  aftd Jinooth  /V,  afterwards  fwallow  it 
again^  not  into  the  fame  Stomachy  but  i^ito  another ^ 
feenid  to  us  wonderful  indeed.  But  many  negledi 
fuch  Works  of  NaturCy  admiri?2g  only  flrange  and 
unufual  Sights.     So  far  Gaht. 

This  pleafant  and  admirable  Story,  fhould 
one  confider  all  the  Particulars  of  it,  and  en- 
deavour to  give  an  Account  of  them,  as  alfo 
all  the  Inferences  that  might  be  drawn  from 
it,  one  might  fill- a  w^hole  Volume  with  Com- 
ments upon  it.  All  that  I  fhall  at  prefent  fay 
is  this.  That  in  all  this  Oeconomy,  and  thefe 
Aftions,  Council  and  Defign  doth  fo  clearly 
appear,  that  he  muft  needs  be  very  ftupid  that 
doth  not  difcern  it,  or  impudent  that  can  de- 
ny it.  I  might  add,  that  there  feems  to  be 
fomething  more  than  can  be  performed  by 
mere  Mechanifm  in  the  Election  this  Creature 
made  of  its  Food;  for  before  it  would  eat  of 
any,  it  fmell'd  to  all  the  Liquors  before  it,  and 
when  it  had  done  fo,  betook  itfelf  to  the 
Milk,  and  devoured  that;  he  doth  not  fay  that 
the  Milk  was  the  laft  Liquor  it  fmeird  to,  or 
that  when  it  had  once  fmell'd  to  that,  it  pre- 
fently  drank  it  up.     The  like  alfo  he  faith  of 

all 


Part  IT.       f;^  //5^  C  R  E  A  T I  o  K.  353 

all  the  Sprouts  and  Branches  of  Plants  that  were 
laid  before  it.  By  the  by  we  may  take  notice  of 
one  thing  very  remarkable,  that  this  Kid  of  its 
own  accord  drank  Milk  after  the  manner  it  had 
done  in  the  Womb;  whereas  had  it  once  drawn 
by  the  Nipple,  it  would  hardly  have  fupp'd  the 
Milk;  and  therefore  in  weaning  young  Creatures 
the  beft  way  is  never  to  let  them  fuck  the  Paps  at 
al>,  for  then  they  will  drink  up  Milk  without  any 
difficulty ;  whereas  if  they  have  fuck'd,  fome  will 
very  hardly,  others  by  no  means  be  brought  to 
drink :  But  how  do  the  Young  with  fuch  Facili- 
ty come  to  take  the  Nipple,  and  to  fuck  at  it, 
which  they  had  never  before  us'd  to  do  ?  Here 
we  muft  have  recourfe  to  natural  Inftind:,  and 
the  Diredion  of  fome  fuperior  Caufe. 

Notice  hath  been  already  taken  in  an  Obferva- 
tion  communicated  by  my  learned  Friend  Dr. 
Tancred  Robin/on^  of  the  Providence  of  Nature  in 
fo  forming  the  Membranes  of  the  Body  as  to  be 
capable  of  a  prodigious  Dilatation  and  Extenfion, 
which  is  of  great  Ufe  in  fome  Difeafes ;  for  Ex- 
ample, the  Dropfy,  to  continue  Life  for  fome 
time  till  Remedy  may  be  had ;  and  if  not,  to  give 
time  to  prepare  for  Death:  But  the  Wifdom  and 
Delign  of  this  Texture  doth  in  no  Inftance  more 
clearly  appear,  than  in  the  neceflity  of  it  for  the 
Womb  in  the  time  of  Geftation ;  for  were  not  the 
Womb  in  Women,  which  during  Virginity  is  not 
bigger  than  a  fmall  Purfe,  almoft  infinitely  dila- 
table, and  alfo  the  Ferttomum^  not  to  mention 

A  a  the 


354     7^^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  11. 

the  Skin  and  the  Cuticula^  how  were  it  poffible  it 
ihould  contain  the  Child,  nay,  fometimes  Twins, 
with  all  their  Appurtenances,  the  Secundines,  the 
Placenta^  the  Liquor  or  Waters,  and  what  elfe  is 
neceflary  for  the  Defence,  Nutrition,  Refpiration, 
and  foft  and  convenient  lodging  of  them,  till  they 
come  to  their  due  Perfedion  and  Maturity  for 
Exclufion  ?  How  could  the  Child  have  room  to 
grow  there  to  his  Bignefs,  and  flir  and  turn  him- 
felf,  as  is  requifite  ?  Add  hereto  another  Obferva- 
tion  of  Blafiiis^y  particularly  relating  to  this  Sub- 
jed ;  he  hath  obferv'd  that  the  Veffels  of  the  in-» 
terior  glandulous  Subftance  of  the  Womb  are 
ftrangely  contorted  and  ^refledled  with  Turnings 
and  Meanders,  that  they  might  not  be  too  much 
ftrain'd,  but  their  Folds  being  extended  and  abo^ 
liih'd,  they  might  accommodate  themfelves  with- 
out danger  of  Rupture  to  the  neceiTary  Extenfion 
of  the  uterine  Subftance  at  that  time. 

Another  remarkable  Proof  of  Counfel  and  De- 
lign  may  be  fetched  from  the  Formation  of  the 
Veins  and  Arteries  near  the  Heart,  which  I  meet 
with  in  Dr.  Lowers  Treatife,  de  Corde.  Juft  before 
the  entrance  of  the  Right  Auricle  of  the  Heart 
(faith  he)  to  wit,  where  the  afcending  Trunk  of 
the  Ve?ia  Cava  meeting  with  the  defcending,  is 
ready  to  empty  itfelf  into  the  faid  Right  Auricle, 
there  occurs  in  it  a  very  remarkable  Knob  or 
Bunch  [T'uberculum']  rais'd  up  from  the  fubjacent 
Fat,  by  the  Interpofition  whereof  the  Blood  fal- 
ling down  by  the  defcending  Vein  is  diverted  in 

the 


Part  II.       i7i  the  Creation.  355 

the  Auricle,  which  otherwife  encouiitring  and 
bearing  upon  that  of  the  afcendcnt  Trunk,  would 
very  much  hinder  and  retard  the  motion  of  it 
upward  towards  the  Heart ;  and  becaufe  in  an 
ere6l  Site  and  Figure  of  the  Body  there  is  a  grea- 
ter and  more  imminent  danger  of  fuch  an  Acci- 
dent, therefore  the  Vena  Cava  in  Mankind  hath 
this  Tubercle  far  greater  and  of  more  extent  than 
it  is  in  Brutes ;  fo  that  if  you  thruft  your  Finger 
into  either  Trunk,  you  can  hardly  fihd  Paffage  or 
Admittance  into  the  other. 

But  in  Quadrupeds,  as  in  Sheepy  DogSy  Horfe, 
Kine^  in  which  the  Courfe  of  the  Blood  from  ei- 
ther Extreme  of  the  Body  is  more  equal,  and  as 
it  were  in  a  plainer  Level ;  and  becaufe  the  Heart 
by  rcafon  of  its  Bulk  and  Weight  hanging  down- 
wards, both  Trunks  of  the  Vena  Cava  have  fome 
little  Declivity  towards  it,  there  is  no  need  of  fo 
great  a  Bar  and  Diverfion  in  them,  yet  are  they 
not  altogether  devoid  of  it. 

Moreover,  left  the  Blood  here  in  its  Conflux 
fhould  make  a  kind  of  Flood  and  Whirlpool, 
whilft  the  Auricle  being  contracted  doth  not  give 
it  free  Ingrefs,  therefore  in  this  place  the  Vena 
Cava  in  great  Animals,  as  well  Man  as  Quadru- 
peds, is  round  about  mufculous,  as  well  that  it 
may  be  reftrain'd  and  kept  within  its  due  Limits 
of  Extenfion,  as  that  it  may  more  vigoroufly  and 
ftrongly  urge  and  impel  the  Blood  into  the  Cavi- 
ty of  the  Auricle.    ^ 

A  a  2  Befides, 


356  neWisDouof  GOD  PartlL 
Befides,  there  is  no  lefs  Providence  and  Cau- 
tion us'd  that  the  Blood,  when  it  is  forcibly  caft 
out  of  the  Left  Ventricle  of  the  Heart,  be  not  un- 
equally diftributed  to  the  fuperior  and  inferior 
Parts  j  for  whereas  this  Gate  or  Orifice  of  the 
Heart  opens  right  upwards,  if  that  Channel  which 
receives  the  firft  Impulfe  of  the  Blood  did  lead  in 
a  ftrait  Line  up  to  the  Region  of  the  Head,  it 
could  not  be  but  that  it  muft  be  pour'd  too  fwift- 
ly  upon  the  Brain,  and  fo  the  inferior  Parts  of  the 
Body  muft  needs  be  defrauded  of  their  vital  Li- 
quor and  Aliment ;  which  Inconvenience,  that  the 
.divine  Architedt  of  the  Body  might  wholly  ob- 
viate and  avoid  in  Animals,  whofe  Hearts  are 
more  ftrongly  mov'd,  he  fo  artificially  contrived 
the  Trunk  of  the  Aortay  which  is  next  the  Heart, 
that  the  Blood  runs  not  diredly  into  the  axillary 
and  carotid  Arteries,  but  doth  as  it  were  fetch  a 
Compafs  y  for  in  the  middle  Space  between  the 
Ventricle  and  thofe  Arteries  it  is  very  much  in- 
flefted  or  bent  -,  whence  it  comes  to  pafs  that 
that  crooked  Angle  fuftains  the  Force  and  firft 
Stroke  of  the  ejefted  Blood,  and  diredls  the  great- 
eft  Torrent  of  it  towards  the  defcending  Trunk 
of  the  Aorta,  which  otherwife  would  rufti  too 
forcibly  into  the  fuperior  Branches  thereof,  di- 
ftending  them  immoderately,  and  foon  opprefs 
and  burden  the  Head.     So  far  Dr.  Lowther. 

To  elude  or  evade  the  Force  of  all  thefc  Inftan- 
ces,  and  innumerable  others  which  might  be  pro- 
duced, to  demonftrate  that  the  Bodies  of  Men  and 
z  all 


Part  IL      in  the  Creation.  357 

all  other  Animals  were  the  EfFedls  of  the  Wifdom 
and  Power  of  an  intelligent  and  almighty  Agent, 
and  the  feveral  Parts  and  Members  of  them  de- 
fign'd  to  the  Ufes  to  which  now  they  ferve,  the 
Atheift  hath  one  Subterfuge,  in  which  he  moft 
confides,  17/2;.  that  all  thefe  Ufes  of  Parts  are  no 
more  than  what  is  neceffary  to  the  very  Exiftence 
of  the  Things  to  whom  they  belong,  and  what 
Tilings  made  Ufes,  and  not  Ufes  Things. 

Nil  ideo  natum  eft  in  corpore  ut  uti 


Pojfemus,  fed  quod  natum  eji  id  procreat  ufum, 

Saith  Lucretius^  Lib.  4. 

And  having  inftanc'd  in  feveral  Members,  he 
concludes, 

—  Omnia  denique  membra 
Antefuere^  ut  opinor^  eorum  quamfuit  ufus, 

I  fhall  give  you  their  Senfe,  together  with  the 
Confutation  of  it,  in  Dr.  Bentleys  Words,  bor- 
row'd  out  of  his  fifth  Ledlure,  &c, 

Thefe  things  (fay  *  they)  are  mi-  *  rh  Atheijis. 
ftaken  for  Tokens  of  Skill  and  Con- 
trivance, whereas  they  are  but  neceffary  Confe- 
quences  of  the  prefenc  Exiftence  of  thofe  Crea- 
tures to  which  they  belong ;  for  he  that  fuppofeth 
any  Animals  to  fubfift,  doth  by  that  very  Suppo- 
fition  allow  them  every  Member  and  Faculty  that 
are  neceffary  to  Subfiftence;  and  therefore  uulefs 

A  a  3  we 


358      T6e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  11. 

we  can  prove  a  priori,  and  independent  on  this 
Ufefulnefs,  now  that  Things  are  once  fuppos'd 
to  have  exifted  and  propagated,  that  among  al~ 
moft  infinite  Trials  and  Effays  at  the  beginning 
of  Things,  among  Millions  of  monftrous  Shapes 
and  imperfeft  Formations,  a  few  fuch  Animals 
as  now  exift  could  not  pofjibly  be  produc'd,  thefe 
after-Confiderations  are  of  very  little  moment ; 
becaufe  if  fuch  Animals  could  in  that  way  pojfibly 
be  form'd,  as  might  live  and  move,  and  propagate 
their  Beings,  all  this  admir'd  and  applauded  Ufe- 
fulnefs of  their  feveral  Fabricks  is  but  a  neceffary 
Condition  and  Confequence  of  their  Exiftence 
and  Propagation. 

This  is  the  laft  Pretence  and  Sophiftry  of  the 
Atheijh  againft  the  Propofition  in  my  Text  \AEis 
xvii.  27.]  that  we  receiv'd  our  Life  arid  Being 
from  a  divine  Wifdom  and  Power ;  and  as  they 
cannot  juftly  accufe  me  of  concealing  or  baulk- 
ing their  grand  Objection,  f o  I  believe  thefe  fol- 
lowing Confiderations  will  give  them  no  reafon 
to  boaft  that  it  cannot  receive  a  juft  and  fatif- 
fadory  Anfwer, 

(i.)  Firji^  therefore,  we  affirm  that  we  can 
prove,  and  have  done  it  already  by  Arguments 
a  friori  (which  is  the  Challenge  of  the  Atheijls) 
that  thefe  Animals  that  now  eiift  could  not  pof- 
iibly  have  been  form'd  at  firft  by  Millions  of  Tri- 
aJs  j  for  feeing  they  allow  by  their  very  Hypothefis 
(and  without  llaniing  to  that  Courtefy  we  have 

prov'd 


Part  I L        in  the  Cke  ATio^.  3.59 

prov'd  it  before)  that  there  can  be  no  cafual  or 
Spontaneous  motion  of  the  Particles  of  Matter,  it 
will  follow,  that  every  fingle  Monfter,  among 
fb  many  fuppos'd  Myriads,  muft  have  been  me- 
chanically and  necelfarily  form'd,  according  to 
the  known  Laws  of  Motion,  and  the  Tempera- 
ment and  Quality  of  the  Matter  it  was  made  of, 
which  is  fufficient  that  no  fuch  Monfters  were  or 
Gpuld  have  been  form'd ;  for  to  denominate  themr 
even  Monfters  they  muft  have  had  fome  rude  kind 
of  drganical  Bodies,  fome  Stamina  of  Life,  tho' 
never  fo  clumfy,  fome  Syjlem  of  Parts,  compoun- 
ded of  Solids  and  Liquids,  that  executed  (tho'  but 
bunglingly)  their  peculiar  Motions  and  Functions. 
But  we  have  lately  fliewn  it  impoffible  for  Na- 
ture unaflifted  to  conftitute  fuch  Bodies,  whofe 
Strudlure  is  againft  the  Law  of  fpecifick  Gravity ; 
fo  that  flie  could  not  make  the  leaft  Endeavour 
towards  the  producing  of  a  Monfter,  or  of  any 
thing  that  hath  more  vital  and  organ ical  Parts 
than  we  find  in  a  Rock  of  Marble  or  a  Fountain 
of  Water.  And  again,  tho'  we  fhould  not  con- 
tend with  them  about*  their  Monfters  and  Abor- 
tions, yet  feeing  that  they  fuppofe  even  the  per- 
fed:  Animals  that  are  ftill  in  being  to  have  been 
form'd  mechanically  among  the  reft,  and  only 
add  fome  Millions  of  Monfters  to  the  Reckoning, 
they  are  liable  to  all  the  Difficulties  in  the  for- 
mer Explication,  and  are  exprefly  refuted  thro' 
the  whole  preceding  Ser?no?i^  where  it  is  abun- 
.  dantly  fliewn  that  a  fpontaneous  Production  is 
againft  the  CathoUck  Laws  of  Motion,  and  a- 

A  a  4  gainft 


360     Tbe  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  II. 

gainft  Matter  of  Fadt,  a  thing  without  Example, 
not  only  in  Man  and  the  nobler  Animals,  but  in 
the  fmalleft  of  Infefts  and  the  vileft  of  Weeds ; 
tho'  the  Fertility  of  the  Earth  cannot  be  faid  to 
have  been  impaired  fince  the  beginning  of  the 
World. 

(2.)  Secondly,  We  may  obferve  that  this  Eva- 
fion  of  the  Atbeijt  is  fitted  only  to  elude  fuch  Ar- 
guments of' divine  Wifdom  as  are  taken  from 
Things  neceffary  to  the  Confervation  of  the  Ani- 
mal, as  the  Faculties  ofSight,  and  Motion,  and 
Nutrition,  and  the  like,  becaufe  fuch  Ufefulnefs 
is  indeed  included  in  a  general Suppofuion  of  the 
Exlftence  of  that  Animal;  but  it  miferably  fails 
him  againit  other  Reafons,  from  fuch  Members 
and  Powers  of,  the  Body  as  are  not  neceffary  ab- 
folutely  to  living  and  propagating,  but  only  much 
conduce  to  our  better  Subfiftence  and  happier 
Condition.  So  the  moft  obvious  Contemplation 
of  the  Frame  of  our  Bodies,  as  that  we  all  have 
double  Senfories^  two  Eyes^  two  Ears,  two  No- 
firih,  is  an  effectual  Confutation  of  this  atheiflical 
Sophifm;  for  a  double  Organ  , of  thefe  Senfes.  is 
not  at  all  comprehended  in  the  Notion  of  bare 
Exiftence,  one  of  them  being  fufRcient  to  have 
preferv'd  Life  and  continu'd  the  Species,  as  com- 
mon Experience  witneffeth.  Nay,  even  the  very 
Nails  of  our  Fingers  are  an  infallible  Token  of 
Delign  and  Contrivance,  for  they  are  ufeful  and 
convenient,  to  give  Strength  and  Firmnefs  to  thofe 
i'arts  in  the  various  Funftions  they  are  put  to, 

and 


Part  11.         in  the  Cke  AT  ION.  361 

and  to  defend  the  numerous  Nerves  and  Tendons- 
that  are  under  them,  which  have  a  moft  exquifite 
Senfe  of  Pain,  and  without  that  native  Armour 
would  continually  be  expos'd  to  it  j  it  is  manifeft 
therefore  that  there  was  a  Contrivance  and  Fore- 
fight  of  the  Ufefulnefs  of  Nails  antecedent  to 
their  Formation  j  for  the  old  ftale  Pretence  of  the 
Atheijis^  that  Things  were  firft  made  fortuitoufly, 
an(^  afterwards  their  Ufefulnefs  was  obferv'd  or 
difcover'd,  can  have  no  place  here,  ufilefs  Naik 
were  either  abfolutely  requifite  to  the  Exiftence 
of  Mankind,  or  were  found  only  in  fome  Indivi- 
duals or  fome  Nations  of  Men,  and  fo  might  be 
afcrib'd  to  Neceffity  upon  one  Account,  or  to 
Fortune  upon  another.     But  from  the  Atheifls 
Suppofition,  that  among  the  infinite  Diverfity  of 
the  firft  terreftrial  Productions,  thei;e  were  Ani- 
mals of  all  imaginable  Shapes  and  Structures  of 
Body,  all  of  which  furviv'd  and  multiply'd,  that 
by  reafon  of  their  Make  and  Fabrick  could  pofil- 
bly  do  fo.  It  neceflTarily  follows  that  we  fliould 
now  have  fome  Nations  without  Nails  upon  their 
Fingers,  others  with  one  Eye  only,  as  the  Poets 
defcribe  yht  Cyclopes  in  Sicily^  and  the  Arimafpi 
in  Scythia ;  others  with  one  Ear,  or  with  one  No- 
ftri],  or  indeed  without  any  Organ  of  fmelling, 
becaufe  that  Senfe  is  not  neceflary  to  Man's  Sub- 
fiftence  -,  others  deftitute  of  the  Ufe  of  Language, 
feeing  that  Mutes  alfo  may  live.     One  People 
would  have  the  Feet  of  Goats,   as  the  feign'd 
Satyrs  and  Panifci-,  another  would  refemble  the 
liead  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  or  the  horned  Statues 

of 


362    "The  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  II, 

of  Bacchus  \  the  Sciopedes  and  EnotocetcCy  and  other 
monftrous  Nations,  would  be  no  longer  Fables, 
but  real  Inftances  in  Nature;  and  in  a  word,  all 
the  ridiculous  and  extravagant  Shapes  that  can  be 
imagined,  all  the  Fancies  and  Whimfies  of  Poets 
and  Painters,  and  /Egyptian  Idolaters,  if  fo  be 
they  are  confiftent  with  Life  and  Propagation, 
would  be  now  adually  in  Being  if  our  Atbeijh 
Notion  were  true;  which  therefore  may  defer- 
vedly  pafs'  for  a  mere  Dream  and  an  Error,  till 
they  pleafe  to  make  new  Difcoveries  in  the  'terra 
iTicognita^  and  bring  along  with  them  fome  Sava- 
ges of  all  thefe  fabulous  and  monftrous  Configu- 
rations. Thus  far  Dr.  Bentley:  who  adds  four 
Confiderations  more  to  confute  this  Fancy,  ex 
abunda7itt^  granting  the  Atheiji  all  the  abfurd  Sup- 
pofitions  he  «can  make ;  for  which,  tho'  they  be 
very  well  worth  the  reading,  yet  being  too  long 
to  tranfcribe,  I  refer  the  Reader  to  the  Sermon 
itfelf 

I  fliall  now  farther  prove  by  a  notable  Inftance 
that  Ufes  made  Things,  that  is  to  fay,  that  fome 
Things  were  m-ade  defignedly  and  on  purpofe  for 
fuch  an  Ufe  as  they  ferve  to ;  and  that  is,  the 
Tendrels  or  Clafpers  of  Plants,  becaufe  they  are 
given  only  to  fuch  Species  as  have  weak  and  in- 
firm Stalks,  and  cannot  raife  up  to  fupport  them- 
felvesby  their  own  Strength ;  we  fee  not  fo  much 
as  one  Tree,  or  Shrub,  or  Herb,  that  hath  a  firm 
and  ftrong  Stem,  and  that  is  able  to  mount  up 
and  ftand  alone  without  Affiftance,  furnifti'd  with 
them ;  whereas  had  they  been  without  Defigi>  " 

fcatter'd 


Part  II.       in  ^>&^  C  r  e  at  i  o  n.  363 

fcatter'd  (as  I  may  fay)  indifferently  and  carelefly 
among  Plants,  it  could  not  poffibly  have  hap- 
pen'd  but  among  fo  many  thoufand  Species  they 
rauft  have  fallen  to  the  Lot  of  fome  few  at  leaft, 
fome  one  of  the  ftrong,  and  not  only  of  the  v^eak ; 
the  fame  hath  been  prov'd  by  the  Inftance  of  the 
Power  given  to  the  Hedge-hog  and  Armadillo^  of 
contracting  their  Bodies  into  a  globular  Figure, 
and  fo  hiding  and  fecuring  their  tender  and  un- 
armed Parts. 

2.  I  fhall  prove  by  another  eminent  Inftance 
that  Things  did  not  make  Ufes,  becaufe  there  is 
a  Sort  of  Creatures  which  have  all  the  Parts  and 
Organs  which  are  fitted  for  a  certain  Aftion,  and 
employed  for  the  Exercife  of  it  by  another  Sort, 
and  yet  make  no  ufe  of  them  for  that  purpofe  ; 
that  is,  the  Ape-Kind;  the  Parifian  Academijii 
in  their  Anatomy  of  fome  Animals  of  this  Kind 
tell  us,  that  the  Mufcles  of  the  Os  Hyoides^  Tongue, 
Larynx  and  Pharynx,  which  do  moft  ferve  to  ar- 
ticulate a  Word,  were  wholly  like  to  thofe  of 
Man;  and  a  great  deal  more  than  thofe  of  the 
Handy  which  neverthelefs  the  Ape,  which  fpeaks 
not,  ufes  with  as  much  Perfedion  as  a  Man ; 
which  demonftrates  that  Speech  is  an  Adlion  more 
peculiar  to  Man,  and  which  more  diftinguiflies 
him  from  Brutes  than  the  Hands,  which  Anaxa- 
goras,  Arijiotle  and  Galen  have  thought  to  be  the 
Organ  which  Nature  has  given  to  Man  as  to  the 
wifeft  of  all  Animals,  for  want  perhaps  of  this 
Refiedion  j  for  the  Ape  is  found  provided  by  Na- 

tuie 


364     7^^  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  I L 

ture  of  all  thofe  marvellous  Organs  of  Speech 
lyeith  fo  much  Exadnefs,  that  the  very  three  fmall 
Mufcles  which  do  take  their  Rife  from  the  Apo- 
ihefis  Styhides  are  not  wanting,  altho'  this  Apo^ 
tbejts  be  extremely  fmall  -,  this  Particularity  doth 
likewife  fhew  that  there  is  no  reafon  to  think  that 
Agents  do  perform  fuch  and  fuch  Adtions  becaufe 
they  are  found  w^ith  Organs  proper  thereunto; 
for  according  to  thefe  Philofophers  Apes  {hould 
fpeak,  feeing  that  they  have  all  the  Inftruments 
neceffary  for  Speech  5  all  this  is  confirmed  and 
approv'd  by  the  learned  and  accurate  Dr.  T'yfon  in 
his  Anatomy  of  the  Orang-Outrang  or  Pigmy y  he 
finding  in  the  Animal  he  defcrib'd  (which  was  of 
the  Ape-Kind)  the  whole  Strufture  of  the  Larynx 
and  Os  Hyoides  exadly  as  it  is  in  Man ;  and  the 
Refledion  which  the  Pariftans  make  upon  their 
Obfervation  of  thefe  and  the  neighbouring  Parts, 
he  thinks  very  juft  and  valuable ;  and  adds  farther, 
that  this  is  not  the  only  Inftance  which  may  ju- 
ftify  fuch  an  Inference,  tho'  he  thinks  it  fo  ftrong 
an  one  as  the  Atheijis  can  never  anfwer. 

It  is  farther  confiderable ,  and  adds  to '  the 
Weight  of  this  Inftance,  that  tho'  Birds  have  been 
taught  to  imitate  human  Voice,  and  to  pronounce 
Words,  yea,  Sentences;  yet  Quadrupeds  never, 
tho*  they  have  Organs  far  more  fit  for  that  pur- 
pofe,  and  fome  of  them,  viz.  Dogs  and  HorfeSy 
converfe  almoft  perpetually  with  Men;  and  o- 
thers,  as  Apes,  are  given  naturally  to  imitate  Mens 
AtUonpj  as  if  Providence  had  defign'd  purpofely 

to 


Part  II.      in  tbe  Cr-e  ATio^.  365 

to  confute  this  fond  Conceit  of  the  Atheijisy  by 
denying  them  the  Power  to  make  ufe  of  thefe 
Organs  of  Speech,  which,  whether  they  under- 
ftand  what  they  faid  or  not,  they  otherwife  might 
and  would  have  done  in  Imitation  of  Man,  and 
that  to  greater  Perfed:ion  than  Birds  do,  or  are 
capable  of  doing. 

Earther,  To  prove  that  thofe  72ohI.er  Faculties 
of  the  Soul,  Reafon  and  IJnderJianding^  cannot  be 
produced  by  Matter  organiz'd ,  but 
muft  have  a  higher  Principle,  *  he  »  Dr.  T%for. 
thus  argues :  It  is  an  Obfervation  of 
Vefaliuss^  that  the  Brain  of  Man,  in  rcfpedof  his 
Body,  is  much  larger  than  what  is  to  be  met  with 
in  any  other  Animals,  exceeding  in  Bignefs  three 
Oxes  Brains ;  whence  he  infers,  that  as  Animals 
excel  in  the  Largenefs  of  the  Brain,  fo  they  do 
Jikewife  in  the  principal  Faculties  of  the  Soul  ^ 
which  Inference  the  Dodor  cannot  allow. 

It  is  (faith  he)  a  generally  receiv'd  Opinion, 
that  the  Brain  is  the  immediate  Seat  of  the  Soui 
itfelf ;  whence  one  would  be  apt  to  think,  tku 
feeing  there  is  fo  great  a  Difparicy  between  the 
Soul  of  a  Man  and  a  Brute^  the  Organ  in  which 
it  is  plac'd  fhculd  be  very  different  too ;  yet,  by 
comparing  the  Brain  of  our  Pigmy  [the  Orang-^ 
Oiitra?ig,  or  wild  Ma?i\  with  that  of  a  Ma72^  and 
with,  the  greateft  Exad:nefs  obferving  each  Part 
'in  both,  it  was  very  furprizing  to  me  to  find  (o 
great  a  Refemblance  of  the  one  to  the  other,  as 

nothing 


366     T6eWisDOM  of  GOD    Part  11, 

nothing  could  be  more;  and  that  in  proportion 
to  its  Body  its  Brain  was  alfo  as  large  as  a  Man's. 

Since  therefore  (he  proceeds)  the  Brain  of  our 
Pigmy  doth  in  all  Refpeds  fo  exadly  refemble  a 
Man's,  I  might  here  make  the  fame  Reflection 
the  Parijiaiis  did  upon  the  Organs  of  Speech^  that 
there  is  no  reafon  to  think  that  Agents  do  per- 
form fuch  and  fuch  Aftions  becaufe  they  are 
found  with  Organs  proper  thereunto,  for  then  our 
Pigmy  might  be  really  a  Man;  the  Organs  in 
animal  Bodies  are  only  a  regular  Compages  of 
Pipes  and  Veffels  for  the  Fluids  to  pafs  thro',  and 
are  paffive ;  what  adtuates  them  are  the  Humours 
and  Fluids,  and  animal  Life  confifts  in  their  due 
and  regular  Motion  in  this  organical  Body  j  but 
thofe  nobler  Faculties  in  the  Mind  of  Man  muft 
certainly  have  a  higher  Principle,  or  Matter  orga- 
nizd  could  never  produce  them ;  for  why  elfe, 
where  the  Organ  is  the  fame,  fhould  not  the 
^^/(?w  be  the  fame  too? 

Objeft.  Some  may  here  objeB  and  argue :  If  the 
Body  of  Man  be  thus  perfe^,  why  did  God  make 
any  other  Animals '?  For  the  mofi  perfeB  Being,  the 
bejl,  an  infinitely  good  Agent ^  which  wants  neither 
Wifdom  7ior  Power,  pould  (one  would  think)  only 
produce  the  mofi  perfect. 

Anfw,  To  which  I  anfwcr :  i.  That  according 
to  this  Argumentation  one  might  infer,  that  God 
muft  produce  but  one  Kind  of  Creature,  and  that 

the 


Part  II.       in  the  Ckil  AT  10 k.  367 

the  moft  perfed:  that  he  is  able,  which  is  impoi- 
fible  ;  for  he  being  infinite  in  all  Perfedion,  can- 
not adt  ad  extremum  viriuniy  unlefs  he  could  pro- 
duce an  infinite  Creature,  that  is,  another  God, 
which  is  a  Contradidtion ;  but  whatever  he  makes 
muft  want  Degrees  of  infinite  Perfedion,  of  which 
he  could  ftill  (if  he  pleas'd)  add  more  and  more 
to  it. 

2.  The  inferior  Creatures  are  perfed  in  their 
Order  and  Degree,  wanting  no  Quality  or  Per-r 
feftion  that  is  neceflary  or  due  to  their  Nature  and 
Condition,  their  Place,  and  manner  of  living; 
now,  why  God  might  not  make  feveral  fubordi- 
nate  Ranks  and  Degrees  of  Creatures,  they  being 
good,  I  fee  no  reafon. 

3.  Thefe  feveral  Ranks  and  Degrees  of  Crea^ 
tures  are  fubfervient  one  to  another,  and  the  moft 
of  them  ferviceable,  and  all  fome  way  or  other 
ufeful  to  Man  -,  fo  that  he  could  not  well  hava 
been  without  them. 

4.  God  made  thefe  feveral  Orders  and  Degrees, 
and  in  each  Degree  fo  many  Varieties  of  Creatures^ 
for  the  manifeftation  and  difplaying  of  his  infinite 
Power  and  Wifdom ;  for  we  have  {hewn  before 
by  a  familiar  Inftance,  that  there  is  more  Art  and 
Wifdom  fhewn  in  contriving  and  forming  a  Mul- 
titude of  different  Kinds  of  Engines  than  in  on? 
only. 

5.  Yet  do  I  not  think  that  he  made  all  thefe 
Creatures  to  no  other  End  but  to  be  ferviceable 
to  Man,  but  alfo  to  partake  themfelves  of  his 
overflowing  Goodnefs,  and  to  enjoy  their  own 
Beings,     If  we  admit  all  other  Creatures  in  this 

2  ^      inferior 


368     72^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  II. 

inferior  World  befides  Man  to  be  mere  Machines 
or  Automata^  to  have  no  Life,  no  Senfe  nor  Per- 
ception of  any  thing,  then  I  confefs  this  Reafon 
is  out  of  Doors,  for  being  uncapable  of  Pleafure 
or  Pain  they  can  have  no  Enjoyment ;  upon  this 
account  aUb,  among  others,  I  am  lefs  inclinable 
to  that  Opinion. 

I  fhould  now  proceed  to  anfwer  fome  Obje- 
aions  which  might  be  made  againft  the  Wifdom 
and  Goodnefs  of  God  in  the  Contrivance  and  Go- 
vernance of  the  World,  and  all  Creatures  therein 
contain  d;  but  that  is  too  great  and  difficult  a 
Talk  for  my  Weaknefs,  and  would  take  up  more 
Time  than  I  have  at  prefent  to  fpare  were  I  qua- 

*M  Robert  ^^^1  ^  ^^^  ^^'  ^^^  befides  fwell  this 
BurfcQugh  of  Volume  to  too  great  a  Bulk  ;  only  I 
ffotnefs ,  in  {^^11  fay  fomething  to  one  Particular 
•^^^^'^*  which  was  fuggefted  to  me  by  a  learn- 

ed and  pious  ^  Friend. 

Objeft.  A  wife  Agent  a6is  for  Ends.  Now 
'what  End  can  there  be  of  creating  fuch  a  vajl  Mul- 
titude of  Infers  as  the  World  is  JiWd  withy  moji  of 
which  feem  to  be  ujelefsy  and  fome  alfo  noxious  and 
pernicious  to  Man  and  other  Creatures? 

Anfw.  To  this  I  {hall  anfwer:  i.  As  to  the 
Multitude  of  Species  or  Kinds.  2.  As  to  the 
Number  of  Individuals  in  each  Kind. 

Firjly  As  to  the  Multitude  of  Species  (which 
we  muft  needs  acknowledge  to  be  exceed- 
ing  great,   they   being   not  fewer,   perchance 

more 


Part  il.       //^  />6^  C  R  E  A  T I  o N.         369 

more  than  Twenty  Thoufand.)     I  anfvver,  there 
were  lb  many  made, 

1.  To  manifeft  and  difplay  the  Riches  of  the 
Power  and  Wifdom  of  God,  Pfalm  civ.  24.  The 
Earth  is  full  of  thy  Riches,  fo  is  the  great  and  wide 
Seay  wherein  are  Things  creeping  injiumerable,  &c* 
We  fhould  be  apt  to  think  too  meanly  of  thofe 
Attributes  of  our  Creator,  fhould  we  be  able  to 
come  to  an  End  of  all  his  Works,  even  in  this 
fublunary  World ;  and  therefore  I  believe  never 
any  Man  yet  did,  never  any  Man  fhall  fo  long  as 
the  World  endures,  by  his  utmoft  Induftry  attain 
to  the  Knowledge  of  all  the  Species  of  Nature  ; 
hitherto  we  have  been  fo  far  from  it,  that  in  Ve- 
getables the  Number  of  thofe  which  have  been 
difcover'd  this  laft  Age  hath  far  exceeded  that  of 
all  thpfe  which  were  known  before  j  fo  true  is 
that  we  quoted  before  out  of  Seneca:  Fufilla  res 
eji  munduSy  niji  in  eo  quod  qucerat  omnis,  mundus, 
habeat.  The  World  is  fo  richly  furnifh'd  and  pro- 
vided, that  Man  need  not  fear  want  of  Employ- 
ment fhould  he  live  to  the  Age  of  Methujelah,  or 
ten  times  as  long ;  but  of  this,  having  touch'd  it 
already,  I  {hall  add  no  more. 

2.  Another  reafon  why  fo  many  Kinds  of  Crea- 
tures were  made,  might  be  to  exercife  the  con- 
templative Faculty  of  Man,  which  is  in  nothing 
fo  much  pleas'd  as  in  variety  of  Objects ;  we  foon 
grow  weary  of  one  Study,  and  if  all  the  Objects 
of  the  World  could  be  comprehended  by  us,  we 
fhould  with  Alexander  think  the  World  too  little 
for  us,  and  grow  weary  of  running  in  a  Round  of 

B  b  feeing 


370     "The  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  II. 

feeing  the  fame  Things ;  new  Objefts  afford  us 
great  Delight,  efpecially  if  found  out  by  our  own 
Induftry.  I  remember  Clufius  faith  of  himfelf, 
*'  That  upon  the  Difcovery  of  a  new  Plant  he 
"  did  not  lefs  rejoice  than  if  he  had  found  a  rich 
"  Treafure/*  Thus  God  is  pleas'd,  by  referving 
things  to  be  found  out  by  our  Pains  and  Induftry, 
to  provide  us  Employment  moft  delightful  and 
agreeable  to  our  Natures  and  Inclinations. 

3.  Many  of  thefe  Creatures  may  be  ufeful  to  us 
whofe  Ufes  are  not  yet  difcover'd,  but  referv*d  for 
the  Generations  to  come,  as  the  Ufes  of  fome  we 
now  know  are  but  of  late  Invention,  and  were 
unknown  to  our  Forefathers ;  and  this  muft  needs 
be  fo,  becaufe,  as  I  faid  before,  the  World  is  too 
great  for  any  Man  or  Generation  of  Men,  by  his 
or  their  utmoft  Endeavours,  to  difcover  and  find 
out  all  its  Store  and  Furniture,  all  its  Riches  and 
Treafures. 

Secondly^  As  to  the  Multitude  of  Individuals  in 
each  Kind  of  InJeB,     I  anfwer : 

I.  It  is  defign'd  to  fecure  the  Continuance  and 
Perpetuity  oi  the  feveral  Species,  which  if  they 
did  not  multiply  exceedingly,  fcarce  any  of  them 
could  efcape  the  Ravine  of  fo  many  Enemies  as 
continually  aifault  and  prey  upon  them,  but 
would  be  in  danger  to  be  quite  deftray'd  and  lofl: 
out  of  the  World. 

z  2.  This 


Part  IL       in  the  Creation.  37 i 

2.  This  vaft  Multitude  of  Infeds  is  ufeful  to 
Mankind,  if  not  immediately,  yet  mediately.  It 
-Cannot  be  deny'd  tlmt  Birds  are  of  great  tFfe  to 
us,  their  Flefli  affording  us  a  good  Part  of  our 
Food,  and  that  the  molt  delicate  too,  and  their 
other  Parts  Phyfick,  not  excepting  their  very  Ex- 
crements 'y  their  Feathers  ferve  to  iluff  our  Beds 
and  Pillows,  yielding  us  foft  and  warm  Lodging, 
which  is  no  fmall  Convenience  and  Comfort  to 
us,efpeGlally  in  thefe  northern  Parts  of  the  World ; 
fome  of  them  have  alfo  been  always  employed  by 
military  Men  in  Plumes,  to  adorn  their  Crefts,  and 
render  them  formidable  to  their  Enemies ;  their 
Wings  and  Quills  are  made  ufe  of  for  writing- 
Pens,  and  to  bru{h  and  cleanfe  our  Rooms,  and 
their  Furniture ;  befides,  by  their  melodious  Ac- 
cents they  gratify  our  Ears ;  by  their  beautiful 
Shapes  and  Colours  they  delight  our  Eyes,  being 
very  ornamental  to  the  World,  and  rehdring  the 
Countpy,  where  the  Hedges  and  Woods  are  full 
of  thenhf,  very  pleafant  and  chearly,  which  with- 
out them  would  be  no  lefs  lonely  and  melancho- 
ly J  not  to  mention  the  Exercife,  Diveriion  and 
Recreation  v^^hich  fome  of  them  give  us. 

Now  Infedsfupply  Land  Birds  with  the  chiefeft 
Part  of  their  Suftenance ;  fome,  as  the  entire  Genu^ 
of  Swallows,  live  wholly  upon  them,  as  I  could 
eafily  make  out  did  any  Man  deny  or  doubt  of  it ; 
and  not  Swallows  alone,  but  alfo  Wood-peckers,  if 
riot  wholly,  yet  chiefly  5  and  all  other  Sorts  of 
Birds  partly,  efpecially  in  Winter-time,  as  appears 
by  diffedtine  their  Stomachs. 

"  B  b  2  As 


372       iTjeWisDouof  GOD   Part  IL 

As  for  young  Birds  which  are  brought  up  in 
the  Neft  by  the  old,  they  are  fed  chiefly  if  not 
folely  by  Infeds ;  and  therefore  for  the  time  when 
Birds  for  the  moft  part  breed,  in  the  Spring,  when 
there  are  Multitudes  of  Caterpillars  to  be  found 
on  all  Trees  and  Hedges  -,  moreover,  it  is  very  re- 
markable, that  of  many  fuch  Birds  as  when  grown 
up  feed  almoft  wholly  upon  Grain,  the  young 
ones  are  nourifh'd  by  Infefts ;  for  example,  Phea- 
fants  and  Partridges^  which  are  well  known  to  be 
granivorous  Birds,  the  Young  live  only  or  moftly 
upon  Ants  Eggs.  Now  Birds,  being  of  a  hot  Na- 
ture, are  very  voracious  Creatures,  and  eat  abun- 
dantly, and  therefore  there  had  need  be  an  infi- 
nite Number  of  Infedls  produc'd  for  their  Sufte- 
nance,.  Neither  do  Birds  alone,  but  many  Sorts 
ofFifhes,  feed  upon  Infcds,  as  is  well  known  to 
Anglers,  who  bait  their  Hooks  with  them  -,  nay, 
which  is  more  ftrange,  divers  Quadrupeds  feed 
upon  Infeds,  and  fome  live  wholly  upon  them, 
as  two  Sorts  of  "Tamundiius  upon  Ants,  which 
therefore  are  call'd  in  EngliJId  Ant-Bears ;  the  Cn- 
melion  upon  Flies  -,  the  Mole  upon  Earth-worms; 
the  Badger  alfo  lives  chiefly  upon  Beetles,  Worms, 
and  other  Infeds. 

Here  we  may  take  notice  by  the  way,  that  be- 
caufe  fo  many  Creatures  live  upon  Ants  and  their 
Eggs,  Providence  hath  fo  ordered  it,  that  they 
fliould  be  the  mofl:  numerous  of  any  Tribe  of  In- 
iefts  that  we  know. 

Confor- 


Part  II.       in  /^^  C  r  e  a  t  i  o n.  373 

Conformable  to  this  Particular  is  the  Reafon 
my  ingenious  and  inquifitive  Friend  Mr.  Derbmn^ 
before  remember'd,  hath  given  of  the  Produdlion 
of  fuch  innumerable  Multitudes  of  fome  aquatick 
Infed:s. 

I  have  often  thought  (faith  he)  that  there  v^as 
fome  more  than  ordinary  Ufe  in  the  Creation  for 
fuch  Infeds  as  are  vaftly  numerous,  fuch  as  the 
Pulices  aquaticiy  which  are  in  fuch  Swarms  as  to 
difcolour  the  Waters,and  many  others ;  and  there- 
fore I  have  bent  my  Enquiries  to  find  out  the 
Ufes  of  fuch  Creatures,  wherein  I  have  fo  far  fuc- 
ceeded,  as  to  difcover,  that  thofe  vaftly  fmall  Ajti- 
malcula^  not  to  be  feen  without  a  Microfcope, 
with  which  the  Waters  are  replete,  fcrve  for  Food 
to  fome  others  of  the  fmall  Infedts  of  the  Water, 
particularly  to  the  Nympha  Culicaria  [Hirjuta  it 
may  be  call'd]  figur'd  in  S'wammerdam  5  for  view- 
ing that  Nympha  one  Day,  to  obferve  the  motion 
of  its  Mouth,  and  for  what  purpofe  it  is  in  fuch 
continual  motion,  whether  as  Fifh  to  get  Air,  or 
to  fuck  in  Food,  or  both,  I  could  plainly  perceive 
the  Creature  to  fuck  in  many  of  the  moft  minute 
Animalculay  that  were  fwimming  brifkly  about  in 
the  Water  5  neither  yet  do  thefe  Animalcules  ferve 
only  for  Food  to  fuch  Nymphce,  but  alfo  to  ano- 
ther, to  me  anonymous  Infed  of  the  Waters,  of 
a  dark  Colour,  cleft  as  it  were  in  funder,  and  fcarce 
fo  big  as  the  fmalleft  Pin's  Head ;  thefe  Inieds 
hunt  thefe  AnunalcideSy  and  other  fmall  Creatures 
that  occur  in  the  Water,  and  devour  them  ;  and 
I  am  apt  to  think,  altho'  I  have  not  yet  feen  it, 

B  b  3  that 


374     T6e  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  II. 

that  the  Pulex  aquaticus  arborefcens  liveth  upon 
thefe,  or  more  minute  and  tender  AnimalculeSy 
and  that  it  is  to  catch  them  that  it  fo  leaps  in  the 
Water. 

This  to  me  feems  a  wonderful  Work  of  God, 
to  provide  for  the  minuteft  Creatures  of  the  Wa- 
ters Food  proper  for  them,  that  is,  minute  and 
tender,  and  fit  for  their  Organs  of  fwallowing. 

As  for  noxious  Infeds,  why  there  j(hquld  be  fo 
many  of  them  produc'd,  if  it  be  demaj^ded, 

I  anfwer,  i.  That  many  that  are  noxipus  to  us, 
are  falutary  to  other  Creatures  i  and  fomc  that  are 
Poifon  to  us,  are  Food  to  them.  So  we  fee  the 
Poultry-Kind  feed  upon  Spiders-,  nay,  there  is 
fcarce  any  noxious  Infedt  but  one  Bird  or  other 
eats  ir,  either  for  Food  or  Phyfick;  for  many, 
nay,  moft  of  thofe  Creatures  whofe  Bite  or  Sting 
is  poifonous,  may  fafely  be  taken  entire  into  the 
Stomach ;  and  therefore  it  is  no  Wonder  that  not 
only  the  Ibis  of  Egypt,  but  even  Storks  and  Pea- 
cocks, prey  upon  and  deftroy  all  Sorts  of  Serpents 
as  well  as  Locujis  and  Caterpillars, 

2.  Some  of  the  mofl  venomous  and  pernicious 
of  Infedis  afford  us  noble  Medicines,  as  Scorpions, 
SpiderSy  and  Cantharides, 

3.  Thefe  Infeds  feldom  make  ufe  of  their  of- 
fenfive  Weapons,  unkfs  affaulted  or  provok'd  in 
their  own  Defence,  or  to  revenge  an  Injury  i  let 

them 


Part  jr.        in  the  CKi^kTio^.  375 

them  but  alone,  and  annoy  them  not,  nor  difturb 
their  Young,  and,  unlefs  accidentally,  you  fhall 
feldom  fufFer  by  them. 

Lajil)\  God  is  pleased  fometimes  to  make  ufe 
of  them  as  Scourges,  to  chaftizc  or  punifli  wic- 
ked Perfons  or  Nations,  as  he  did  Herod  and  the 
Egyptians  -,  no  Creature  fo  mean  and  contempti- 
bfe,  but  God  can  when  he  pleafes  produce  fuch 
Armies  of  them,  as  no  human  Force  is  able  to 
conquer  or  deftroy,  but  they  fhall  of  a  fudden 
confume  and  devour  up  all  the  Fruits  of  the 
Earth,  and  whatever  might  ferve  for  the  Sufte- 
nance  of  Man,  as  Locujls  have  often  been  obferv'd 
to  do. 

Did  thefe  Creatures  ferve  for  no  other  Ufe,  as 
they  do  many,  yet  thofe  that  make  them  an  Ob- 
je(5llon  againft  the  Wifdom  of  God,  may  (as  Dr. 
Cockhurn  well  notes)  as  well  upbraid  the  Pru- 
dence and  Policy  of  a  State  for  keeping  Forces, 
which  generally  are  made  up  of  very  rude  and 
infolent  People,  which  yet  are  neceflary,  either 
to  fupprefs  Rebellions,  or  punifh  Rebels,  and  o- 
ther  diforderly  and  vicious  Perfons,  and  keep  the 
World  in  Quiet. 

From  that  Part  of  this  Difcourfe  which  relates 
to  the  Body  of  Man,  I  fliall  make  thefe  pradtical 
Inferences. 

B  b  4  Infer. 


376     Tie  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  II. 

Infer,  i.  Firji^  Let  us  give  Thanks  to  Almigh- 
ty God  for  the  Perfection-  and  Integrity  of  our 
Bodies  5  it  would  not  be  amifs  to  put  it  into  the 
euchariftical  Part  of  our  daily  Devotions:  We 
praife  thee,  O  God,  for  the  due  Number,  Shape, 
and  Ufe  of  our  Limbs  and  Senfes  j  and  in  general, 
of  all  the  Parts  of  our  Bodies ;  we  blefs  thee  for 
the  found  and  healthful  Conftitution  of  them, 
Ffal.  X.  It  is  thou  that  haft  made  us,  and  not  we 
ourfelves ;  in  thy  Book  were  all  our  Members  writ- 
ten. The  Formation  of  the  Body  is  the  Work  of 
God,  and  the  whole  Procefs  thereof  attributed  to 
him,  Pfal  cxxix.  13,  14,  15.  The  Mother  that 
bears  the  Child  in  her  Womb  is  not  confcious  to 
any  thing  that  is  done  there,  fhe  underftands  no 
more  how  the  Infant  is  form'd  than  itfelf  doth ; 
but  if  God  hath  beftow'd  upon  us  any  peculiar 
Gift  or  Endowment  wherein  we  excel  others,  as 
Strength,  or  Beauty,  or  Activity,  we  ought  to  give 
him  fpecial  Thanks  for  it;  but  not  to  think  the 
better  of  ourfelves  therefore,  or  defpife  them  that 
want  iu 

Now  becaufe  thefe  bodily  Perfedions  being 
common  Bleffings,  we  are  apt  not  at  all  to  con- 
fider  them,  or  not  to  fet  ajuil  Value  on  them; 
and  becaufe  the  Worth  of  Things  is  beft  difcern*d 
by  their  want,  it  v/ould  be  ufeful  fometimes  to 
imagine  or  fuppofe  ourfelves,  by  fom^  Accident, 
to  be  deprived  of  one  of  our  Limbs  or  Senfes,  as 
ii  Hand,  or  a  FooCj  or  an  Eye,  for  then  we  can- 
not 


Part  II.         7;^ /)&^  Creation.  377 

not  but  be  fenfible  that  we  (hould  be  in  worfe 
Condition  than  now  we  are,  and  that  we  fhould 
foon  find  a  difference  between  two  Hands  and 
one  Hand,  two  Eyes  and  one  Eye,  and  that  two 
excel  one  as  much  in  Worth  as  they  do  in  Num- 
ber ;  and  yet,  if  we  could  fpare  the  Ufe  of  the 
loft  Part,  the  Deformity  and  Unfightlinefs  of  fuch 
a  Defedt  in  the  Body  would  alone  be  very  grie- 
vous to  us.     Again,  which  is  lefs,  fuppofe  we 
only  that  our  Bodies  want  of  their  juft  Magni- 
tude, or  that  they  or  any  of  our  Members  are 
crooked  or  diflorted,  or  difproportionate  to  the 
reft,  either  in  Excefs  or  Defed:;  nay,  which  is 
leaft  of  all,  that  the  due  Motion  of  any  one  Part 
be  perverted,  as,  but  of  the  Eyes  in  fquinting, 
the  Eye-lids  in  twinkling,  the  Tongue  in  ftam- 
mering,  thefe  things  are  fuch  Blemifhes  and  Of- 
fences to  us,  by  making  us  Gazing-ftocks  to  o- 
thers,    and  Objeds  of  their  Scorn  or  Derifion, 
that  we  could  be  content  to  part  with  a  good 
Part  of  our  Eftates  to  repair  fuch  Defeds  or  heal 
fuch  Infirmities.     Thefe  things  confider'd,  and 
duly  weigh'd,  would  furely  be  a  great  and  effe- 
ctual Motive  to  excite  in  us  Gratitude  for  this 
Integrity  of  our  Bodies,  and  to  efteem  it  no  fmall 
Bleffing,   I  fay,  a  Bleffmg  and  Favour  of  God  to 
US;  for  fome  there  be  that  want  it,  and  why 
might  not  we  have  been  of  that  Number?  God 
was  no  way  obliged  to  beflow  it  upon  us. 

And 


378     T^he  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  II. 

And  as  we  are  to  give  Thanks  for  the  Integri- 
ty of  our  Body,  fo  are  we  likewife  for  the  Health 
of  it,  and  found  Temper  and  Conftitution  of  all 
its  Parts  and  Humours;  Health  being  the  princi- 
pal Bleffing  of  this  Life,  without  which  we  can- 
not enjoy  or  take  Comfort  in  any  things  befide. 

Neither  are  we  to  give  Thanks  alone  for  the 
firft  Collation  of  thefe  Benefits,  but  alfo  for  their 
Prefervation  and  Continuance.     God  preferves 
our  Souls  in  Life,  and  defends  us  from  Dangers 
and  fad  Accidents,  which  do  fo  befet  us  on  every 
iide,    that  the  greateft  Circumfpedion  in  the 
World  could  not  fecure  us,  did  not  his  good  Pro- 
vidence continually  watch  over  us ;  we  may  be 
faid  to  walk  and  converfe  in  the  midft  of  Snares ; 
befides,  did  we  but  duly  confider  the  Make  and 
Frame  of  our  Bodies,  what  a  multitude  of  minute 
Parts  and  Veffels  there  are  in  them,  and  how  an 
Obftrudion  in  one  redounds  to.  the  Prejudice  of 
the  whole,  we  could  not  but  wonder  how  fo  cu- 
rious an  Engine  as  Man's  Body  could  be  kept  in 
Tune  one  Hour  as  we  ufe  it,  much  lefs  hold  out 
fo  many  Years;  how  it  were  poffible  it  fliould 
endure  fuch  Hardfhips,   fuch  Blows,  fo  many 
Shocks  and  Concuffions,  nay,  fuch  Violences  and 
Outrages  as  are  offered  it  by  our  frequent  ExccfTes, 
and  not  be  diforder'd  and  rendered  ufclefs;  and 
acknowledge  the  tranfcendent  Art  and  Skill  of 
him  who  fo  put  it  together,  as  to  render  it  thus 
firm  and  durable. 

Infer,  z. 


Part  II.       in  the  Ckeatioi^.  379 

Ifjfer,  2.  Secondly,  Have  a  care  thou  doft  not 
by  any  vicious  Pradice  deface,  marr,  or  deftroy 
the  Workmanfliip  of  God  ;  fo  ufe  this  Body  as  to 
preferve  the  Form  and  Comelinefs,  the  Health 
and  Vigor  of  it. 

I.  For  the  Form  and  Beauty  of  the  Body, 
whiph  Mankind  generally  is  fond  enough  of,  and 
which  muft  be  acknowledg'd  to  be  a  natural  En- 
dowment and  Blefiing  of  God,  a  thing  defirable, 
which  all  Men  take  Complacency  in,  which  ren- 
ders Perfons  gracious  and  acceptable  in  the  Eyes 
of  others  -,  of  which  yet  we  do  not  obferve  that 
brute  Beafts  take  any  notice  at  all :  Of  this  I  (hall 
obferve,  that  outward  Beauty  is  a  fign  of  inward; 
and  that  handfome  P^erfons  are  naturally  well  in- 
clin'd,  till  they  do  either  debauch  themfelves,  or 
are  corrupted  by  others,    and  then  with  their 
Manners  they  marr  their  Beauty  too ;  for  a  Man 
may  obferve,  and  ealily  difcern,  that  as  Perfons 
are  better  or  worfe  inclin'd,  the  very  Air  of  their 
Vifage.v^ill  alter  much  -,  and  that  vicious  Courfes, 
defacing  the  inward  Pulchritude  of  the 
Soul,  do  cha?2ge  even  the  outward  Coun-     *  Z?r.  Morft. 
tenance  into  an  abhor r  d  Hue  "*  ;  as  is 
evident  in  the  Vices  of  Intemperance  and  Anger, 
and  may,  by  fagacious  Perfons,  be  obferv'd  in 
others  alfo.     No  better  Cofmeticks  than  a  fevere 
Temperance  and  Purity,  a  real  and  unaffedted 
-Modedy  and  Humility,  a  gracious  Temper  and 

Calmnefs 


380     Hoe  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part II. 

Calmnefs  of  Spirit,  a  fincere  and  univerfal  Cha- 
rity ;  no  true  Beauty  without  the  Signatures  of 
thefe  Graces  in  the  very  Countenance  ;  they 
therefore  who  thro*  the  contrary  Vices  do  deface 
and  blot  out  this  natural  Character  and  Imprefs, 
and  do  Violence  to  their  own  Inclinations,  that 
facrifice  this  Jewel  to  their  Lufts,  that  rejedt 
this  Gift  of  God,  and  undervalue  the  Favour 
of  Man,  aggravate  their  Sin  and  Mifery,  and 
purchafe  Hell  at  fomewhat  a  dearer  Rate  than 
others  do  ;  and  thofe  that  have  but  a  mean 
Portion  of  this  Gift,  are  the  more  obliged  by 
virtuous  Practices,  not  only  to  preferve,  but  to 
improve  it.  Virtue  (  as  Cicero  obferves )  if  it; 
could  be  ktn  with  corporeal  Eyes,  admira-' 
biles  flit  Atnores  excitaret ;  it  would  excite  a 
wonderful  hove  oj  itjelf,  ^y  the  Signatures  it^ 
there  impreffes,  it  is  in  fome  meafure  vifible 
in  the  Faces  of  thofe  that  pra.6tife  it,  and  fo 
muft  needs  impart  a  Beauty  and  Amiablenefs 
to  them. 

T>iogenes  Laertius ,  in  the  Life  of  Socrates , 
tells  us ,  that  the  Philofopher  was  wont  to 
advife  young  Men,  (Tuv^'J(2c;  •ii^.r^itr^^ic^i-,  often 
to  behold  themfelves  in  their  Looking-Glaffes 
or  Mirrors.  Grammercy,  Socrates,  that  is  good 
Coimfel  indeed !  will  our  young  Gentlemen 
and  Ladies  be  ready  to  fay:  We  like  it  very 
well  ,  and  we  pradlife  accordingly  :  And  it 
feems  we  are  injurioufly  tax'd  and  reprehended 

by 


Part  II.       in  t/je  Creation.  381 

by  Divines  for  fpendlng  (o  much  Time  between 
a  Comb  and  a  Glafs.  Be  not  over  hafty, 
take  what  remains  along  with  you :  Mark  the 
End   for  which   the  Philofopher  exhorts  this, 

^oLfhlct  T  ^a&^eicw  '^^}i^?iv^Tcievy  I'hat  if  they 
be  handfome^  they  might  appro^ce  thcmjehes  wor- 
thy of  their  Form ;  but  if  they  be  otherwife^  they 
may  by  Difcipline  and  Injiitution  hide  their  Z)^- 
formity ;  and  fo  by  their  virtuous  Behaviour 
compenfate  the  Hardnefs  of  their  Favour,  and 
by  the  Pulchritude  of  their  Souls  make  up 
what  is  wanting  in  the  Beauty  of  their  Bodies; 
and  truly  I  believe  a  virtuous  Soul  hath  In- 
fluence upon  its  Vehicle,  and  adds  a  Luftrc 
even  to  the  outward  Man,  (l:iining^  forth  in  the 
very  Face. 

2.  So  ufe  the  Body  as  to  preferve  the  Health 
and  Vigor,  and  confequently  prolong  the  Life 
of  it ;  thefe  are  Things  that  all  Men  covet ; 
no  more  effedlual  Means  for  the  Maintenance 
and  Prefervation  of  them  than  a  regular  and 
virtuous  Life.  That  Health  is  impaired  by  Vice, 
daily  Experience  fufficiently  evinceth ;  1  need 
not  fpend  Time  to  prove  what  no  Man  doth 
or  can  deny.  And  as  for  Length  of  Days,  we 
find  by  the  fame  Experience,  that  intemperate 
and  diforderly  Perfons  are,  for  the  moft  part, 
-(hort-liv'd  >  moreover,  immoderate  Cares  and 
Arujciety  are   obferv'd  ^  fuddenly  to   bring    grey 

Hairs 


382      7he  Wisdom  of  GOD    Part  11. 

Hairs  upon  Men,  which  are  ufually  the  Signs 
and  Forerunners  of  Death  j  and  therefore  the 
way  to  live  long  muft  needs  be  in  all  Points 
to  ufe  our  Bodies  fo  as  is  moft  agreeable  to  the 
Rules  of  Temperance,  and  Purity,  and  right 
Reafon  ;  every  Violence  offered  to  it  weakens 
and  impairs  it,  and  renders  it  lefs  durable  and 
lafting.  One  Means  there  is  which  Phyficians 
take  notice  of  as  very  effedtual  for  the  Prefef- 
vation  of  Health,  which  I  cannot  here  otnit, 
that  is,  a  quiet  and  chearful  Mind,  not  afflift- 
ed  with  violent  Paflions ,  or  diftraded  with 
immoderate  Cares,  for  thefe  have  a  great  and 
ill  Influence  upon  the  Body ;  now,  how  a  Man 
can  have  a  quiet  and  chearful  Mind  under  a 
great  Burden  and  Load  of  Guilt,  I  know  not, 
unlefs  he  be  very  ignorant ,  or  have  a  feared 
Confcience ;  it  concerns  us  therefore,  even^  upon 
this  Account,  to  be  careful  of  our  Converfation, 
and  to  keep  our  Confciences  void  of  Offence 
both  toward  God  and  toward  Men. 

Infer,  3.  "Thirdly^  Did  God  make  the  Body  ? 
let  him  have  the  Service  of  it,  Rom,  xii.  i.  I  be* 
feech  youy  Brethren^  by  the  Mercies  of  God^  that 
you  prefent  your  Bodies  a  living  Sacrifice,  holy, 
acceptable  unto  God  y  which  is  your  reafonable 
Service.  How  we  fhould  do  that,  St.  Chryfo- 
fiom  tells  us  in  his  Commentary  upon  this  Place, 


Part  II.        in  the  C'RE  ATio"^.  383 

fx^Sip  yj  yXoooSoL  XctKivrod  alay^uy  5^  "^yve  ^ur^ts- 

Q\Q'H^u'mfj{^^  &c.  Let  the  Eye  behold  no  evil 
things  and  it  is  made  a  Sacrifice  \  let  the  Hongue 
fpeak  no  filthy  Word^  and  it  becomes  an  Oblation ; 
let  the  Hand  do  no  unlawful  ABion^  and  you 
render  it  a  Holocauft.  Tet  it  is  not  enough  thus 
to  refirain  them  from  Evily  but  they  mufi  alfo  be 
employ  d  and  exercisd  in  doing  that  which  is 
good 'y  the  Hand  in  giving  Almsy  the  tongue  in 
blejfing  them  that  curfe  us  and  defpite fully  ufe 
us ;  the  Ear  in  hearkening  to  divine  LeBures  aiid 
Difcourfes,  I  Cor.  vi.  20.  Glorify  God  in  your 
Body^  or  with  your  Body^  and  in  your  Spirit^ 
which  are  God's-,  and  that  not  by  Redemption 
only,  of  which  the  Apoftle  there  fpeaks,  but 
by  Creation  alfo:  Rom,  vi,  13.  Neither  yield  ye 
your  Members  as  Inflruments  oj  Unrighteoujnejs 
unto  Siny  but  as  Infiruments  of  Righteoufnefs  wito 
God,  And  again ,  ver.  1 9,  Even  jo  now  yield 
your  Members  Servants  of  Righteoufnejs  unto  Ho- 
linefs,  1  {hall  inftance  in  two  Members,  which 
are  efpecially  to  be  guarded  and  reftrain'd  from 
Evil,  and  employ'd  in  the  Service  of  God. 

Firfiy    The  Eye,     We  muft  turn  away  our 

Eyes  from  beholding  Vanity  ,    as  David   pray'd 

'God  would  his,  Tfal,  exix.  37.    We  muil  make  a 

Covenant  with  our  Eyes^,  as  Job  did,  Job  xxxi.  i. 

Thefe 


384     ThWisBOM  of  GOD     Partll. 

Thefe  are  the  Windows  that  let  in  exterior  Ob-* 
jeds  to  the  Soul ;  by  thefe  the  Heart  is  afFefted ; 
this  way  Sin  entered  firft  into  the  World  j  our  firft 
Parent  faw  that  the  ^ree  and  its  Fruit  was  plea- 
fant  to  the  Eyes^  and  fo  was  invited  to  take  and 
eat  it.  There  are  four  Sins  efpecially  for  which 
the  Eye  is  noted,  as  either  difcovering  themfelves 
in  the  Eyes,  or  whofe  Temptations  enter  in  by, 
and  fo  give  Denomination  to  the  Eye. 

1.  There  is  d,  proud  Eye,  Pro  v.  xxx.  13.  'Tbere 
is  a  Generation,  O  how  lofty  are  their  Eyes  I  And 
their  Eye4ids  are  lifted  up.  Chap.  vi.  17.  A  proud 
hook  is  reckoned  the  firft  of  thofe  fix  things  that 
God  h^ieSyPfaL  xviii.  27.  God  (the  Pfalmiji  faith) 
will  bring  down  proud  or  high  Looks.  Pfal.  ci.  5. 
Him  that  hath  a  high  hook  and  a  proud  Heart 
(faith  David)  I  will  not  fuffer.  And  in  Pfalm 
cxxxi.  I.  he  faith  of  himfelf,  that  his  Heart  is  not 
haughty,  nor  his  Eyes  lofty.  By  which  Places  it 
appeareth  that  Pride  (heweth  forth  itfelf  in  the 
Eyes  efpecially,  and  that  they  are  as  it  were  the 
Seat  or  Throne  of  it. 

2.  There  is  a  wanton  Eye,  which  the  Pro- 
phet Ifaiah  fpeaks  of  in  his  third  Chapter,  at  the 
i6th  Verfe,  Becaufe  the  Daughters  of  ^erujdlem 
ivalk  with  Jlretched-out  Necks  and  wanton  Eyes. 
The  Apoftle  St.  Peter,  in  his  Second  Epiftlc, 
Chap.  ii.  24.  mentions  Eyes  full  of  Adultery ; 
for  by  thefe  Cafements  enter  in  fuch  Objeds  as 

2  may 


Part  II.       ^';?  /y^^  C  R  E  A  T I  o N.  385 

may  provoke  and  ftir  up  adulterous  Thoughts 
in  the  Mind,  as  they  did  in  David's  -,  and  like- 
wife  impure  Thoughts  conceived  in  the  Heart, 
may  difcover  themfelves  by  the  Motions  of  the 
Eye ;  and  therefore  in  this  refpedt  we  fliould  do 
well,  with  holy  Job,  to  make  a  Covenant  with 
our  Eyes,  not  to  gaze  upon  any  Objedl  which 
may  tempt  us  to  any  inordinate  Appetite  or  De- 
iire  5  for  our  Saviour  tells  us,  it  were  better  to 
pluck  out  our  Right  Eye  than  that  it  fhould  be 
an  Offence  to  us ;  which  I  fuppofe  refers  to  this 
Matter ,  becaufe  it  immediately  follows  thofe 
Words,  He  that  looketb  upon  a  Woman  to  luji  after 
her,  hath  already  committed  Adultery  with  her  in 
his  Heart, 

3.  There  Is  a  covetous  Eye,  By  Covetoufnefs 
I  underftand,  not  only  a  defiring  what  is  another 
Man*s,  which  is  forbidden  in  the  Tenth  Com- 
mandment, but  alfo  an  inordinate  Delire  of  Ri- 
ches, which  the  Apoftle  St.  John  feems  to  under- 
ftand in  his  firft  Epiftle,  Chap.  ii.  16.  by  the  Lu[i 
of  the  Eye,  And  Covetoufnefs  may  well  be  call'd 
the  LuJi  of  the  Eye,  becaufe,  i.  The  Temptation 
or  tempting  Objedl  enters  by  the  Eye ;  fo  the  fee- 
ing the  Wedge  of  Gold  and  BabyloniJJo  Garment 
ftirr'd  up  the  covetous  Defire  in  Achan,  2.  Be- 
caufe all  the  Fruit  a  Man  reaps  of  Riches,  more 
than  will  furnifli  his  Neceffities  and  Convenien- 
ces, is  the  feeding  of  his  Eye,  or  the  Pleafure  he 
takes  in  the  beholding  of  them,  Ecclef,  v.  11. 

C  c  When 


386     77j^  Wisdom  of  GOD     Patt  IL 

When  Goods  increafe^  &c.  what  Good  is  there  to  the 
Owners  thereof^  faving  the  beholding  them  with 
their  Eyes  ? 

4.  There  is  an  envious  Eyey  which  by  otir  Sa- 
viour is  caird  an  evil  Eye,  Matth,  xx.  15.  Is  thine 
Eye  evil  becaufe  I  am  good  ?  That  is,  envieft  thou 
thy  Brother  becaufe  I  am  kind  to  him  ?    And 
Chap.  vii.  22.  one  of  thofe  evil  things  v^hich  pro- 
ceed out  of  the  Heart  and  defile  a  Man,  is  an  evil 
Eye,     Envy  is  a  repining  at  the  Profperity  or 
Good  of  another,  or  Anger  and  Difpleafure  at  any 
Good  of  another  v^hich  we  want,  or  any  Advan- 
tage another  hath  above  us ;  as  in  the  Parable  of 
the  Labourers  in  the  Vineyard,  thofe  that  came 
in  firfl  envy'd  the  laft,  not  becaufe  they  receiv'd 
more  than  they>  but  becaufe  they  receiv'd  equal 
Wages  for  lefs  Time ;  thofe  that  are  fubjecSt  to 
this  Vice  cannot  endure  to  fee   another   Man 
thrive,  and  are  apt  to  think  his  Condition  better 
than  theirs,  when  indeed  it  is  not. 

Let  us  then  fo  govern  our  Eyes  that  we  difco- 
ver  by  them  none  of  thefe  Vices  5  let  the  Humi- 
lity and  Purity  of  our  Minds  appear  even  in  our 
outward  Looks  j  let  neither  Pride  nor  Luft  ma- 
nifeft  themfelves  in  the  Pofture  or  Motions  of  our 
Eyes  J  let  us  have  a  care  that  thefe  Members  be 
neither  the  Inlets  nor  Outlets  of  any  of  the  fore- 
mention'd  Vices,  that  they  neither  give  Admif- 
fion  to  the  Temptation,  nor  be  expreffive  of  the 

Concep- 


Part  II.       in  /^^  Creation.  387 

Conception  of  them ;  let  Us  employ  them  in  read- 
ing the  Word  of  God  and  other  Books,  fpr  the 
Increafe  of  our  Knowledge  and  Diredion  of  our 
Prad:ice ;  in  diligently  viewing  and  contempla- 
ting the  Works  of  the  Creation,  that  we  may  dif- 
cefn  and  admire  the  Footfteps  of  the  divine  Wif- 
dom,  eafily  to  be  trac'd  in  the  Formation,  Dif- 
pofition,  and  Defignations  of  them;  let  us  take 
notice  of  any  extraordinary  Events  and  EfFeds  of 
God's  Providence  towards  curfelves  or  others, 
perfonal  or  national,  that  as  they  are  the  Iffues  of 
his  Mercy  or  Juftice,  they  may  Ilir  up  fuicable 
Affedions  in  us  of  Thankfulnefs  or  Fear  •  let 
thofe  fad  and  miferable  Objedls  that  prefent  them-, 
felves  to  our  Sight  move  us  to  Pity  and  Commit 
feration  ;  and  let  our  Eyes  fometimes  be  exercised 
in  weeping  for  the  Miferies  and  Calamities  of 
others,  but  efpecially  for  our  own  and  their  Sins. 

Secondly y  Another  Member  I  {l:iall  mention  is, 
the  To?2guey  which  as  it  is  the  chief  Inftrument  of 
Speech,  fo  it  may  be  well  or  ill  employ'd  in  the 
Exercife  of  that  Adtion,  and  therefore  ftands  irt 
need  of  Diredlion  and  Reftraint.  I  remember  I 
once  heard  from  an  m^tmoxxs  Aitatomiji  oi  Padua 
this  Obfervation,  that  there  are  but  two  Members 
in  the  Body  that  have  a  natural  Bridle,  both 
which  do  very  much  need  it ;  the  Tongue,  and 
another  I  fliall  not  name ;  the  Signification  where- 
of may  be,  that  they  are  not  to  be  let  loofe,  but 
diligently  curbed  and  held  in.     That  the  Tongue 

C  c  2  needs 


388       neWisj^ouof  GOD    Part  IL 

needs  a  Bridle,  you  will  readily  grant,  if  you  read 
what  .the  Apoftle  St.  James  hath  written  of  it. 
Chap.  iii.  6.  The  Tongue  is  a  fire ^  a  world  of  Ini- 
quity :  fo  is  the  Tongue  among  our  Members^  that  it 
defileth  the  whole  Body,  andjetteth  on  fire  the  courfe 
of  Nature^  and  is  fet  on  fire  of  Hell,  For  every 
KindofBeaftSy  and  of  Birds ^  and  of  Serpent Sy  and 
of  things  in  the  Sea^  is  tamedy  and  hath  been  tamed 
of  Mankind  \  but  the  Tongue  can  no  Man  tame^  it 
is  an  unruly  Evil,  full  of  deadly  Poifon,  For  the 
better  Government  of  the  Tongue,  I  fhall  note 
fome  Vices  of  Speech  which  muft  carefully  be 
avoided ;  firft  of  all.  Loquacity  or  Garrulity,  this 
the  Contrivance  of  our  Mouths  fuggefts  to  us; 
our  Tongues  are  fenced  and  guarded  with  a  dou- 
ble Wall  or  Mound  of  Lips  and  Teeth,  that  our 
Words  might  not  rafhly  and  unadvifedly  flip  out  j 
then  Nature  hath  furnifh'd  us  with  two  Ears  and 
but  one  Tongue,  to  intimate  that  we  mufl  hear 
twice  fo  much  as  we  fpeak.  Why  Loquacity  is  to 
be  avoided  the  wife  Man  gives  us  a  fufficient 
Reafon,  Prov,  x.  19.  In  the  multitude  of  words 
there  waiiteth  not  Sin,  And,  Ecclef.  v.  7.  In  many 
words  there  are  divers  vanities.  To  which  we 
may  add  another,  of  great  Force  with  moft  Men, 
viz,  that  it  hath  been  always  efteem^d  an  EfFed: 
and  Argument  of  Folly,  Ecclef,  v.  3.  yf  FooPs 
Voice  is  hiown  by  multitude  of  Words,  And  on  the 
contrary,  to  be  of  few  Words  is  a  Sign  of  Wif- 
dom ;  and  he  that  is  wife  enough  to  be  filent,  tho' 
a  Fool,  may  pafs  undifcover'd  j  befides  all  this, 

a  talkative 


Part  IL       in  the  Creation.  389 

a  talkative  Perfon  muft  needs  be  impertinent,  and 
fpeak  many  idle  Words,  and  fo  render  himfelf 
burdenfome  and  odious  to  Company,  and  may 
perchance  run  himfelf  upon  great  Inconveniences, 
by  blabbing  out  his  own  or  others  Secrets;  for  a 
Word  once  uttered,  fuglt  irrevocabile^  is  irrevo- 
cable, whatever  the  Confequence  of  it  be ;  great 
need  therefore  have  we  to  fet  a  Watch  over  our 
Mouths^  and  to  keep  the  Door  of  our 
hips,  Pfal.  cxli.  1.  and  not  fufFer  our  *//^^'^>'  ^^' 
longues  ^  ^^r^^')^eiv  tn<;  dtxvpict^  wit. 
as  IJbcrates  phrafeth  it. 

Secondly^  Lying,  or  falfe  fpeaking.  There  is 
difference  between  mentiri  and  mendaciwn  dicere^ 
that  is,  lying,  and  fpeaking  of  an  Untruth,  or  a 
thing  that  is  falfe.  Mentiri y  is  contra  mentem  ire, 
which,  though  it  be  no  good  Etymology  of  the 
Word,  is  a  good  Notion  of  the  thing ;  that  is, 
to  go  againft  one's  Mind,  or  fpeak  what  one  does 
not  think. 

As  Homer  expreffes  it,  to  conceal  one  thing  in 
the  Mind,  and  fpeak  another  with  the  Tongue  j 
heuice  a  Man  may  fpeak  an  Untruth  and  yet  not 
lie,  when  he  thinks  he  fpeaks  the  Truth  j  and 

C  c  3  on 


390  The  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  li- 
on the  contrary,  may  fpeak  what  is  materially 
true  and  yet  lie,  when  he  fpeaks  what  he  thinks 
not  to  be  true.  The  Tongue  was  made  to  be  the 
J7idex  of  the  Mind,  Speech  the  Interpreter  of 
Thought,  therefore  there  ought  to  be  a  perfedt 
Harmony  and  Agreement  between  thefe  twos  fo 
that  lying  is  a  great  Abufe  of  Speech,  and  a  per- 
vertino-  the  very  End  of  it,  which  was  to  com- 
municate our  Thoughts  one  to  another  j  it  hath 
alfo  an  ill  Principle  for  the  moft  part,  proceed- 
ing either  from  Bafenefs  of  Spirit^  or  Cowardice^ 
as  in  them  that  have  committed  a  Fault,  and 
deny  it  for  fear  of  Punifliment  or  Rebuke ;  and 
therefore  the  ancient  Perjians^  as  Xenopkon  tells 
us  in  his  Kyp«  TTsttS^eia,  made  it  one  of  the  three 
thingc  they  diligently  taught  their  Children, 
which  were  linT^&iVy  59  To|<^'«r,  ?^  aMi^v&tV  to 
Ridc^  to  Shoot y  and  to  /peak  thel'ruth:  Or  from 
Ccvetoufnefs^  as  in  Tradefmen,  who  falfly  com- 
mend their  Commodities,  that  they  may  vend 
them  for  a  greater  Price;  or  from  Vanity  and 
Vain-glory^  in  them  who  falfly  boaft  of  any  Qua- 
lity or  Adion  of  their  own.  It  is  odious  both 
to  God  and  Man ;  to  God,  Trov,  vi.  17.  A  lying 
Tongue  is  one  of  thofe  fix  or  feven  things  that  are 
an  Abomination  to  him ;  to  Men,  as  Hojner  wit- 
nelTeth  in  the  Verfe  preceding  the  fore-quoted. 


Part  11.       ?>/  ^>6^  Creation.         391 

^E^^CP^  ;S  jLui  TteLVQ^  ofjut)^  AiStto  'TTuAmy  Sec, 

He  that  tells  Lies  is  as  hateful  to  me  as  the 

Gates  of  Hell  or  Death.  The  Pradice  of 

lying  is  a  diabolical  Exercife,  and  they  that  ufe 
it  are  the  Devil's  Children,  as  our  Saviour  tells 
us,  yohn  viii.  44.  Te  are  of  your  Father  the  Devils 
6^c.  for  he  is  a  Liar^  and  the  Father  of  it,  An4, 
laftly,  it  is  a  Sin  that  excludes  out  of  Heaven, 
and  depreffes  the  Soul  into  Hell.  All  Liars  Jloall 
have  their  Part  in  the  Lake  which  burns  with  Fire 
and  Brimjioney  which  is  the  fecond  Death. 

T'hirdlyy  Another  Vice,  or  Abufe  of  Speech, 
or  vicious  Adion,  to  which  the  Tongue  is  in- 
ftrumental,  is  Slandering  -,  that  is,  raifing  a  falfe 
Report  of  any  Man,  tending  to  his  Defamation  j 
this  might  have  been  comprehended  under  the 
former  Head,  being  but  a  kind  of  lying,  pro- 
ceeding from  Enmity  or  lU-v^illj   it  is  a  very 
great  Injury  to  our  Neighbour,  Mens  Reputation 
being  as  dear  to  them  as  Life  itfelf  5  fo  that  it  is 
grown  to  be  a  Proverb  among  the  Vulgar,  Take 
away  my  good  Name  and  take  away  my  Life,  And 
that  which  enhanfes  this  Injury  is,  that  it  is  irre- 
parable ;  we  cannot,  by  any  contrary  Declaration, 
fo  clear  the  Innocency  of  our  Neighbour,    as 
wholly  to  extirpate  the  pre-conceiv'd  Opinion 
out  of  the  Minds  of  thofe  to  whom  our  Confef- 
fion  comes  5  and  many  will  remain  whom  the 
C  c  4  Calumny 


392     "The  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  IL 

Calumny  hath  reached,  to  whom  the  Vindication 
probably  will  not  extend,  the  Pravity  of  Man's 
Nature  being  more  apt  to  fpread  and  divulge  an 
ill  Report  than  to  flop  and  lilence  it.  I  might 
inftance  in  flattering  of  others  and  boafting  of 
ourfelves,  for  two  Abufes  of  Speech^but  they  may 
both  be  referred  to  lying,  the  one  to  pleafe  others, 
and  puft  them  up  with  Self-conceit,  and  a  falfe 
Opinion,  that  they  have  fome  excellent  Quality 
or  Endowment,  which  they  want,  or  have  not 
in  fuch  a  degree,  or  that  they  are  better  thought 
of  by  others  than  indeed  they  are,  and  more  ho- 
noured ;  the  other,  to  gain  more  Honour  than  is 
due  to  ourfelves.  Neither  yet  is  boafting  only 
of  what  we  have  not,  but  alfo  what  we  have, 
condemned  and  difallow'd  by  God  and  Men,  as 
being  contrary  to  that  Humility  and  Modefty 
that  ought  to  be  in  us,  Prov.  xxvii.  2.  Let  aito- 
ther  Man  praife  thee^  and  not  thine  own  Mouthy 
a  Stranger^  and  not  thine  own  Lips,  And  Mora* 
lifts  proceed  fo  far  as  to  cenfure  all  unneceflary 
'Tn^oLVTXiTKoyict^  that  is,  talking  of  a  Man's  felf, 

Fourthly,  Obfcene  and  impure  Words  are  ano- 
ther vicious  Effe(5t  of  the  Tongue ;  thofe  are 
principally  the  (toli^^\  Ko')s>iy  rotten  Speeches  the 
Apoftle  fpeaks  of,  Eph,  v.  29.  fuch  ^s  chafte  Ears 
abhor,  which  tend  only  to  the  depraving  and 
corrupting  the  Hearers,  and  are  to  be  ftudioufly 
1  ^  ar\c} 


Part  II.        ^';^ /Z>^  Cre  ATioN.  393 

and  carefully  avoided  by  all  that  pretend  to  Chri- 
ftianity,  Eph,  v.  3.  But  Fornication^  and  all  Un- 
cleannejs^  let  it  not  be  once  nanid  among  you. 

Fifthly^  Curfing,  and  railing  or  reviling  Words, 
are  alfo  a  great  Abufe  of  Speech,  and  outrageous 
Effeds  and  Expreflions  of  Malice  and  Wicked- 
nefs,"  PfaL  x.  7.  The  Pfalmiji  makes  it  Part  of 
the  Character  of  a  wicked  Man,  that  his  Mouth  is 
full  of  Curfing',  which  Paflage  we  have  quoted 
by  the  Apoftle,  Roin,  iii.  14.  whofe  Mouth  is  full 
of  Curfing  and  Bitternefs, 

Sixthly,  Swearing,  and  irreverently  ufing  the 
Name  of  God  in  common  Difcourfe  and  Con- 
verfe,  is  another  Abufe  of  the  Tongue  5  to  which 
I  might  add,  vehement  AiTeverations  upon  flight 
and  trivial  Occafions.     I  do  not  deny,  but  in  a 
Matter  of  weight  and  moment,  which  will  bear 
out  fuch  Atteftation,  and  where  Belief  will  not 
be  obtain'd  without  them,  and  yet  it  may  much. 
import  the  Hearer  or  Speaker  that  his  Words  be 
believ'd,  or  where  the  Hearer  would  not  other- 
wife  think  the  Matter  fo  momentous  or  impor- 
tant as  indeed  it  is,  Proteftations  and  AiTevera- 
tions, yea,  Oaths,  may  lawfully  be  us'd  3  but  to 
call  God  to  witnefs  to  an  Untruth,  or  a  Lie  per- 
haps^ or  to  appeal  to  him  on  every  trivial  Occa- 
fion  in  conamon  Difcourfe,  cuftomarily,  without 

any 


394    ^^^  Wisdom  of  GOD  Part  II. 

any  Confideration  of  what  we  fay,  is  one  of  the 
highefl  Indignities  and  Affronts  that  dan  be  offered 
him,  being  a  Sin  to  which  there  is  no  Tempta- 
tion ;  for  it  is  fo  far  from  gaining  Belief  (which 
is  the  only  thing  that  can  with  any  (hew  of  Rea- 
fon  be  pleaded  for  it)  that  it  rather  creates  Diffi- 
dence and  Diftruft ;  for  as  multa  jidem  promijfa 
levant^  io  multa  jur amenta  too -y  it  being  become 
a  Proverb,  lie  that  willfwear  will  lye  j  and  good 
reafon  there  is  for  it,  for  he  that  fcruples  not  the 
Breach  of  one  of  God's  Commands,  is  not  likely 
to  make  Confcience  of  the  Violation  of  another. 

Lajily^  (for  I  will  name  no  more)  fcurrilous 
Words,  fcoffing  and  jeering,  flouting  and  taunt- 
ing, are  to  be  cenfur'd  as  vicious  Abufes  of 
Speech. 

This  Scoffing  and  Derifion  proceeds  from  Con- 
tempt, and  that  of  all  Injuries  Men  do  moft  im- 
patiently bear,  nothing  offends  more  or  wounds 
deeper  ;  and  therefore  what  greater  Violation  of 
that  general  Rule  of  Chriflian  Pradlice,  to  do  to 
ethers  a^  we  would  theyjhould  do  unto  us  ?  This  Inju- 
ry of  being  derided  the  Pfalmijl  himfelf  complains 
of,  PfaL  Ixix.  II,  12.  I  became  a  Proverb  to  them. 
They  that  fit  in  the  Gate  /peak  againji  me^  and  I 
was  the  Song  of  the  Drunkards,  And  PfaL  xxxv. 
15.  according  to  the  Church  Tranflation,  The 
very  AbjeBs  came  together  againfl  me  unawares^ 
making  Mows  at  me^  and  ceafed  not.     And  the 

Prophet 


Part  II.       /«  /^^  C  R  E  AT  I  o N.  395 

Prophet  "Jeremy^  Jer.  xx.  7.  I  am  in  Derifion 
daily ^  every  07ie  mocketh  me.  And  tho'  there  may 
be  ibme  Wit  fhewn  in  fcoffing  and  jefting  upon 
others,  yet  is  it  a  Pradiice  inconfiftent  with  true 
Wifdom.  The  Scorner  and  the  Wife  Man  are 
frequently  opposed  in  Scripture,  Prov,  ix.  8.  and 
Chap.  xiii.  i,  <S?r.  It  is  a  proverbial  Saying,  ^he 
greatejl  Clerks  are  not  always  the  wifejl  Men.  I 
thijjk  the  Saying  might  as  often  be  verify'd  of  the 
greateft  B^its,  Scorning,  in  that  Gradation  in 
the  firft  Pfalmy  is  fet  down  as  the  higheft  Step  of 
Wickednefs.  And  Solomon  tells  us,  that  Judg- 
ments  are  prepardfor  the  Scorners, 

You  will  fay  to  me,  how  then  muft  our 
Tongues  be  employed  ?  I  anfwer,  j.  In  Praifes 
and  Thankfgiving  unto  God,  PfaL  ^xxv,  28.  ^nd 
my  Tongue  Jhall  /peak  of  thy  Righteoufnefs  ajid  of 
thy  Praifes  all  the  Day  long.  Parallel  whereto  is 
ver,  24.  oi  PfaL  Ixxi.  Indeed  the  Book  oiPfalms 
is  in  a  great  meafure  but  an  Exercife  of  or  Ex- 
hortation to  this  Duty.  2.  We  muft  exercife 
our  Tongues  in  talking  of  all  his  wondrous 
Works :  PfaL  cxlv.  5>  6.  /  mil  fpeak  of  the  glo- 
rious Honour  of  thy  Majefy,  and  of  thy  wondrous 
Works,  3.  In  Prayer  to  God.  4.  In  Confeffion 
of  him  and  his  Religion,  and  publickly  owning 
it  before  Men,  whatever  the  Hazard  be.  5.  In 
teaching,  inftrufting,  and  counfelhng  of  others, 
6.  In  exhorting  them.  7.  In  comforting  them 
that  need  it.     8.  In  reproving  them.    AIJ  w^hich 

Parti- 


396     Hdc  Wisdom  o/GOD  Part  If. 

Particulars  I  might  enlarge  upon,  but  becaufe 
they  come  in  here  only  as  they  refer  to  the 
Tongue,,  it  may  fuffice  to  have  mentioned  them 
fummarily. 

^hirdlyy  Let  us  hence  learn  duly  to  prize  and 
value  our  Souls.  Is  the  Body  fuch  a  rare  Piece, 
what  then  is  the  Soul  ?  The  Body  is  but  the  Hufk 
or  Shell,  the  Soul  is  the  Kernel ,  the  Body  is  but 
the  Cafk,  the  Soul  the  precious  Liquor  contained 
in  it ',  the  Body  is  but  the  Cabinet,  the  Soul  the 
Jewel;  the  Body  is  but  the  Ship  or  Veflel,  the 
Soul  the  Pilot ;  the  Body  is  but  the  Tabernacle, 
and  a  poor  Clay  Tabernacle  or  Cottage  too,  the 
Soul  the  Inhabitant;  the  Body  is  but  the  Ma- 
chine or  Engine,  the  Soul  that  ov^v  77,  that 
adluates  and  quickens  it ;  the  Body  is  but  the 
dark  Lantern,  the  Soul  or  Spirit  is  the  Candle  of 
the  Lord  that  burns  in  it:  And  feeing  there  is 
fuch  difference  between  the  Soul  and  the  Body  in 
refped  of  Excellency,  furely  our  better  Part  chal- 
lenges our  greateft  Care  and  Diligence  to  make 
Provifion  for  it.  Bodily  Provifion  is  but  half 
Provifion,  it  is  but  for  one  Part  of  a  Man,  and 
that  the  meaner  and  more  ignoble  too,  if  we  con- 
fider  only  the  Time  of  this  Life ;  but  if  we  con- 
lider  a  future  Eftate  of  endlefs  Duratipn  after  this 
Life,  then  bodily  Provifion  will  appear  to  be,  I 
do  not  fay,  quarter  Provifion,  but  no  Provifion  at 
all  in  comparifon,  there  being  no  Proportion  be- 
tween 


Part  II.       in  tde  Cre  ATio^.  397 

tween  fo  fhort  a  Period  of  Time  aad  the  infinite 
Ages  of  Eternity  ;  let  us  not  then  be  fo  foolifh  as 
to  employ  all  our  Thoughts  and  beftow  all  our 
Time  and  Pains  about  cherifliing,  accommoda- 
ting and  gratifying  our  Bodies,  in  wakwg  Provi- 
Jion  for  the  Flefi  to  fulfil  the  Lujls  thereof^  as  the 
Apoftle  phrafeth  it,  and  fufFer  our  Souls  to  lie  by 
negleded  in  a  miferable,  and  poor,  and  blind, 
and  paked  Condition.     Some  Philofophers  will 
not  allow  the  Body  to  be  an  effential  Part  of 
Man,  but  only  the  Veflel  or  Vehicle  of  the  Soul; 
Anima  cujufque  ejl  quifque  \  the  Soul  is  the  Man. 
Tho'  I  would  not  be  fo  unequal  to  it,  yet  I  muft 
needs  acknowledge  it  to  be  but  an  inferior  Part; 
it  is  therefore  fo  to  be  treated,  fo  dieted  and  pro- 
vided, as  to  render  it  moft  calm  and  compliant 
with  the  Soul,  moft  tradable  and  obfequious  to 
the  Didates  of  Reafon  ;  not  fo  pamper'd  and  in- 
dulged, as  to  encourage  it  to  caft  its  Rider,  and 
to  take  the  Reins  into  its  own  Hand,  and  ufurp 
Dominion  over  the  better  Part,  the  td  h'}^ujovt}dvy 
to  fink  and  deprefs  it  into  a  fordid  Compliance 
with  its  own  Lufts,  Atque  affigere  humi  droinc^ 
farticulam  aura. 

This  is  our  Duty ;  but  alas !  what  is  our  Pra- 
dice?  Our  great  Partiality  towards  our  Bodies, 
and  Negled  of  our  Souls,  (hews  clearly  which 
Part  we  prefer ;  we  are  careful  enough  of  wound- 
ing or  maiming  our  Bodies,  but  we  make  bold 
-to  la(h  and  wound  our  Souls  daily  j  for  every  Sin 

we 


^98      Tl)eWisDoM  of  GOD    Part  IL    i 

we  commkj  being  contrary  to  its  Nature,  is  a 

teal  Stripe,  yea,  a  mortal  Wound  to  the  Soul  j 

and  we  fliall  find  it  to  be  fo,  if  our  Confciences 

be  once  awaken'd  to  feel  the  Sting  and  Smart  of 

it.     We  are  induftrious  enough  to  preferve  our 

Bodies  from  Slavery  and  Thraldom,  but  we  make 

nothing  of  fuffering  our  Souls  to  be  Slaves  and 

Drudges  to  our  Lufts,  and  to  live  in  the  vileft 

Bondage  to  the  moft  degenerate  of  Creatures,  the 

Devil.     We  are  thrifty  and  provident  enough, 

not  to  part  with  any  thing  that  may  be  fervice- 

able  to  our  Bodies  under  a  good  Confideration, 

and  we  fo  efteem  them  as  that  we  will  part  with 

all  we  have  for  the  Life  of  them ;  but  we  make 

little  Account  of  what  is  moft  beneficial  to  our 

Souls,  the  Means  of  Grace  and  Salvation,  the 

Word  of  God,  and  Duties  of  his  Worfhip  and 

Service ;  nay,  we  can  be  content  to  fell  our  Souls 

themfelves  for  a  Trifle,  for  a  thing  of  nothing, 

yea,  for  what  is  worfe  than  nothing,  the  fatisfy- 

ing  of  an  inordinate  and  unreafonable  Appetite 

or  Paffion.     We  highly  efteem  and  ftand  much 

upon  our  Nobility,  our  Birth  and  Breeding,  tho' 

we  derive  nothing  from  our  Anceftors  but  our 

Bodies  and  corporeal  Qualities ;  and  it  is  ufeful 

fo  far  to  value  and  improve  this  Advantage,  as  to 

provoke  us  to  imitate  the  good  Examples  of  our 

Progenitors,  not  to  degenerate  from  them,  nor 

to  do  any  thing  unworthy  of  our  Breeding ;  and 

yet  the  divine  Original  of  our  Souls,  which  are 

Beams  from  the  Father  of  Light,  and  the  imme- 

I  diate 


Part  II.       if^  2^^^  C  R  E  A  T I  o N.  399 

diate  OfF-fpring  of  God  himfelf,  tS  ;^  3§  yiyo^ 
idfjiAvy  hath  little  Influence  upon  us  to  engage  us 
to  walk  worthily  of  our  Extraftion,  and  to  do 
nothing  that  is  bafe  or  ignoble,  and  unfuitable  to 
the  Dignity  of  our  Birth. 

You  will  fay,  how  fhall  we  manifefl:  our  Care 
of  our  Souls  ?  What  fliall  we  do  for  them  ?  I  an- 
fwer,  the  fame  we  do  for  our  Bodies. 

Firjiy  We  feed  our  Bodies,  our  Souls  are  alfa 
to  be  fed ;  the  Food  of  the  Soul  is  Knowledge, 
efpecially  Knowledge  in  the  Things  of  God,  and 
the  Things  that  concern  its  eternal  Peace  and 
Happinefs;  the  Dodrine  of  Chriftianity,  the 
Word  of  God  read  and  preach'd,  i  Pet,  iL  2.  As 
new  born  Babes  defire  the  [nicer e  Milk  of  the  Word^ 
that  ye  may  grow  thereby^  Heb.  v.  I2.  The  Apo- 
ftle  fpeaks  both  of  Milk  and  of  ftrong  Meat. 
Milk  he  there  calls  the  Principles  of  the  Dodrine 
of  Chrift.  And  again,  i  Cor,  ii.  3.  I  have  fed  you 
with  Milky  and  not  with  Meat ;  for  hitherto  ye 
were  not  able  to  bear  it.  So  we  fee  in  the  Apoftle's 
Phrafe,  feeding  of  the  Flock,  is  teaching  and  in- 
ftruding  of  them.  Knowledge  is  the  Foundation 
of  Pradice  >  it  is  impoffible  to  do  God  s  Will  be- 
fore we  know  it ;  the  Word  muft  be  received  in- 
to an  honeft  and  good  Heart,  and  underftood,  be- 
fore any  Fruit  can  be  brought  forth. 

Secondly, 


400     7X^  Wi s D o M  of  GOD     Part  IL 

Secondly^  We  heal  and  Cure  our  Bodies,  when 
they  are  inwardly  iick,  or  outwardly  harm'd : 
Sin  is  the  Sicknefs  of  the  Soul.  Matth  ix.  12. 
T^hey  that  be  whole  need  not  a  Phyftcian^  but  they 
that  be  Jick,  faith  our  Saviour  by  way  of  Simili- 
tude ;  which  he  explains  in  the  next  Verfe,  /  am 
not  come  to  call  the  Righteous^  but  Sinners  to  Re- 
fentance.  For  the  Cure  of  this  Difeafe,  an  hum- 
ble, ferious,  hearty  Repentance,  is  the  only  Phy- 
fick  ;  not  to  expiate  the  Guilt  of  it,  but  to  qua- 
lify us  to  partake  of  the  Benefit  of  that  Atone- 
ment which  our  Saviour  Chrift  hath  made  by  the 
Sacrifice  of  himfelf,  and  reftore  us  to  the  Favour 
of  God,  which  we  had  forfeited,  it  being,  as 
much  as  in  us  lies,  an  undoing  again  what  we 
have  done. 

Thirdly^  We  cloath  and  adorn  our  Bodies  j  in- 
deed too  much  Time  and  too  many  Thoughts 
we  beftow  upon  that ;  our  Souls  alfo  are  to  be 
cloath'd  with  holy  and  virtuous  Habits,  and 
adorn'd  with  good  Works,  i  Pet,  v.  5.  Be  ye 
cloath' d  with  Humility,  And  in  the  fame  Epi- 
ftle,  Chap.  ii.  2.  he  exhorts  Women  to  adorn 
themfehes ,  not  with  that  outward  adorning  of 
plaiting  the  Hair^  and  wearing  Gold^  &c.  but 
with  the  Ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  Spirit ^ 
which  is  in  the  Sight  of  God  of  great  Price : 

And. 


Part  II.       in  the  Creation.  40 1 

And  in  Rev.  xix.  8.  The  Righteoufnefs  of  the  Saints 
is  caird  fine  Linen.  And  the  Saints  are  faid  to 
be  cloath'd  in  white  Raijnent.  Matth.  xxiii.  1 1. 
Works  of  Righteoufnefs  and  a  Converfation  be- 
coming the  Gofpel  is  call'd  a  Wedding  Garment, 
Colojf.'in.  10.  Put  on  the  ?iew  Ma?i.  And  again. 
Put  on  therefore^  as  the  EleB  of  God^  Bowels  of 
Mercy,  Meeknefs,  &c.  On  the  contrary,  vicious 
Habits  and  finful  A6lions  are  compar'd  to  filthy 
Garments.  So,  Zech.  iii.  3.  J  of  ma  the  High- 
Prieft  is  faid  to  be  cloath'd  with  filthy  Garments  \ 
which  in  the  next  Verfe  are  interpreted  his  Ini- 

,  quities,  either  perfonal,  or  of  the  People  whom 
he  reprefented :  /  have  caufed  thy  Iniquity  to  pafs 

from  thee^  and  will  cloath  thee  with  Change  of 
Raiment, 

Fourthly,  We  arm  and  defend  our  Bodies,  and 
our  Souls  have  as  much  need  of  Armour  as  they; 
for  the  Life  of  a  Chriftian  is  a  continual  Warfare ; 
and  we  have  potent  and  vigilant  Enemies  to  en- 
counter withal,  the  Devil,  the  World,  and  this 
corrupt  Flefh  we  carry  about  us ;  we  had  need 
therefore  to  take  to  us  the  Chriftian  Panoply,  to 
put  on  the  whole  Armour  of  God,  that  we  may  with- 
fand  in  the  evil  day,  and  having  done  all,  may  f  and  \ 
having  our  Loins  girt  with  T'ruth,  and  having  on 
the  Br eaf -plate  of  Righteoifnefi,  and  our  Feet  Jhod 
with  the  Preparation  of  the  Gofpel  oj  Peace.  'Above 
aM,  taking  the  Shield  of  Faith  \  and  for  an  Helmet^ 
the  Hope  of  Salvation,  and  the  Eword  of  the  Spij'it^ 
which  u  the  Word  of  God,  Eph.  vi.  13,  14. 

D  d  He 


402     Hoe  Wisdom  of  GOD   Part  II. 

He  that  with  this  Chriftian  Armour  manfully 
fights  againft  and  repels  the  Temptations  and  Af- 
faults  of  his  fpiritual  Enemies ;  he  that  keeps  his 
Garments  pure,  and  his  Confcience  void  of  Of- 
fence towards  God  and  towards  Man,  (hall  enjoy 
perfedt  Peace  here,  and  Aflurance  for  ever.     T^z- 
citus  faith  of  the  Finnic  a  northern  People>  that 
they  were  feciiri  adverfus  homines,  feciiri  adverfm 
Deos,     They  need  not  fear  v>^hat  God  or  Man 
could  do  to  them,  becaufe  they  were  in  as  bad  a 
Condition  as   could   conlift  with  living  in  the 
World  3  they  could  not  be  banifli'd  into  a  worfe 
Country,  nor  put  into  worfe  Circumftances  than 
they  were  in  already.     I  might  fay  of  the  Man 
that  keeps  a  good  Confcience,  that  he  is  fecure 
againft  God  and  Man  ;  not  in  that  Senfe  the  Jp//z- 
ni  were,  but  fecure  of  any  Evil  befalling  him 
from  either.     God  can  do  him  no  Harm,  not  for 
want  of  Power,  but  for  want  of  Will,  which  is 
regulated  by  his  Truth  and  Juftice.     He  is  alfo 
fecure  in  refpeft  of  Men,  becaufe  he  is  under  the 
Protedion  of  the  Almighty;  and  if  any  there  be 
that  would  do  him  Harm,  they  (hall  either  be  re- 
ftrain'd  by  the  divine  Providence,  or  if  they  be 
permitted  to  injure  him,  it  fhall  tend  only  to  the 
Exercife  and  Imiprovement  of  his  Faith  and  Pa- 
tience, and  enhanfing  his  future  Reward  at  that 
great  Day,    when   the  Almighty  ihall  difpenfe 
Aureohe  to  thofe  Champions  who  have  fignaliz'd 
their  Valour  and  Fidelity  by  heroick  Aftions,  or 
patient  Sufferings  of  unworthy  things  for  his  fake. 
3.  A  good  Confcience  not  only  fecures  a  Man 

from 


Part  II.        in  //5^  C  R  e  a  t  i  o  n.  403 

from  God  and  Men,  but  from  himfelf  tooj  there 
is  no  Peace  to  the  Wicked ^  faith  my  Gody  no  inward 
Peaces  fuch  a  Man  is  at  odds  with  himfelf ;  for 
the  Commandments  of  God  being  agreeable  to 
the  Nature  of  Man,  and  perfedly  conformable 
to  the  Didlates  of  right  Reafon,*  Man's  Judgmenc 
gives  Sentence  with  the  divine  Law,  and  con- 
demns him  when  he  violates  any  of  them  -,  and 
fo  the  Sinner  becomes  an  Heauto?2timoriimenos,  a 
Tormentor  of  himfelf  Prima  ejl  hac  ultio^  quod 
Je  Jiidice  nemo  nocem  abfohitiir.  No  guilty  Per- 
fon  is  abfolv'd  at  his  own  Tribunal,  himfelf  be- 
ing Judge. 

Neither  let  any  profligate  Perfon,   who  hath 
bidden  Defiance  to  his  Confcience,    and  is  at 
War  with  himfelf,   think  to  take  Sanduary  in 
Atheifm,  and  becaufe  it  imports  him  highly  there 
fliould  be  no  God,  ftoutly  deny  that  there  is  any. 
For  firft,  fuppofing  that  the  Exigence  of  a  Deity 
were  not  demonftrably  or  infallibly  prov'd  (as  it 
moft  certainly  is)  yet  he  cannot  be  fure  of  the 
contrary,  that  there  is  none.     For  7io  Man  can  he 
fure  df  a  pure  Negative,  namely^  that  fuch  a  thing 
is  noty  unlefs  he  iiuill either  pretend  to  have  a  certain 
Knowledge  of  all  things  that  are  or  may  be^  than 
which  nothing  can  be  more  monjlroufly  and  ridtcu^ 
loujly  arrcga7it ;  or  elj'e^  unlcfs  he  he  fure  that  the 
being  of  nsjhat  he  denies  doth  imply  a  ContradiBion^ 
for  which  there  is  not  the  leaf.  Colour  in  this  'Cafe  % 
the  true  Notion  of  God  conffiing  in  this,  that  he  is 
a  Being  of  all  polTible  Perfection,  that  I  may  bor- 
row my  Lord  Biihop  of  Chefers  Words,  in  his 
Difcourfe  of  natural  Religion,  Page  94. 

D  d  2  ^  Now 


404     T/je  Wisdom  of  GOD     Part  II, 

Now  if  he  be  not  fure  there  is  no  Deity,  he 
cannot  be  without  fon^e  Sufpicion  and  Fear  that 
there  may  be  one. 

Secondly,  If  tloere  Jkoidd  be  a  Deity ^  fo  holy^  and 
juji^  and  powerful,  as  is  Jupposdy  what  Vengeance 
and  Indigfiation  may  fuch  vile  Mifcreants  and  Re^ 
bels  expeB,  who  have  made  it  their  Bujinefs  to  banijh 
him  out  of  the  World,  who  is  the  great  Creator  and 
Governor  of  it  \  to  undermine  his  Being,  and  eradi- 
cate all  Notions  of  him  out  of  their  own  and  other 
Mens  Minds ;  to  provoke  his  Creatures  and  Vaffals 
to  a  Contempt  of  him,  a  flighting  of  his  Fear  and 
Worfoip,  as  being  fuch  imaginary  Chimaera's  as  are 
fit  only  to  keep  Fools  in  awe  ?  Certainly  as  this  is  the 
higheji  Provocation  that  any  Man  can  be  guilty  of 
fojhatl  it  be  punifod  with  theforefi  Vengeance. 

Now  a  flender  Sufpicion  of  the  Exiftence 
of  a  Being ,  the  Denial  whereof  is  of  fo  fad 
Confequence,  muft  needs  difturb  the  Atheift's 
Thoughts,  and  fill  him  with  Fears,  and  qualify 
and  allay  all  his  Pleafures  and  Enjoyments,  and 
render  him  miferable  even  in  this  Life. 

But  on  the  other  fide,  he  that  believes  and  owns  a 
God,  if  there  fdoiild  be  none,  is  in  no  danger  of  any 
bad  Confequent  5  for  all  the  Inconvenience  of  this 
Belief  'will  be,  that  he  may  be  hereby  occafion'd  to 
tye  himfelf  up  tofome  needlefs  Refiraints  during  this 
Jkort  T^ime  of  his  hife^  wherein  notwithfianding 
2  there 


Part  11.        in  the  C  r  e  at  i  o  N.  405 

there  is,  as  to  the  prefent,  much  Peace,  ^liet,  a?id 
Safety  ;  and  as  to  the  future,  his  Error  Jhall  die 
with  him,  there  being  none  to  call  him  to  an  Account 
for  his  Mijlake.     Thus  far  the  Bifhop. 

To  which  I  fhall  add,  that  he  not  only  fufFers 
no  Damage,  but  reaps  a  confiderable  Benefit  from 
this  Miftakej  for  during  this  Life  he  enjoys  a 
pleafant  Dream  or  Fancy  of  a  future  bleffed  State, 
with  the  Thoughts  and  Expedlations  whereof  he 
folaces  himfelf  and  agreeably  entertains  his  Time, 
and  is  in  no  danger  of  being  ever  awakened  out 
of  it  and  convinced  of  his  Error  and  Folly,  Death 
making  a  full  End  of  him. 


FINIS, 


Books  printed  for  W.  Inn\s  and  R.  Manby. 

PHilofophical  Letters  between  the  late  learned  Mr.  Kaj  and  fe- 
veralof  his  ingenious  Correfpondents,  Natives  and  Foreigners; 
to  which  are  added  thofe  of  Francis  IFilloughby  Efq;  the  whole  con- 
j&fting  of  many  curious  Difcoveries  and  Improvement«;  in  the  Hillo- 
ry  of  Quadrupeds,  Rirds,  Fifhes,  Infeds,  Plants,  Foffils,  Fountains, 
i^'c.  Publifh'd  by  Mr.  D^r>^/7w.     ^-vo.   1718. 

Three  Phyfico-Theological  Difcourfes  concerning,  I.  The  pri- 
mitive Chaos  and  Creation  of  the  World.  11.  The  general  Deluge, 
its  Caufes  and  EfFedls.  III.  The  Diflblution  of  the  World,  and 
future  Conflagration  ;  wherein  are  largely  difcufs'd,  the  Produdlion 
and  Ufe  of  Mountains,  the  Original  of  Fountains,  of  form'd  Stones 
and  Sea-Fifhes  Bones  and  Shells  found  in  the  Earth,  the  Effefts  of 
particular  Floods  and  Inundations  of  the  Sea,  the  Eruptions  of  Vul- 
cano's,  the  Nature  and  Caufes  of  Earthquakes ;  alfo  an  hiilorical 
Account  of  thofe  two  late  remarkable  ones  in  Jamaica  ^ind  England', 
with  pra6lical  Inferences ;  illulbated  with  Copper  Plates.  By  John 
Ray,  late  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.  The  5'th  Edit.  ^vo.  1732. 

Joannis  Rail  Synopfis  Methodica  Avium  &  Pifcium  ;  Opus  Pofl- 
humum,  quod  vivus  recenfuit  &  perfecit  ipfe  infigniffimus  Author: 
in  quo  multas  fpecies,  in  ipfius  Ornithologia  &  Itchthyologia  defi- 
deratas,  adjecit  :  Methodumque  fuam  Pifcium  Naturae  magis  conve- 
nientem  reddidit.  ^Cum  Appendice.  &  Iconibus.     1713. 

Phyfico-Theology  :  Or,  A  Demonfiration  of  the  Being  and  At- 
tributes of  God  from  his  Works  of  Creation  ;  with  large  Notes, 
and  many  curious  Obfervations.  By  Williafn  Derhafn,  Re^flor  of 
Vpminfier  in  EJfex,  Canon  of  Windjor^  and  F.  R.  5.  The  Eighth 
Edition,  Svo.     1732. 

Aflro-Theology  :  Or,  A  Demonftration  of  the  Being  and  Attri- 
butes of  God  from  a  Survey  of  the  Heavens ;  illuftrated  with  Cop- 
per Plates.  The  Fifth  Edition.  By  the  fame  Author,  S'jo.  iyzS. 

Philofophiae  Naturalis  Principia  Mathematica,  Audlore  Ifaaco 
Newtono  Equite  Aurato.    Editio  terria,  au61a  &  emcndata.  4/^. 

Opticks  :  or,  a  Treatife  of  the  Refleclicns,  Refraftions,  Inflexions, 
and  Colours  of  Light.  The  Third  Edition,  correded.  By  Sir  Jfaac 
NezvtoUy  Kt.     Svo. 

Optice,  five  de  Reflexionibus,  Refracffionibus,  Inflexionibus,  & 
Coloribus  Lucis.  Libri  tres,  Authore  Ifaaco  Newtono,  Equite  Au- 
rato. Latine  reddidit  Samuel  Clarke,  S.  T.  P.  Editio  fecunda 
au61ior.     Szw. 

Sir  Ifaac  Newto?i\  Algebra. 

Epiftola  ad  amicum  de  Cotefii  Tnvenlis,  Curvarum  ratione,  qua2 
cum  Circulo  &  Hyperbola  comparationem  admittunt ;  cui  additur 
Appendix,  auftore  Hen,  Pemberton,  M.  D.  R.  S.  S.     4/^. 

Philofophical 


Books  printed  for  W.  Innys  a?t'd  R.  Manby.     ^ 

Philofophical  Tranfacftions,  giving  fome  Account  of  the  prefcnt 
Undertakings,  Studies,  and  Labours  of  the  Ingenious,  in  many  con- 
fiderablc  Parts  of  the  World,  from  1665  to  1727.  Continu'd  and 
publilh'd  by  Dr.  Mort'uner.  In  37  Vols.  \to.  N.  B.  There  arc 
432  Numbers,  molt  of  which  may  be  had  feparate. 

Philofophical  Experiments  and  Obfervations  of  the  late  eminent 
Dr.  Robert  Uookcy  S.  R.  S.  and  Geom.  Prof.  Grefh.  and  eminent 
Virtuofo's  in  his  Time  ;  with  Copper  Plates.  Publifh'd  by 
IV.  Derham.  F.  R.  S.     %vo.     \jz6. 

The  philofophical  Works  of  the  honourable  Robert  Boyle  Efq; 
abridg'd,  methodiz'd,  and  difposM  under  the  general  Heads  of  Phy- 
ficks,  Staticks,  Pneumaticks,  Natural  Hillory,  Chymiftry,  and  Me- 
dicine ;  the  whole  illuitrated  with  Notes,  containing  the  Improve- 
ments made  in  the  feveral  Parts  of  natural  and  experimental  Know- 
ledge fmcc  his  Time.     By  Peter  Shaw,  M.  D.   3  Vols.  \to.   1725. 

Perfuafive  to  a  holy  Life,  from  the  Happinefs  which  attends  it, 
both  in  this  World  and  in  the  World  to  come.     By  Mr.  Ray. 

A  Treatife  of  Algebra,  in  two  Books  ;  the  firft  treating  of  ths 
arithmetical,  and  the  fecond  of  the  geometrical  Part.  The  Second 
Edition,  with  Additions.  ^-^  Philip  Ronayne,  Gent.  %vo.  1727. 

EkxTicnta  Arithmeticae  Numerofas  &  Speciofae,  in  ufum  Juventu- 
tis  Academics,  Audtore  Edv.  Wells,  S.  T.  P.  Editio  altera  Auflior, 
^vo,     1726. 

Introdu(flio  ad  Veram  Phyficam.  Authore  Joanne  Keill,  M.  D. 
Aftr.  Prof.  Sav.  R.  S.  S.     Editio  quarta,  %vo.     1719. 

A  new  mathematical  Didionary  ;  wherein  is  contain'd,  not  only 
the  Explanation  of  the  bare  Terms,  but  likewife  a  Hiitory  of  thc- 
Rife,  Progrefs ,  State,  Properties,  ^c.  of  Things,  both  in  pure 
Mathematicks  and  natural  Philofophy,  fo  far  as  it  comes  under  a 
mathematical  Confideration,  '^vo.     1726. 

An  EfTiy  on  Perfpe^tive.  By  W.  J.  'sGravefande,  ^c.  2>vo.  1724. 

The  religious  Philofopher ;  or  the  right  Ufe  of  contemplating  the 
Works  of  the  Creator,  ly?,  In  the  wonderful  Structure  of  animal 
Bodies,  and  in  particular  Man.  zdly.  In  the  no  lefs  wonderful  and 
wife  Formation  of  the  Elements,  tlieir  various  Effeds  upon  animal 
and  vegetable  Bodies.  And,  3^/)',  In  the  molt  amazing  Structure 
of  the  Heavens,  with  all  its  Furniture,  defign'd  for  the  ConviAion 
of  Atheifls  and  Infidels.  By  that  learned  Mathematician  Dr.  Neu- 
wentyt :  To  which  is  preiix'd  a  Letter  to  the  Tranflator,  by  the 
Reverend  J  T.  Defaguliers,  L.  L.  D.  F.  R.  S.  The  Fourth  Edi- 
tion, adorn'd  with  Cuts.    3  Vols.  '^vo. 

An  a^nalytick  Treatife  of  conic  Sedions,  and  their  Ufe,  for  refol- 
ding ot  Equations  in  determinate  and  indeterminate  Problems,  being 
jhe  pofthumcus  Works  of  the  Marquis  de  rtiofpital,  ^io.  1723. 

The  great  and  wonderful  Worlds  oi  God  humbly  reprefented,  and 
the  jult  and  equal  Diitributions  of  Providence  demonltrated  i  with 
an  Appendix  concerning  St.  Paul.  By  an  ancient  Doftor  oi  Phy- 
iiek.     Zvo.     1727. 

Allrono- 


Books  printed  for  W.  Innys  and  R.  Manby. 

Aflronomical  Principles  of  Religion,  natural  and  revealM,  in  ninff 
Parts.  I.  Lemmata  :  Or,  the  known  Laws  of  Matter  and  Motion. 
II.  A  particular  Account  of  the  Syftem  of  the  Univerfe.  III.  The 
Truth  of  that  Syilem  briefly  demonftrated.  IV.  Certain  Obferva- 
tions  drawn  from  that  Syftem.  V.  Probable  Conjedlarcs  of  the 
Nature  and  Ufes  of  the  feveral  celeftial  Bodies  contain'd  in  the  fame 
Syftem.  VI.  Important  Principles  of  natural  Religion  demonftra- 
ted from  the  foregoing  Obfervations.  VII.  Important  Principles 
of  divine  Revelation  conlirm'd  from  the  foregoing  Conjeflures. 
VIII.  Such  Inferences  fhewn  to  be  the  common  Voice  of  Nature 
and  Reafon,  from  the  Teftimonies  of  the  moft  confiderable  Perfons 
of  all  Ages.  IX.  A  Recapitulation  of  the  whole,  with  a  large  and 
ferious  Addrefs  to  all,  efpecially  the  Scepticks  and  Unbelievers  of 
our  Agei  together  with  a  Preface,  of  the  Temper  of  Mind  necefia- 
rv  for  the  Difcovery  of  divine  Truth,  and  of  the  degree  of  Evidence 
that  ought  to  be  expe£led  in  divine  Matters.  By  William  WhiJioHy 
M.  A.  fometime  Profeflbr  of  the  Mathematicks  in  the  Univerfity  of 
Cambridge.     Sz/o.     1725.    . 

Religion  of  Nature  delineated.     4/^. 

An  Introduction  to  natural  Philofophy,  or  philofophical  Le(5lures 
read  in  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford,  A.  D.  1 700.  To  which  are  ad- 
ded, the  Demonftrations  of  Monfieur  Huygens\  Theorems,  concern- 
ing the  centrifugal  Force  and  circular  Motion.  By  John  Keill, 
M.  D.  Savilian  Profeflbr  of  Aftronomy,  F.  R.  S.  The  Second 
Edition.     %v'o.     1726. 

Dr.  Robert  Hook's  pofthumous  Works,  in  which  the  prefent  Defi- 
ciency of  natural  Philofophy  is  difcours'd  of,  with  the  Methods  of 
xendring  it  more  certain  and  beneficial,  ^c,  Publifli'd  by  Richard 
Waller  £fq;    I  olio. 

Johannis  Seldeni  Jurifconfulti  Opera  omnia,  tarn  edita  quam  in- 
cdita,  in  tribus  Voluminibus,  collegit  ac  recenfuit,  Vitam  Auftoris, 
Prsefationes  &  Indices  adjecit  David  Wilkim,  S.  T.  P.  Archidiaco- 
nus  Sufl'olcienfis,  Canonicus  Cantuarienfis,  Reverendiflimo  in  Chri- 
fto  Patri  ac  Domino  Gulielmo,  Divina  Providentia  Archiepifcopo 
Cantuarienfi,  ^r.  a  Sacris  Domefticis.  In  6  Tom.  Fol.  Lo?id.  1726. 

The  philofophical  Tranfaftions  (from  the  Year  1720  to  the  Year 
J 732)  abridg'd,  and  difpos'd  under  general  Heads,  by  Mr.  Rei d  znd 
John  Gray,  A.  M.  F.  R.'S.  In  two  Volumes;  being  a  Continua- 
tion of  the  Abridgment  done  by  Mr.  Lowtharp,  Jones,  and  Motte. 


^TF*  ouf: 


m 


m^' 


^isi»yi-^  »- 


