Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


E.BIBL-.RADCL. 


Qxjo     i.  ■    7£' 


1 


r 


I 


THE  BRIDGEWATER  TREATISES 

ON  THE  POWER  WISDOM  AND  GOODNESS  OF  GOD 
AS  MANIFESTED  IN  THE  CREATION 


TREATISE  VII 

ON  THE  HISTORY  HABITS  AND  INSTINCTS  OF  ANIMALS 
BY  THE  REV.  WILLIAM  KIRBY,  M.A. 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES 
VOL  II 


''  c'eST,  la  BIBLB  a  IJi  MAIN,  QUE  NOUS  DEV0N8  ENTRER  DANS 
LB  TEMPLE  AUGUSTE  DE  lA.  NATURE,  POUR  BIEN  COMPRENDRR 
LA  VOIX  DU  CR^ATEUR."  GAEDE. 


r 


ON  THE 

POWER  WISDOM  AND  GOODNESS  OF  GOD 

AS  MANIFESTED  IN  THE  CREATION 

OF  ANIMALS  AND  IN  THEIR  HISTORY  HABITS 

AND  INSTINCTS 

BT  THE 

REV.  WILLIAM  KIRBY,  M.A.  F.R.8.  etc. 

RECTOR  OF  BARilAM. 


LONDON 

WILLIAM   PICKERING 

1835 


C.  WHITTINOHAII,  TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCRRY  I.ANK. 


CONTENTS 
OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME. 

Page 

Explanation  op  Plates   vii 

Chap.  XIII.  Functions  and  Instincts.  Cirripedes  and  Cri- 

ndideana   2 

XIV.  — — Entomostracan  Condyhpes ,  16 

XV. Crustacean  Condyhpes.  •  •  •  36 

XVI. ' Myriapod  Condy lopes   ....  63 

XVII.  Motive,  locomotive  and  prehensory  organs.  •  92 

1 .  Rotatory  organs  •  • .  • 96 

2.  Tentacles 99 

3.  Suckers    114 

4.  Bristles    127 

5.  Natatory  organs 131 

6.  Wings 144 

7.  Steering  organs   161 

8.  Legs • 165 

XVIII.  Instinct  in  general    220 

XIX.  Functions  and  Instincts.  Arachnidans^Pseu^ 

darachnidans^  and  Acaridan  Condy  lopes  .  281 

XX.  ■  Insect  Condy  lopes 310 

XXI. Fishes 371 

XXII. Reptiles 409 

XXIII. Birds 435 

XXIV. Mammalians 475 

XXV; Man 518 

Conclusion 525 


VOL.  II. 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES. 


VOLUME  II. 


PLATE  IX.    Ektomostracaks. 


Page 


Fio.  1 — 5.  States  of  Adheres  Perearum   ^  •  •  •  • 

1.  Fcetus  in  Egg. 

2.  ■    further  developed. 

3.  Larve. 

4.  Pupc? 

a.  AntennflB. 

b.  Unguiculate  thoracic  legs. 

c.  Natatory,  sub-abdominal  ditto. 

d.  e.  Cast  skin. 
6.  Imago. 

a.  a.  Maxillary  legs. 

h.  &.  AntennsB. 

c.  c.  Two  posterior  pair  of  thoracic  legs  confluent, 
so  as  to  form  one  organ,  and  to  each  of  which 
the  sucker  (({)  is  hooked,  by  which  the  animal 
fixes  itself  immoveably. 

e.  Abdomen,  shewing  the  eggs  in  the  ovaries. 
//.  Egg  pouches. 

5.  a.  Natural  sise  of  the  animal. 

^^^  • 

PLATE  X.    Crustaceans. 


25 


Fig.  1.   Birgus  Latro ••.......       48 

2.  Pagurtu  clibanarius  •  • 45 

a.  a.  a.  Adhesive  organs  at  the  tail. 


•  • 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES.  Vll 

Page 

b,  b.  c.  c.   Two  last  pairs  of  thoracic  legs,  by 
which  it  also  adheres  to  the  shell  it  inhabits, 

d.  d.  Egg  bearers. 

€.  e.  Forceps,  in  this  species  both  of  the  same 
size. 
3.  Phyllosama  brevicome 59 

PLATE  XL    Arachnidav  aud  Insbct  Condylopbs. 

Fig.  1 .  Mormolyce  phyllodes 359 

2.  Arcinea  notacantha 299 

3.  Portion  of  an  honey-comb,  to  shew  that  every 

cell  stands,  as  it  were,  upon  three 337 

PLATE  XL  B.    Abachvidav  Coitdtlopes. 

Fig.  1 .  Ctenizafodiens 287 

2.  Nest  and  tube  of  do. 

a.  Lid  or  trap-door.    b.  Tube. 

3.  Cteniza  nidulans    292 

4.  Nest  of  do. 

a.  Trap-door.     b.  Tube. 

PLATE  XL  C.     Insect  Cokdtlopes. 

Fig.  I. — 3.  Mymnca  KirbU 340 

4.  Nest  of  do. 

PLATE  XIL    Fishes. 

Fig.  I.  Callicthys 142 

2.  Pectoral  bony  ray  of  a  Silurus^  found  in  digging 

at  Blakenham  parva  Rectory ^  in  Suffolk    .  •  •  •     140 

PLATE  XIIL     Fishes  (continued). 

Fig.  1.  Malthe  VesperHlio 137 

2.  Lateral  view  of  the  head  of  do. 

3.  A  species  of  Jishing  frog  from  China 138 


•  •  • 


Mil        EXPLANATION  OP  THE  PLATES. 


PLATE  XIV.  Reptile*. 

Fig.  I.  Proteus  anguinus,  vol.  i.  35. . .  • 413 

a.  Gills. 

2.  Anterior  lee  of  the  Chamaleon    I    ,  ^^ 

*  ^    192 


3.  Posterior  do. 


} 


PLATE  XV.     Birds. 


Fig.  1.  Sylvia  cisticola 467 

2.  Nest  of  do. 

3.  Portion   of  do.   to  shew  the  stitching  of  the 

leaves. 

PLATE  XVI.    Quadrupeds. 
ChlamyphoruM  truncatus • 207 


C  M    i«-(L,    iti 


.  \ 


Muivr     lllk 


fl.t,   XI    B 


■% 


CJffV*,.  u. 


Pinu  xm. 


f 


/ 


puuAir. 


S 


2. 


3. 


C  M  d/rti* .  djtl 


J^t.u:7.   Vt^ 


MtjjcT    icM 


n; 


h 


^s 


«tr 


THE 


HISTORY,  HABITS,  AND  INSTINCTS 


OF  ANIMALS. 


Chapter  XIII. 


FuTictians  and  Instincts.     Cirripedes  and 

Crinoideans. 

CIRRIPEDES. 

1  HERE  is  a  class  of  animals  defended  by  multi- 
▼alve  shells,  separated  from  the  MoUuscans  not 
only  by  the  more  complex  structure  of  their 
shells,  but  also  by  very  material  differences  in 
the  organization  of-  the  creatures  that  inhabit 
them.  These  Linn6  considered  as  forming  a 
single  genus,  which  he  named  Lepas,  a  word 
derived  from  the  Greek  lexicographers,  and 
explained  by  Hesychius  ad  meaning  a  kind  of 
shell-fish  that  adheres  to  the  rocks.  In  this 
country  these  animals  are  known  by  the  general 
name  of  Barnacles.  Lamarck,  I  believe,^ was 
the  first  who  regarded  them  as  entitled  to  the 

TOL.  II.  B 


2  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

rank  of  a  class,  which  he  denominated  Cirr- 
hipeda,  not  conscious,  that  by  the  insertion  of 
the  aspirate,  he  made  his  term,  like  MofwculuSj 
half  Greek  and  half  Latin :  later  writers  who 
have  adopted  the  class,  to  avoid  this  barbarism, 
have  changed  the  term  to  Cin^hopoda,  but  as 
this  gives  a  different  meaning  to  the  word, 
changing /ringed  or  tendriUlegs^^  very  happily 
expressing  the  most  striking  character  of  the 
animals  intended,  into  yellow-legs^^  which  does 
not  indicate  any  prominent  feature,  I  shall, 
after  Dr.  Leach  and  Mr.  W.  S.  Mac  Leay, 
omitting  the  aspirate,  call  them  Cirripeda^  or 
Cirripedes. 

These  animals  have  a  soft  body,  protected  by 
a  multi valve  shell.  They  are  without  eyes,  or 
any  distinct  head ;  have  no  powers  of  locomo- 
tion, but  are  fixed  to  various  substances.  Their 
body,  which  has  no  articulations,  is  enveloped 
in  a  kind  of  mantle,  and  has  numerous  teBta-* 
cular  arms,  conaisting  of  many  jouits,  fringed  oa 
each  side,  and  issuing  by  pairs  from  jointed 
pedicles :  their  mouth  is  armed  with  tran&veise 
toothed  jaws  in  pairs,  which,  like  the  mandibleB 
of  the  Crustaceans,  are  furnished  with  a  ieelier ; 
they  have  a  knotty  longitudinal  spinal  chord ; 
gills  for  respiration.;  and  for  circulation/ a  heart 
and  vascular  syttem. 

J  Lat.  Cirri,  *  Gr.  Ktppoc* 


CIRRIPEDES.  3 

This  clam  is  divided  into  two  Orders. 

1.  The  JirH  consists  of  the  Lepadites^  or 
Groose-barnacles/  the  species  of  which  are  dis- 
tinguished by  a  tendinous,  contractile,  and  often 
long  tube,  fixed  by  its  base  to  some  solid  marine 
substance,  supporting  a  compressed  shell,  con^^ 
sisting  of  valves  united  to  each  other  by  mem- 
brane,  and  by  having  six  pairs  of  tentacular 
arms.  They  are  usually  found  in  places  ex-« 
posed  to  the  fluctuations  of  the  waves.  One 
genus'  appears  to  perforate  rocks  to  form  a 
habitation.  These  animals  roll  up  and  unroll 
their  arms  with  great  velocity,  thus  creating  a 
little  whirlpool,  that  brings  to  their  mouth  an 
abundant  supply  of  animalcules,  an  action 
which  Poll  compares  to  fishermen  casting  a  net. 
Some  species,  instead  of  shell,  are  covered  by 
a  membranous  sac,  having  occasionally  very 
minute  shelly  valves.^ 

2.  The  second  Order  of  Cirripedes  consists  of 
the  Balanites^  or  Acorn-barnacles,  which  are  dis- 
tioguifthed  from  the  Lepadites  by  a  shelly,  in- 
stead of  a  tendinous  tube,  the  mouth  of  which 
is  closed  by  an  operculum,  usually  consisting  of 
four  valves.  The  animals  of  this  Order  are 
commonly  regarded  as  sessile ;  but,  if  Lamarck 
is  right  in  considering  the  valves  of  the  shell  of 
the  Lepadites  as  analogous  to  the  operculum  of 

>  Anatifa*  Pentetasmis,  Sec.  <  Lithotrya, 

'  Anatifa  cariacea  et  leporina. 


4  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  Balanites,  as  it  seems  to  be,  and  their  tendi- 
nous tube  as  really  a  part  of  the  body  of  the 
animal — as  its  being  organized,  living,  and  mus- 
cular, seems  to  prove — ^then  it  must  be  analogous 
to  the  shelly  tube  of  the  latter,  and  both  must 
be  considered  as  elevated  by  a  footstalk.  This 
tube,  in  the  Balanites,  consists  usually  of  six 
pieces,  soldered,  as  it  were,  together;  and  in 
several  species,  as  in  the  common  sea-adorn,^  of 
a  triangular  shape,  and  having  their  acute 
angle  alternately  at  the  base  and  at  the  mouth  of 
the  tube.  The  base  of  the  tube  generally  takes 
the  form  of  the  bodies  upon  which  it  is  fixed, 
and  is  sometimes  composed  of  shell,  sometimes 
of  membrane,  and  sometimes  it  is  incomplete. 
The  animal,  in  this  Order,  has  twenty-four  ten- 
tacular arms,  shorter  than  those  of  the  Lepadites, 
consisting  of  two  sorts,  namely,  six  pairs  of 
large  similar  ones,  but  unequal  in  size,  placed 
above;  and  as  many  smaller  pairs,  dissimilar 
and  unequal,  and  placed  below.  One  pair  of 
these  is  much  larger  than  the  others.  In  the 
water  they  keep  these  tentacles^  in  perpetual 
motion,  and  thus  arrest,  or,  by  producing  a  cur- 
rent to  their  mouth,  absorb  the  animalcules,, 
which  constitute  their  food.    They  not  only  fix 

^  Balanus  Tintinnabulum, 

2  These  organs,  though  called  tentacles,  from  their  use,  seem 
rather  analogous  to  the  antenTUB  and  other  jointed  organs  of 
Condy  lopes. 


GIRRIPEDE8.  O 

d^niBelyes  upon  inanimate  substances,  such  as 
rocks,  stones,  the  hulls  of  ships,  &c*  but  also 
upon  various  marine  animals  and  plants.  Thus 
some  are  found  on  Zoophytes,  as  sponges  and 
madrepores;  others  attached  closely  to  each 
other  on  shell-fish,  especially  bivalves,  so  closely 
that  the  point  of  a  pin  cannot  be  thrust  between 
-them.  One  species  takes  its  station  on  the  shell 
of  the  turtle;^  others  plant  themselves  in  the 
flesh  of  the  seal ;  and  others  bury  their  tube  in 
the  unctuous  blubber  of  the  whale« 

If  we  compare  the  animals  of  the  above  Orders 
with  each  other,  we  shall  find  that  they  are  fitted 
by  their  Creator  to  collect  their  food  in  different 
ways;  The  Lepadites^  by  means  of  their  long 
contractile  flexible  tube,  can  rise  or  sink,  and 
head,  themselves  in  different  directions,  so  as,  in 
some  sort,  to  pursue  their  prey ;  their  tentacles, 
also,  from  their  greater  length,  seem  to  further 
this  end:  these,  according  to  Poll's  metaphor 
abov«  alluded  to,  they  can  throw  out  and  draw 
in.  laden  with  fry,  as  a  fisherman  does  his  net. 
When  their  prey  is  in  their  mouth,  it  is  subjected 
to  the  ac^on  of  their  toothed  jaws,  which  seem 
more  numerous  and  powerful  than  those  of  the 
Balanites ;  and  as  the  valves  forming  the  shell 
are  more  numerous  and  connected  by  membrane, 
and  the  whole  shell  more  compressed  than  the 
operculum  of  the  last  named  animals,  we  may 

*  Coronula  testudinaria. 


0  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

suppose  that  they  are  capaUe  of  a  more  yari^ 
action,  and  one  that  may  perhaps  add  to  the  mo- 
mentum of  the  masticating  organs.  Hence  we 
may  conjecture  that  the  animals  destined  to 
form  their  nutriment,  may  be  lai^er,  so  as  to 
require  more  exertion  and  force,  both  to  take 
and  to  masticate. 

In  the  other  Order,  the  structure  of  the  Sor 
hnites  seems  to  indicate  merely  the  protrusi<m 
and  employment  of  their  tentacles ;  and  being 
usually  attached  to  floating  bodies,  such  as  the 
hulls  of  ships,  or  parasitic  upon  locomotive  ani- 
mals, riding  as  they  do  upon  the  back  of  the 
turtle,  the  dolj^in,  and  the  whale,  they  may  visit 
various  seas  in  security,  and  feast  all  the  while, 
with  little  trouble  and  exertion,  upon  aninml*- 
cules  of  evary  description,  the  produce  of  ardic, 
temperate,  and  tropical  seas. 

With  respect  to  their  place  in  nature,  it  seems 
not  quite  dear  whether  they  should  be  r^arded 
as  leading  from  the  MoUuscans,  with  which 
Cuvier  arranges  them,  towards  the  Crustaceans, 
and  they  certainly  seem  to  have  organs  bor- 
rowed from  both ;  their  shells  and  mantle  in 
some  degree  from  one,  and  their  palpigerous 
mandibles  and  jointed  organs,  proceeding  in 
pairs  from  a  common  footstalk — like  the  interior 
antennae  of  the  lobster — and  knotty  spinal  chord 
from  the  other :  but  with  respect  to  their  jointed 
organs,   I   must  observe  that  they   still    more 


CIRRIPBDES.  7 

doB^  KMmble  ihode  of  some  of  the  Encri- 
mte8»^  like  than  beiag  fringed  on  each  side, 
though  not  with  organs  of  that  description.  A 
learned  naturalist,  Mr.  W.  S.  Mac  Leay,  is  of 
opinion  that  the  Echinidans,  or  sea  urchins,  ex- 
hibit some  i^proximation  to  the  Balanites.^  If, 
indeed,  we  compare  the  genus  Caronula  with  an 
EehimtSj  we  shall  discover  several  points  in 
which  their  structure  agrees.  We  learn  from 
Lamarck,  that  the  pieces  of  the  so  called  oper- 
culum, which  close  the  mouth  of  the  former 
shell,  are  affixed  rather  to  the  animal  than  to 
the  shell.  Thus  the  operculum,  in  some  sort, 
represents  the  jaws  of  an  Echinus,  though  con- 
sisting of  fewer  pieces,  and  the  tube  appears 
divided  into  alleys,  like  the  crust  of  that  animal* 
These  circumstances  seem  to  prove  some  affinity 
between  the  Cirripedes  and  Radiaries;  they 
appear  also  to  have  some  points  in  common  with 
l^vigny's  Nereideans,  especially  Amphitrite} 
Weighing  all  these  circumstances,  I  have  thought 
it  best  to  place  the  Cirripedes  immediately  he^ 
fore  the  Entomostracan  Crustaceans. 

But  what  if  these  Cirripedes  should  at  last 
prove  to  be,  not  the  guides  to  the  great  Crusta- 
cean host,  but  its  legitimate  progeny  ?  This  has 
been  asserted,  at  least  partially,  by  a  modern 
zoologist,  who  has  assigned  his  reasons  for  this 

1  See  Plate  III.  B.  Fio.  1. 

«  Hor.EnUi.^VZ.  '  Ibid. 


8  FUNCTIONS  AND  IN0TINCTS« 

Bingular  and  startling  opinion.  I  will  not  say 
the  thing  is  impossible — for  with  Gk>d  all  things 
are  possible — ^but  it  certainly  appears  in  the 
highest  degree  improbable.  That  a  2k>ea  should 
become  a  crab  is  sufficiently  extraordinary,  and 
an  opinion,  as  Latreille  remarks,  which,  if  it  be 
not  erroneous,  has  great  need  of  support  from 
experiment  :^  but  that  a  locomotive  animal, 
gifted  with  eyes  and  legs,  should,  by  an  extraor* 
dinary  metamorphosis,  in  its  perfect  state,  be- 
come a  barnacle,  without  head,  eyes,  or  locomo* 
tiye  organs,  can  never  be  admitted  till  confirmed 
by  repeated  experiments  of  the  most  able  and 
practised  zoologists,  so  as  to  place  the  matter 
beyond  dispute.  I  by  no  means,  however,  m^in 
to  assert  that  Mr.  Thompson  did  not  think  he 
saw  what  he  has  stated,  in  both  cases,  to  take 
place,  but  he  was  probably  deceived  by  appear- 
ances  in  some  such  way  as  he  states  Slabber  to 
have  been.* 

A  single  fact,  observed  by  Poli,  is  sufficient  to 
overturn  this  whole  hypothesis.  This  illustrious 
conchologist  relates  that  he  had  an  opportunity 
of  examining  the  immense  fecundity  of  the 
sessile  barnacles.  '^  In  the  beginning  of  June 
he  found  innumerable  aggregations  of  them, 
covering  certain  boats  that  had  been  long  sta* 
tionary,  which,  when  closely  examined,  were  so 

*   Cours  D^EntamologiCy  i.  385. 
'  ZooL  Research.  No.  i.  7. 


C1RRIPEDE6.  9 

minute,  that  single  shells  were  not  bigger  than 
the  point  of  a  needle ;  and  that  from  that  time 
they  grew  very  rapidly,  and  anived  at  their  full 
size  in  October."  These  very  minute  ones  must 
have  be«i  hatched  from  the  egg,  and  not  pro- 
duced from  larves. 

With  r^ard  to  the  functions  and  instincts  of 
these  Cirripedes,  very  little  has  been  observed* 
We  see  from  the  above  account  of  them,  that^ 
like  many  other  animals  amongst  ,the  lowest 
grades  of  the  animal  kingdom,  they  are  fur- 
nished with  particular  oigans  adapted  to  the 
capture  of  animalcules  and  other  minor  inhabi- 
tants of  the  deep,  which  they  help  to  keep 
within  due  limits.  Probably  they  act  upon  the 
substances  to  which  they  attach  themselves,  and 
promote  the  decomposition  of  shells,  and  other 
exuviae  of  defunct  animals,  and  also  of  the  rocks 
and  ligneous  substances  on  which  they  take  then: 
station.  Of  this  we  are  sure,  that  they  work 
His  work  who  gave  them  being,  and  assigned 
them  their  several  stations  in  the  world  of 
waters. 

CRINOiDEANS. 

In  the  deepest  abysses  of  the  ocean,  it  is 
probable,  lurks  a  tribe  of  plant-like  animals,  to 
judge  from  its  numerous  fossil  remains,  abound- 
ing in  genera  and  species  that  are  very  rarely 


10  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

seen  in  a  recent  state,  and  which,  fipom  a  sup* 
posed    resemblance    between    the    prehensory 
organs  or  arms,  surrounding  the  head  or  mouth  of 
several  speciea  belonging  to  the  tribe,  when  their 
extremities  conrerge,  to  the  blossom  of  a  liliaceous 
plant,  have  been  denominated   Encrinites  and 
Crinaideafu.^    It  was  not  my  original  intention, 
as  little  or  nothing  was  known  with  respect  to 
the  habits  and  station  of  the  few  recent  ones  that 
have  been  met  with — except  that  one  has  been 
taken  in  the  seas  of  Europe,  and  three  in  the 
West  Indies,  namely,  near   Martinique,    Bar- 
bados, and  Nevis — ^to  have  introduced  them  into 
the  present  work,  but  having  subsequently  seen 
fragments  of  a  specimen,  taken  either  in  the 
Atlantic  or  Pacific,  I  am  not  certain  which,  imd 
upon  examining  it  under  the  microscope,  finding 
evident  traces  of  suckers  on  the  underside  of 
its  fingers,  and  of  the  tentacles  that  form  its 
fringes,'  a  circumstance  I  found  afterwards  men- 
tioned by  Ellis,  and  which  throws  some  light 
upon  their  economy,  I  felt  that  I  ought  not  to 
pass  them  wholly  without  notice,  and  finding  in 
the  Hunterian  Museum  a  very  fine  specimen 
which  does  not  appear  to  have  been  figured,  for 
the  figure  given  by  Ellis  seems  to  have  been 
taken  from  Dr.  Hunter's  specimen,  now  at  Glas- 
gow, and  Mr.  Miller's  fi*om  a  specimen  of  Mr. 
Tobin's,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  by  the  kind 

'  From  Kpiyoy,  a  lily.  *  Plate  !II.  B.  Fig.  2. 


peimu»i<m  of  the  Curators  of  the  Mufleam  in 
lincolii's  Inn  Fields,  I  was  allowed  to  haye  a 
fignie  of  it  taken  by  my  ajtist,  Mr.  C.  M.  Curtis.^ 
Lamarck  has  placed  the  Crinoi'deans»  led  pro^ 
bably  by  their  plant^like  aspect,  in  the  same 
Older  with  his  Floating  Polgpes,*  not  aware  that 
the  majority  are  evidently  Jia^ed^  but  Cuvier 
aad  most  modem  zodogisls  consider  them,  with 
more  reason,  as  forming  a  family  of  the  StfUerir 
dams^  from  which  the  way  to  them  is  by  the  genus 
Cmnrntulay  remarkable  for  its  jointed  rays  fringed 
on  each  side.  The  Marsupites^  as  Mr.  Mantell, 
after  Mr.  Miller,  has  observed,  form  the  link 
which  connects  the  proper  or  pedunculated 
Ccinoideans  with  the  Stelleridans.  If  we  com* 
pafe  them  again  with  the  class  last  described, 
the  CuripedeMf  especially  the  Lepadites^  we  shall 
find  several  points  which  they  possess  in  common. 
In  the  first  place  both  sit  upon  a  footstalk,  though 
ofa  different  structure  and  substance ;  the  animal 
in  both,  in  its  principal  seat,  is  protected  by 
shelly  pieces  or  valves;  the  head  or  mouth  in 
both,  is  surrounded  by  dichotomizing  articulated 
organs,  involuted,  and  <^en  converging  at  the 
summit^  and  fringed  on  each  side,  in  the  Crinoi* 
deans,  with  a  series  of  lesser  dlgitations,  and  in 
the  Cirripedes  with  a  dense  fringe  of  hairs.  If 
the  opinion  of  Mr.  W.  S.  Mac  Leay,  stated  above, 

*  Pirate  III.  B.  Fig.  1.  '  Pob^pi  natanies; 


13  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

that  some  ^f  the  Echinoderms  exhibit  an  ap- 
proximation to  some  of  the  Cirripedes^  is  cor^ 
rect,  as  it  seems  to  be,  the  CrindideanSj  though 
still  far  removed,  would  form  one  of  the  links 
that  concatenate  them ;  or  if  their  connection  is 
thought  merely  analogical,  the  Balanites  would 
be  the  analogues  of  the  Echinida$u  and  of  the 
sessile  Crindideans,  and  the  Lepadites  oi  the 
pedunculated  ones. 

The  following  characters  distinguish  the  Pen-* 
tacrinitesy  to  which  Tribe  all  the  known  recent 
species  belong. 

Aninudf  consisting  of  an  angular  flexible 
column,  composed  of  numerous  joints,  articula- 
ting by  means  of  cartilage,  and  perforated  for 
the  transmission  of  a  siphon  or  intestinal  canal, 
and  sending  forth  at  intervals,  in  whorls,  several 
articulated  cylindrical  branches,  curving  into  a 
hook  at  their  summit ;  fixed  at  its  base,  and  8up<« 
porting  at  its  free  extremity  a  cup-like  boJy, 
containing  the  mouth  and  larger  viscera,  consist- 
ing  of  several  pieces,  terminating  above  in  five 
(or  six)  dichotomizing,  articulated,  seini*cylin* 
drical  arms,  fringed  with  a  double  series  of 
tentacular  jointed  dotations,  furnished  below 
on  each  side  with  a  series  of  minute  suckers ; 
these  arms,  when  expanded,  resemble  a  star  of 
five  (or  six)  rays,  and  when  they  converge,  a 
pentapetalous  or  hexapetalous  IQiaceous  flower. 
The  whole  animal,  when  alive,  is  supposed  to  be 


CRINOIDEANg.  13 

imrested  with  a  gelatinoud  muscular  integu* 
ment. 

In  the  specimen  figured  by  Mr  EUis,  and  that 
in  the  Hunterian  Museum,  there  appear  to  be 
six  ums  springing  from  the. so-called  pelvis,  but 
the  natural  number  appears  to  hejivey  correspond 
ding  with  the  p^itagonal  column.  Mr.  Miller 
seeuM  to  be  of  opinion  that  the  species  described 
by  M.  Guettard,  and  that  which  he  has  himself 
figured,  are  the  same  species,  and  synonymous 
with  the  Isis  Asteria  of  Linn6  and  the  JEncrinus 
Caput  MeduMB  of  Lamarck,  but  to  judge  from 
the  figures  of  the  first  in  Parkinson,^  and  of  the 
other  in  Miller,'  ccmipared  with  that  which  is 
given  in  this  work^^  the  last  seems  to  differ  I 

fiom  both,  as  well  in  the  pelvis,  as  in  the  dicho- 
tomies, and  length  of  the  arms;  its  suckers 
likewise  appear  to  be  circular,^  and  not  angular 
as  they  are  described  by  Mr.  Miller  under  the 
name  of  plates.^  If  this  observation  turns  out 
correet,  I  would  distinguish  the  last  species  by 
the  name  of  Pentacrinus  Astei^. 

The  stem  of  the  Crinoideans  consists  of  nu- 
merous joints,  united  by  cartilages,  which  exhibit 
8ev»al  peculiarities ;  in  the  first  place  the  upper 
and  under  side  is  beautifiilly  sculptured,  so  as  to 
r^iesent  a  star  of  five  rays,  or  a  pentapetalous 

^  Organic  Remains^  ii.  t.  xix,f.  1.         *  Crinotdea^  48.  t.  1. 
»  Plate  III.  B.  Fig.  1.  *  Ibid.  Fig.  2. 

*  Vbi  iupr.  54.  t.  ii./.  6. 


14  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

flower;  the  Creator's  object  in  this  structure 
appears  to  be  the  attachment  of  the  cartilage 
that  connects  them,  and,  perhaps,  to  afford  means 
for  a  degree  of  rotatory  motion,  as  well  as  to 
prevent  dislocations,  and  also  to  increase  the 
flexure  of  the  stemf  accoiding  to  circtnnstances, 
and  the  will  of  the  animal .  For  the  transmission 
of  the  siphcm,  wh^ber  a  spinal  chord,  or  intes- 
tinal canal,  or  both,  each  joint  of  the  column  is 
perforated,  the  aperture  being  round  in  some, 
and  floriform  in  others.  The  whole  stem,  with 
its  whorls  of  brami^es,  exhibits  a  striking  resem* 
bknce  to  the  branch  of  the  common  horse-taii.^ 
The  entire  structure  seems  calculated  to  enable 
the  animal  to  bend  its  stem,  which  appears  very 
long,  in  any  direction,  like  the  Lepadites,  and 
thus  as  it  were  to  pursue  its  prey;  we  may 
suppose  that  the  branching  arms,  fingers,  and 
their  lateral  oi^ans,  when  they  are  extended 
horizontally  and  all  expanded,  must  form  an 
ami^e  net,  far  exceeding  that  of  the  Cirripedes, 
which,  when  they  have  their  prey  within  it& 
circumference,  by  converging  their  arkns,  and 
closing  all  their  digitations,  and  employing  their 
suckers,  they  can  easily  so  manage  as  to  prevent 
the  escape  of  any  animal  induded  within  the 
meshes  of  their  net. 
With  regard  to  their  functions,  and  what  ani- 

'  Equisetum  arvenst. 


«     CRINOIDEANS,  15 

mala  their  Creator  has  given  a  charge  to  them 
to  keep  within  dae  limits,  little  can  be  known  by 
observation ;  as  nothing  like  jaws  has  been  dis- 
covered in  them,  in  which  they  differ  from  the 
Cinipedes,  it  shoold  seem  that  either  their  food 
most  consist  of  animalcules  that  reqnhre  no  mas- 
tication, or,  if  they  entrap  larger  animals,  that 
they  must  suck  their  juices,  which  seems  to  be 
Mr.  Miller's  opinion.^  This  idea  is  rendered  not 
improbable  by  the  vast  number  of  suckers  by 
which  their  fingers,  and  their  lateral  branches 
or  tentacles  as  they  are  called,  are  furnished ;  by 
these  they  can  lay  fast  hold  of  any  animal  too 
powerful  to  be  detained  in  their  net  by  any 
other  means,  and  sobject  it  to  the  action  of  their 
proboecis. 

From  the  great  rarity  of  recent  species  of 
these  animals,  it  should  seem  that  the  metropolis 
of  their  race  is  in  the  deepest  abysses  of  the 
world  of  waters.  ''  It  appears,"  says  Bosc,^ 
'*  that  the  species  were  extremdy  numerous  in 
the  ancient  wcNrld,  perhaps,  those  actually  in 
existence  are  equally  so,  for  I  suspect  that  all 
inhabit  the  depths  of  the  ocean,  a  place  in  which 
they  may  remain  to  eternity  without  being 
known  to  man." 

Naturalists  veiy  often,  too  hastily,  regard 
species  as  extinct,  that  are  now  found  only  in 

'  CHnoidea,  54.  «  N.  D,  D'Hist.  Nat.  x.  224. 


16  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

a  fosBil  State,  forgetting  that  there  may  be  many 
stations  fitted  for  animal  or  vegetable  life,  that 
are  still,  and,  perhaps,  always  will  be  inaccessible 
to  the  investigator  of  the  works  of  the  Creator, 
where  those  mourned  over  as  for  ever  lost,  may 
be  flourishing  in  health  and  vigour. 


Chapter  XIV. 
Entamostracan  Candyhpes. 

We  are  now  arrived  at  a  great  branch  of  the 
animal  kingdom,  which,  in  its  higher  tribes,  ex- 
hibits Divine  Wisdom,  acting,  in  and  by  the 
instincts  of  creatures,  small  indeed  in  bulk,  but 
mighty  in  operation,  in  a  way  truly  admirable, 
indicating,  in  a  most  strikmg  manner,  the  source 
from  which  it  proceeds. 

Some  modem  zoologists  do  not  regard  this 
vast  and  interesting  branch  as  forming  a  group 
by  itself,  but  have  associated  with  it,  under  a 
common  name,  several  of  the  preceding  classes. 
Cams,  in  his  Class  of  Articulated  AnitneJs^^  in- 
cludes Lamarck's  Worms  and  Annelidans;  and 
Dr.  Grant,  in  his  Sub-kingdam^  bearing  the 
same  appellation,  adds  to  these  the  Wheel-* 
animalcules^^  and  Cirripedes.^ 

^  Articulata.  '  RoHfera,  ^  Cirrhopoda, 


ENTOMOSTRACAN  CONDYLOPES.  17 

I  cannot  help  thinking,  however — taking  the 
wlxole  of  their  organization  and  structure  into 
<x>nsideration,  particularly  their  powers  and 
means  of  locomotion  and  prehension — that  it  is 
best  to  regard  those  animals  having  jointed  legSy 
and,  mostly,  a  body  formed  of  two  or  more  seg- 
ments^ as  constituting  a  separate  Sub-kingdom. 
This  is  the  view  that  my  late  illustrious  and 
lamented  friend,  Latreille,  has  taken  of  this 
great  group,  named  by  him,  from  the  above  cir- 
cumstance,  Condyhpesy^  which  term,  since  that 
of  Anntdose  aninialsy^  sometimes  used,  is  syno- 
nymous with  Annelidansj  I  shall  adopt  in  the 
present  work. 

The  distinctive  characters  of  this  great  group, 
or  Sub-kingdom,  may  be  given  in  few  words : 

Animal,  not  fixed  by  its  base,  but  locomotive. 

Body^  in  the  great  majority,  consisting  of  two 
or  more  segments. 

Legs^  jointed. 

The  first  of  these  characters  distinguishes  the 
Condyhpes  from  the  last  class,  the  Cirripedesj 
which  are  fixed  by  their  base,  whereas  the  pre- 
sent tribe  are  more  free  in  their  motions  than 
most  of  the  animals  of  the  preceding  groups ;  and 
the  two  last  from  the  AnnelidanSj  which,  though 
annulated,  are  not  insected,  and  have  no  jointed 
legs. 

1  Ccndylopa,  from  xov^vkoif  joints,  and  wovq,  a  foot. 
*  Annulo8a» 

VOL.  II.  C 


18  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Cuvier,  Latreille,  and  most  other  zoologists, 
consider  this  section  of  the  animal  kingdom,  as 
subdivided  into  three  great  Classes — Cf-ustaceans, 
Arachnidafis^  and  Insects :  Dr.  Leach,  taking  the 
respiratory  organs  for  his  guide,  also  begins  with 
three  primary  Sections,  those,  namely,  which 
have  gills^  those  which  have  sacs^  and  those 
which  have  tracheie,  for  respiration ;  and  out  of 
these  he  forms  five  Classes,  viz.  Crustaceans^ 
Aracknoidans^  Acarines^  Myriapods,  and  Insects* 
The  first  and  last  of  these  Classes  he  further 
subdivides,  each  into  two  Sub-classes :  the  Cms* 
taceans  into  Entamostracans  and  Malacostracans  ; 
and  Insects  into  Ametabolians  and  Metabolians^ 
or  those  that  do  not  undergo  a  metamorphosis, 
and  those  that  do.  So  that  according  to  his 
primary  Section  his  system  is  temaiy ;  accord- 
ing to  his  secondary  it  is  quinary ;  and  according 
to  his  tertiary  it  is  septenary.  I  shall  mostly 
follow  him  in  each  of  these  last  subdivisions. 

Having  made  these  remarks  upon  the  Condy- 
lopes  in  general,  I  must  now  proceed  to  one  of 
the  Classes  above  enumerated :  but  here,  at  first, 
it  seems  difficult  to  ascertain  which  ought  to  be 
regarded  as  forming  the  first  step  in  an  ascead- 
ing  series, — a  difficulty,  indeed,  which  often 
arrests  the  course  of  the  student  of  the  woiics  of 
his  Creator,  for,  when  any  one,  in  a  philosophic 
spirit,  after  a  careful  survey,  sits  down  to  trace 
the  paths  by  which  Divine  Wisdom  seems  to 


ENTOMOSTAACAN  CONDYLOPES.  19 

have  passed  in  the  creation,  and  the  arrange- 
ment and  connection  of  the  various  groups  of 
organised  beings,  he  is  lost  and  bewildered  in  a 
most  intricate  and  mazy  labyrinth,  in  which 
paths  intersect  each  other  at  every  angle,  and 
when  he  thinks  he  is  travelling  in  a  straight 
road  he  often  comes  to  branches  leading  off  from 
it,  which  render  it  uncertain  in  which  direction 
he  ofught  to  proceed,  in  order  best  to  attain  the 
object  he  is  pursuing. 

Such  indeed  is  the  perplexity  of  animated 
natoie,  that  it  is  impossible  to  see  clearly  the 
arrangement  of  the  objects  that  constitute  eiUier 
the  vegetable  or  the  animal  kingdom;  and  in 
order  to  get  any  tolerable  notion  of  them,  as 
God  has  placed  them,  when  we  have  reached  a 
certain  station  we  are  c^n  obliged  to  retro- 
grade, and  begin  a  branch,  from  the  point  ci  its 
divergement,  &x  removed  from  that  to  which  we 
have  arrived. 

Ilatimlle,  in  the  last  edition  of  the  Rigne  Am- 
nudj  divides  his  Crustaceans  into  two  Sul>classes, 
die  first  of  which,  after  Aristotle,  he  denominates 
Malacastracans ;^  and  the  second,  after  Miiller, 
Emtomastracans  :^  these,  on  account  of  a  connec- 
tion wJiich  seems  to  exist  between  them  and  the 
Ku^-crab^^  he  places  immediately  b^ore  the 
Araehsiidams.   *  I  agree  with  this  learned  entomo- 

'  Matacastraea,  *  Entomostraca. 

*  lAmMlus  Polyphemus. 


20  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

logistt  in  considering  them  as  inferior  to  the 
proper  Crustaceans,  and  shall  therefore  begin 
the  Condylope  group  with  some  account  of 
them.  Like  the  infusory  animalcules,  they 
form  a  kind  of  centre,  sending  forth  rays  to  dif* 
ferent  points,  some  inclosed  in  a  bivalve  shell, 
seeming  to  tend  towards  the  MoUuscans ;  ^  others 
assuming  more  of  the  Crustacean  form ;  ^  a  third 
looking  to  the  Arachhidans ;  ^  and  a  fourth  to  the 
Thysanuran^  or  Sugar-louse  tribe  ;^  with  other 
forms  that  might  be  enumerated,  some  of  which 
are  perfectly  anomalous,  so  that  it  appears  almost 
indifferent  where  they  are  placed.  As  there  is, 
however,  evidently  some  affinity  between  the  En* 
tomostracans  and  the  Cirripedes,  not  only  in  both 
being  furnished  with  jointed  organs  for  their 
motions,  but  also  in  some  of  the  former  being 
inclosed  in  shells,  and  in  others  by  the  brisk 
agitation  of  their  legs,  producing  a  current  in 
the  water  to  their  mouths,  as  De  Geer  states  of 
the  Water-flea :  ^  this  furnishes  a  further  argu- 
ment for  placing  them  next  to  the  latter  tribe. 

It  is  difficult,  and  next  to  impossible,  to  fix 
upon  any  characters  that  are  common  to  the 
whole  of  this  remarkable  Class.  Generally 
speaking,  but  not  invariably,  they  are  covered^ 
not  by  a  calcareous  and  solid,  but  by  a  horny 
and  thin  integument.    They  vary  considerably 

*   CypriSf  &c.  '  Branchipus.  '  Limulus, 

«  Cyclops.  *  Daphnia  PuUx.     Dtf  Qetr,  vii.  453. 


ENTOMOSTRACAN  CONDYLOPE8.  21 

in  the  number  of  their  antennae  and  legs,  the 
former  often  branching,  and  used  as  oars, 
and  the  latter  usually  being  connected  with 
their  respiration,  evincing  the  analogy  between 
these  legs  and  the  ciliae  of  the  Rotatories,  and 
tentacles  of  the  Polypes  ;*  in  the  majority  these 
organs  are  not  calculated  for  prehension.  One 
^oup  of  them  lives  by  suction,  and  is  parasitic 
upon  other  aquatic  animals:  the  great  body, 
however,  masticate  their  food,  but  without  the 
aid  of  maxillary  legs.  Their  eyes  are  gene- 
rally sessile,  and  a  considerable  number  of 
them  have  only  one,  or  rather  two  eyes  enve- 
loped by  a  common  cornea.* 

LatreiUe,  in  his  Cours  D' Entomologie^  divides 
this  Class — regarded  by  Linn6  as  forming  one 
genus,  which  he  named  Monoculus — into  six 
Orders;  but  it  will  be  sufficient  here  to  adopt 
his  division  of  them  in  the  Rhgne  Animal^ 
into  two,  which,  as  separating  the  fresh-water 
from  the  marine  genera,  is  more  simple,  and 
better  suited  to  my  purpose.  These  Orders  he 
names  Branchiopods  and  Poecilopods. 

1 .  The  Branchiopods  are  all  very  minute,  and 
several  of  them  microscopic  animals.  Their 
mouth  consists  of  an  upper  lip,  two  mandibles,  a 
tongue,  aiid  one  or  two  pairs  of  maxillse.  Their 
legs  are  natatory,  connected  with  their  respira- 

»  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  154,  164.        «  Roget,  B,  T,  ii.  493. 


2i  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

tion — whence  their  name  of  Branchiapoda^  ot 
gill-bearing  legs-'-often  branching,  varying  in 
number  from  six  to  more  than  a  hundred* 

2.  The  Poecilopods  differ  fiom  the  preceding 
Order  by  the  different  structure  and  uses  of  their 
legs,  which  are  not  branching,  and  all  of  them 
in  some,  and  part  of  them  in  others,  are  prehen- 
sory  and  ambulatory,  in  some  part  are  also 
branchial  and  natatory.  They  differ  likewise 
by  not  haying  the  ordinary  mandibles  and  max- 
illae, which  are  scnn^imes  r^laced  by  the  spiny 
hips  of  the  six  first  pairs  of  l^s,  and,  in  one 
tribe,  by  a  mouth  and  oral  oi^ans  prop^  for 
suction. 

There  is  a  tribe  of  parasitic  animals,  which 
neither  Cnvier  nor  Latreille  have  induded 
amongst  the  Entomostracans,  but  which  Audoin 
and  Milne  Edwards  conjecture  are  of  a  Crusted 
eean  type.  I  am  speaking  of  the  Lemeans  of 
the  author  first  mentioned,  which  he  has  placed, 
but  not  without  hesitation,  in  his-  first  order,^  of 
Intestinal  Worms.*  Ht^  N<^dmann,  faoweverp 
has  made  it  evident  that  they  undergo  a  meta*- 
UMNrphosis  little  differing  finom  that  of  the  first 
Order  of  the  Entomostracans,  the  Branchiopods, 
especially  Cyclops ;  and  he  is  of  opinion,  that,  in 
a  system,  they  would  follow  that  genus.  Th^r 
resemblance  is  indeed  striking  in  their  prepa^ 

^  Intestinaux  cavitaires,  <  EntozoUy  Rud. 


ENT0M08TEACAN  CONDYLOPES.  23 

ratory  states,  but  in  their  last  or  perfect  state, 
they  differ,  and  like  the  Poecilopods,  are  para* 
sitic ;  many  of  them  are  furnished  with  a  very 
conspicuous  organ,  which  I  shall  afterwards 
describe,  for  fixing  themselves;  and  their  form 
is  very  diffident,  their  body  consisting  of  two 
segments,  like  that  of  the  Arachnidans,^  though 
attached  to  their  abdomen,  like  many  of  the 
Branchiopods,  they  have  two  egg-pouches.^  In 
fact  the  Lerneans  seem  scarcely  more  anomalous 
amongst  the  Eotomostracans,  than  the  King- 
crab,  and  other  PoBcilopods.  All  things  consi- 
deredt  perhaps,  they  may  be  regarded  as  forming 
an  osculant  group  between  the  two  Orders. 

The  animals  of  the  first  Order  mostly  frequent 
stagnant  waters,  moving  about  with  great  ra- 
pidity. They  are  generally  regarded  as  preda- 
ceous,  and  are  stated  to  make  the  infusory 
animalcules  their  prey,  but  some  are  supposed 
to  be  herbivorous,  and  they  abound  particularly 
in  waters  in  which  plants  are  vegetating.  As 
the  places  that  they  firequent  are  very  subject  to 
be  dried  up  in  the  summer-time,  it  seems  pro- 
baUe  that  a  kind  Providence  has  fitted  them  for 
this  event,  by  giving  them,  as  well  as  the  Infii- 
sories,  powers  of  reviviscence.  Latreille  thinks 
that  those  of  them,  which,  for  the  protection  of 

«  Plate  IX.  Fig.  5.  '  Ihid.f.f, 


24  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

their  slender  and  frail  branching  antenns  and 
legs,  are  enclosed  in  shells,  have  the  power,  after 
drawing  in  all  their  organs,  of  hermetically  seal- 
ing their  shells  till  the  return  of  moisture. 

These  little  animals  differ  from  the  MoUuscans, 
and  the  other  preceding  Classes,  by  the  changes 
of  their  integument ;  they  do  not,  like  them,  when 
their  advance  in  growth  requires  it,  add  to  their 
shells ;  but,  fixing  themselves  to  some  substance 
at  handy  they  move  their  Umbs,  and  the  valves 
of  their  old  shells,  new  ones  being  already  formed 
underneath,  and  thus  loosening  their  exuviae,  in 
a  short  time  they  cast  those  of  the  whole  body ; 
of  all  their  limbs,  hairs,  plumes,  even  those  that 
are  invisible  to  the  naked  eye.  Amongst  these 
exuviae  may  be  detected,  not  merely  the  cast  ^ia 
of  the  external  parts,  but  that  of  the  internal 
also.  These  moults  follow  each  other  at  an 
interval  of  five  or  six  days,  and  it  is  not  till  after 
the  third  that  the  animal  has  acquired  the  repro- 
ductive faculty. 

In  the  antecedent  classes  of  the  smimal  king* 
dom,  which  were  almost  all  inhabitants  of  the 
water,  we  have  seen  no  instances  of  animals 
casting  their  skins,  or  und^going  any  metamor- 
phosis— either  in  the  number  or  form  of  their 
parts— in  their  progress  to  their  adult  state. 
Some  few  shell-fish,  indeed,  are  stated  to  cast 
their  shells,  and  form  others,^  but  a  degree  of 

^  See  above.  Vol.  I.  p.  300. 


ENTOMOSTRACAN  CONDYLOPES«  25 

doabt  rests  upon  the  fact.  In  the  Branchiopods, 
however,  a  kind  of  metamorphosis,  as  well  as 
the  moult  just  described,  has  long  been  noticed 
and  recorded. 

The  young  ones  of  the  Cyclops^  the  animal 
before  mentioned  as  an  analogue  of  the  sugar- 
louse,  when  first  hatched  have  only  four  l^s, 
their  body  is  nearly  round,  and  has  no  tail, 
which  led  MiiUer  to  mistake  them  for  species  of 
a  different  genus ;  ^  soon  afterwards  another  pair 
is  acquired,  which  the  same  author  r^arded  as 
a  second  genus,^  and  so  it  proceeds  till  ii  assumes 
the  perfect  form  of  its  kind.  Nordmann  has 
given  figures  of  a  very  remarkable  Lernean 
parasite,^  which  infests  the  perch,  representing 
its  whole  progress,  from  the  egg  to  the  perfect 
insect,^  which,  like  the  Cyclops,  does  not  acquire 
all  its  organs,  except  at  its  last  metamorphosis. 

Our  progress  upwards,  as  far  as  we  have  at 
present  proceeded,  has  been  a  gradual  advance, 
form  after  form  appearing  upon  the  stage  of 
ammal  existence,  each  distinguished  by  cha- 
racters indicating  an  elevation  as  to  rank  and 
station.  But  in  the  animals  amongst  which  the 
law  in  question  obtains,  we  see  the  same  indi- 
vidual, at  different  periods  of  its  existence,  assu- 
ming a  higher  tone  of  character,  and  ofi:en  endued 

'  Amymone.  '  Nauplius,  '  Adheres  Percarum. 

*  Plate  IX,  Egg,  Fig.  1,  2.  Larva,  Fig.  3.  Pupa, 
Fig.  4.     Imago,  Fio.  5. 


26  FWUCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

with  organs  that  fit  it  for  a  more  extended  range. 
Sometimes  from  being  purely  aquatic,  it  becomes 
a  denizen  of  the  earth  and  the  air — or  of  earth, 
air,  and  water  at  once — and,  with  this  change  of 
character  and  organs,  its  Creator  wills  it  to 
undertake  a  new  charge  in  the  general  arrange- 
ment  of  functions  and  duties. 

It  will  be  recollected  that  a  very  considerable 
portion  of  the  food  of  the  higher  creatures, 
especially  the  birds,  is  derived  from  animals  that 
undergo  a  metamorphosis ;  and,  that  the  majority 
of  these  in  their  first  state,  are  more  bulky,  and 
contain  more  nutritive  substance  than  they  do 
when  arrived  at  their  last,  and,  therefore,  even  in 
this  view,  circumstance  important  tothe  general 
welfiEtre  may  arise  firom  this  disposition,  and 
variety  of  food  may  also  be  produced,  and  more 
enjoyment  to  the  various  animals  who  ^re  des- 
tined to  live  by  the  myriad  forms  of  the  insect 
world* 

Whether  the  higher  Orders  of  Crustaoeans 
undergo  a  real  jDoi^tamorphosis  has  not  been 
satisfactorily  proved.  They  are  known  to  change 
their  shells  annually,  but  it  has  not  been  observed 
that  this  moult  is  attended  by  any  change  of 
form,  or  by  the  acquisition  of  new  locomotive  or 
other  organs.  Insects,  we  know,  after  their  last 
change  do  not  increase  in  size ;  the  Crustaceans 
are  found,  however,  to  vary  very  much  in  this 
respect.   Whether  a  different  law  obtains  amongst 


ENTOMOSTBACAN  CONDYLOPBS.  27 

them,  from  what  takes  place  in  insects,  and  they 
feUow  the  Batrachian  reptiles,  which,  after  they 
hare  exchanged  the  tadpole  for  the  frog,  grow 
till  they  hare  arriyed  at  the  standard  of  their 
mpective  species,  I  cannot  certainly  affirm  ;  but 
reasoning  from  analogy,  it  seraos  more  probable 
that  the  crustaceans  should  follow  the  law  of 
anim^la  most  nearly  related  to  them,  and  belong- 
ing to  the  same  primary  group,  than  diat  they 
diould  copy  the  reptiles,  animals  far  removed 
from  tibem,  and  of  a  completely  different  organi- 
zati<m. 

There  is  anotiier  point  in  which  this  subject 
of  animal  metamorphoses  may  be  viewed.  Do 
not  these  successive  changes  in  the  outward 
form,  ftmctions,  and  locomotions  of  so  many 
umials,  preach  a  doctrine  to  the  attentive  and 
duly  nnpressed  student  of  animal  forms,  and 
their  history — do  they  not  symbolically  declare 
to  him,  that  the  same  individual  may  be  clothed 
with  diffigrent  forms,  in  different  states  of  exist- 
ence, that  he  may  be  advanced,  after  certain 
preparatory  changes,  and  an  intermediate  inter- 
val of  rest  and  repose^  to  a  much  more  exalted 
rank ;  with  organs,  whether  sensiferous  or  loco- 
motive, of  a  much  wider  range ;  with  tastes  nM>re 
refined ;  with  an  intellect  more  developed,  and 
employed  upon  hi^er  objects;  with  affections 
more  spiritualized,  and  ftirther  removed  fix>m 
gross  matter  ? 


28  .  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

The  multiplication  of  these  creatures,  which*, 
like  the  Aphides^  are  oviparous  at  one  time,  and 
viviparous  at  another,  is  sometimes  prodigious, 
and  only  exceeded  by  that  of  the  Infusories. 
A  female  Cyclops^  the  animal  before  alluded  to, 
in  the  space  of  three  months,  after  one  fecundation 
which  serves  for  several  successive  generations, 
lays  her  eggs  ten  times,  and  it  has  been  calcu- 
lated that  from  only  eight  of  these  ovipositions, 
allowing  forty  for  each,  she  might  be  the  progen- 
itrix, incredible  as  it  may  seem,  of  four  milliards 
and  a  half,  or  four  thousand  five  hundred  inii- 
lions ! !  ^  Another  animal  belonging  to  a  genus  of 
the  present  order,*  was  observed  by  Captain 
Kotzebue  in  such  myriads  that  the  sea  exhibited 
a  red  stripe,  a  mile  long,  and  a  fathom  broad, 
produced  by  a  species,  individually  viewed, 
scarcely  visible  to  the  naked  eye.  How  astonish- 
ing is  the  reflection,  that  in  so  short  a  space,  in 
the  case  of  the  Cyclops,  a  single  individual 
should  be  gifted  by  its  Creator  to  fill  the  waters 
with  myriads  of  animated  beings,  supposing  a 
single  impregnated  female  at  first  to  have  been 
the  surviving  inhabitant  of  any  given  pool  or 
ditch.  Conjecture  is  lost  when  we  meditate 
upon  the  mysterious  subject.  How  can  life,  as 
originally  imparted,  at  the  interval  of  a  few 
months  be  so  multiplied  and  subdivided,  as,  that 

'  Latreille  Cours  D^ Entomologies  i.  421.  '  Calanus, 


ENTOMOSTRACAN  CONDYLOPES.  29 

sach  infinite  shoals  of  beings  shall  each  have  a 
share  in  the  wonderful  bequest.  But,  when  we 
reflect  that  an  Omnipresent  Deity  is  every  where 
mighty  in  operation,  working  all  in  all,  and  that 
he  guideth  all  the  powers  of  nature,  as  the  rider 
goideth  the  horse  upon  which  he  sitteth,  to  answer 
the  purposes  of  his  providence ;  ^  we  may  easily 
conceive,  that  under  his  superintendence  the 
thing  may  be  accomplished,  though  how  it  is 
accomplished,  must  always  remain  an  unfathom- 
able mystery. 

These  powers  of  multiplication  are,  however, 
given  to  these  creatures  for  a  wise  and  beneficent 
purpose.  They  themselves  afibrd  a  supply  of 
food  to  a  variety  of  creatures — to  numerous 
aquatic  insects,  even  polypes  and  worms;  and 
to  many  fishes  and  birds,  by  whom  their  numbers 
are  hourly  and  greatly  diminished.  As  the  stag- 
nant waters  likewise,  in  which  they  abound,  are 
apt  to  be  dried  up  in  the  summer  season,  many 
of  th^m  probably  perish ;  but,  in  some,  anima- 
tion may  be  suspended  till  the  places  they  in- 
habit are  again  filled  with  water.  I  have  found 
the  little  animal  described  by  Dr.  Shaw,  in  the 
Linnean  Transactions^  as  the  Cancer  stagnalis  of 
Linii4»  in  horse^hoof  prints,  in  the  spring,  then 
filled  with  water,  but  which  had  been  previously 
quite  dry. 

»  1  Cor.  xii.  6.     P».  Ixviii.  4,  33* 


30  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 


The  finny  tribes  of  the  world  of  waters  seem 
more  particularly  exposed  to  the  invasion  of  pa- 
rasitic foes ;  as  far  as  they  are  known  thei*e  is 
scarcely  a  fish  that  swims  that  is  not  infested 
by  more  than  one  of  these  enemies ;  even  the 
mightiest  monsters  of  the  ocean,  the  gigantic 
whale,  the  sagacious  dolphin,  the  terrific  and 
all-devouring  shark,  cannot  defiMid  themselves 
from  them.  Where  they  abound  they  doubtless 
generate  diseases,  and  are  amongst  Uie  means 
employed  by  a  watchful  Providence  to  keep 
within  proper  limits  the  inhabitants  of  the 
waters;  and  probably  there  are  oth&t  benefits 
which  our  imperfect  knowledge  of  their  history 
prevents  us  firom  duly  appreciating,  that  are  con- 
ferred, through  these  animals,  upon  the  oceanic 
population.  Their  prevalence  upon  the  preda- 
ceous  fishes,  as  was  before  observed,  may  tend 
to  diminish  their  ravages  by  lessening  their  acti- 
tivity;  while  to  those  of  a  milder  character, 
within  certain  bounds  and  under  certain  circum- 
stances, they  may  be  beneficial  rather  than  inju- 
rious. 

Of  this  description  is  the  tribe  <^  Lemeans^ 
above  alluded  to  as  intermediate  between  the 
Branchiopod  and  Poecilopod  Entomostracans ;  of 
which  I  cannot  select  a  more  inta^esting  spe- 
cies to  exemplify  the  adaptation  of  the  structure 
to  the  instinct  and  functions,  than  one  described 
and  figured  by  Dr.  Nordmann,  under  the  appro- 


ENTOM08TRACAN  CONDYLOPES.  31 

priate  name  of  Adheres  Percarum^^  or  Pest  of  the 
Perch. 

Tliis  animal,  like  the  Branchiopods,  is  found 
in  firesh  \rater,  where  it  attaches  itself  to  the 
common »  and   another   species  of  the    perch 
genus,*  and  takes  its  station  usually  within  the 
month,  fixing  itself,  by  means  of  its  sucker,  in 
the  ceilidar  membrane,  so  deeply  that  it  cannot 
disengage  itself,  or  be  extracted  by  external 
force,  without  rupturing  the  so  called  arms,  that 
are  attached  to  the  sucker,  and  leaving  it  be- 
hind.   The  animal  often  fixes  itself  to  the  pa- 
late, and  eren  to  the  tongue.    The  arms'  take 
their  rise  at  the  base  of  the  cephalothorax — as 
the  part  consisting  of  head  and  thorax,  not 
separated  by  a  suture,  is  called — ^where  they 
are  very  robust  and  thick,  but  they  taper  to- 
wards the  other  extremity,,  a  single   sucker,^ 
common  to   both,   being,  as  it  were,  hooked 
to  them.    These  arms  are   bent    nearly  into 
a  circle,  surrounding  the  cephalothorax,  and  the 
socker  is  in  firont  of  the  head :  their  substance  is 
cartilaginous,  and  they  repose  in  the  same  plane 
with  the  head ;  whence  we  may  conjecture  that 
the  animal,  when  fixed  and  engaged  m  suction, 
lies  close  to  the  part  where  it  has  taken  its 
station.    When  we  consider  that  these  preda* 
ceoos  fishes  often  gorge  their  prey,  swallowing 

*  AxBripTfg,  Annoying.      «  Perca  fluviatilis  and  P,  luciqperca. 

*  Plati&IX.  Fio.5.c,c.      ♦  Plate  IX.  Fio.  5*d. 


32  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

it  entire,  we  see  how  necessary  it  was  that  our 
parasite  should  be  thus  fitted  to  fix  itself  firmly, 
and  root  itself,  as  it  were,  that  it  may  be  enabled 
to  withstand  the  pressure  and  violent  action  of 
the  bodies  that  pass  oyer  it,  for  the  palate  and 
tongue  of  a  Perch  must  be  a  perilous  station. 
This  purpose  seems  further  aided  by  a  quantity 
of  saliva,  usually  formed  around  it. 

These  pests  of  the  perch  are  themselves  sub- 
ject to  the  incursions  and  annoyance  of  animals 
still  more  minute  than  themselves.  A  small 
species  of  mite  ^  makes  them  its  prey,  and  when 
the  saliva  just  mentioned  is  removed,  they  are 
often  found  quite  covered  by  a  species  of  Infu- 
sory  belonging  to  the  genus  Varticella. 

The  next  Order,  including  all  the  marine  En- 
tomostracans,  will  not  detain  us  long.  The  first 
section  consists  of  a  single,  but  very  remarkable, 
genus,  the  type  of  which  is  the  Monoculus  Poly- 
phemus of  Linn6.^  In  the  West  Indies  it  is 
called,  by  way  of  eminence,  the  King-crahj  and 
is  found  in  the  seas  both  of  the  East  and  West, 
firom  the  equator  to  the  40th  deg.  of  latitude. 
The  species  are  few,  and  near  to  each  other. 
They  difier  widely  both  in  their  characters  and 
form  from  every  other  Crustacean  tribe.  Like 
the  Cirripedesj  they  have  no  distinct  head :  their 

1  Gamasus  scabriculus,  *  Limulus, — Miill. 


£NTOMOSTRACAN  CONDYLOPES.        33 

crust  is  divided  into  two  portions^  the  anterior 
embracing  the  posterior,  and  being  terminated, 
like  the  Rays,  to  which  they  present  an  ana- 
l<)g7»  hy  a  long  angular  tail.  They  have  both 
compound  and  simple  eyes ;  the  first  are  situated, 
one  in  the  middle  of  each  lateral  ridge,  usually 
under  the  spine  on  the  outer  side ;  the  second,  or 
simple  eyes,  are  on  each  side  of  the  intermediate 
ridge,  where  it  begins ;  these  last  are  very  mi- 
nute, and  not  easily  discoverable.  The  under 
side  of  the  shield,  or  anterior  portion  of  the 
crust,  is  deeply  hollowed  for  the  reception  of  the 
body,  and  the  cavity  is  marked  out  anteriorly 
by  an  emarginate  ridge,  which  gives  it  some- 
thing the  appearance  of  the  hooded  serpent. 
Some  of  them  attain  to  a  large  size,  the  species 
found  near  the  Molucca  Islands  being  sometimes 
two  feet  in  length. 

The  head  in  them,  as  in  the  Arachnidans, 
seems  suppressed,  or  to  merge  in  the  thorax, 
which  also,  as  in  that  Class,  bears  the  eyes,  the 
outer  pair  corresponding  with  those  of  certain 
Crustaceans  in  which  they  are  sessile,  and  the 
inner  pair  being  like  those  of  the  Arachnidans, 
but  they  have  neither  the  oral  organs  nor  the 
legs  of  the  Class  just  named.  In  fact,  these 
animals  seem  to  stand  in  much  the  same  posi- 
tion amongst  the  Entomostracans,  that  the 
Cephalopods  do  amongst  the  Molluscans,  and 
moreovcgr  as  giants  amongst  pigmies.     Time  will 

VOL.  II.  D 


34  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

probably  throw  more  light  upon  these  singular 
works  of  the  Creator. 

Their  most  remarkable  organ  is  their  to£/, 
which  is  probably  of  considerable  service  to 
them  in  their  locomotions.  It  is  shaped  like  a 
stiletto,  and  is  so  extremely  sharp  at  the  ex- 
tremity, that  it  will  easily  pierce  the  flesh,  and 
may  perhaps  be  used  by  the  animal  as  a  weapon, 
as  it  is  said  to  be  by  the  Indians ;  it  is  so  articu* 
lated  with  the  posterior  piece  of  the  crust  as  to 
move  with  more  ease  upwards  and  downwards 
than  laterally.  Comparing  the  small  body  with 
the  vast  volume  and  levity  of  the  crust  which 
covers  and  protects  it,  and  considering  that  the 
animal,  as  M.  Latreille  has  remarked,  passes  the 
night  with  its  anterior  half  out  of  the  watar,  wc 
may^  conjecture  that,  by  the  depression  of  the 
tail,  it  may  be  elevated  in  part  above  the  water, 
and  remain  stationary.  By  a  slight  inclination 
on  either  side  it  probably  also  helps  to  steer 
it,  and  as  it  is  ciliated  at  the  base,  like  the 
natatory  legs  of  a  Dyticusj  it  may  be  of  some  use 
in  swimming.  The  l^s  are  all  armed  with  pin- 
cers, like  those  of  a  crab,  from  which  it  seems 
evident  that  it  is  predaceous,  and,  from  their  small 
size,  that  its  prey  must  consist  of  minute  animals. 

The  whole  of  its  structure  appears  calculated 
to  give  the  king-crab  mwe  than  usual  buoyancy, 
the  reasons  of  which,  when  its  history  is  better 
known,  will  be  more  fully  understood ;  and  the 


ENTOMOSTRACAN  CONDYLOPE8.        35 

Power,  Wisdom,  and  Goodness  that  every  where 
flash  upon  us,  when  we  consider  animal  struc-' 
tures  and  their  adaptation  to  their  habits  and 
mstincts,  when  fully  investigated^  will  be  duly 
appreciated*  It  is  said  that  this  creature, 
amongst  the  ancient  Japanese,  was  the  symbol 
of  the  zodiacal  sign  Cancer^ 

The  animals  belonging  to  the  second  section  of 
the  Pcecilipods  differ  from  all  the  rest,  by  the 
manner  in  which  they  take  their  food.  They 
are  parasitic  upon  Cetaceans,  fishes,  some  rep- 
tiles, and  Crustaceans,  whose  juices  they  imbibe 
by  su€tio$i*  They  are  often  fixed  to  the  gills  of 
these  animals,  but  nothing  farther  interesting  is 
known  of  their  history^  Some  have  two  long 
jointed  tails,  like  ephemersB^  and  others  are 
distinguifidied  by  a  remarkable  lateral  elongation 
of  the  thorax.^  Some  fit  themselves  to  their 
prey  by  means  of  suckers,  terminating  their  first 
pair  of  legs,^  which  the  remainder  have  not^ 

The  observation  of  Dr.  Von  Baer,  quoted  in  a 
former  part  of  this  work,^  that  the  lowest  grades 
of  the  animal  kingdom  exhibit  the  leading  types 
of  the  various  organizations  it  contains^  for  rea^ 
sous  before  alluded  to,  would  almost  justify  the 
zoc^ogist  in  assigning  to  the  Entomostracans  a 
place  amongst  the  Infusories.  But  the  subject 
of  centres^  in  that  kingdom,  sending  forth,  as  it 

•  Caligus.  2  Nicothoe. 

*  Arguius.  *  Vol.  I.  p.  320. 


36  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS.' 

were,  raj?s  in  different  directions,  and  leading  to 
Yarious  forms,  requires  very  deep  and  minute 
investigation,  and  abundant  proof,  before  it  will 
be  safe  to  adopt  it  as  a  principle. 


Chapter  XV. 

CfiistMean  Condytopes. 

We  are  now  arrived  at  a  Cla^s  of  animals,  in 
which  the  organs  of  locomotion  assume  a  new 
and  more  perfect  form^  corresponding  in  some 
measure  with  those  of  many  of  the  vertebrated 
animals.  The  advance,  in  structure,  hitherto, 
from  a  mouth  surrounded  by  organs  like  rays, 
serving  various  distinct  purposes,  and  by  dif- 
fereat  means  contributing  to  the  nutrition,  respi- 
ration, and  motions  of  the  animal,  has  been,  by 
certain  inarticulate  organs,  more  generally  dis- 
tributed over  the  body,  but  still  in  a  radiating 
order ;  as  for  instance,  the  tentacular  suckers  of 
the  Stelleridans  and  Echinidans,  which  they  use 
in  their  locomotions,  and  for  prehension,  as  well 
as  the  purposes  just  named.  In  the  Entomos* 
tracans,  as  we  have  seen,  the  legs,  though 
jointed,  are  very  anomalous,  assume  various 
forms,  and  are  applied  to  sundry  uses :  in  the 


CRUSTACEAN  CON  DY LOPES.  37 

sole  instance  of  the  king-crab,  they  take  the 
articulations  of  those  of  the  Crustaceans,  in  which 
we  may  trace  the  general  structure  of  the  legs  of 
the  other  Classes  of  Condylopes. 

But  as  I  shall  have  occasion,  in  a  subsequent 
chapter,  to  give  a  concentrated  account  of  the 
gradual  deyelbpement  of  the  organs  of  locomotion 
and  prehension,  from  their  first  rudiments  in  the 
lowest  grades  of  the  animal  kingdom  to  their 
state  of  perfection  in  the  highest,  I  shall  not 
here,  therefore,  enlarge  further  upon  the  sub- 
ject, than  by  observing,  that,  in  most  of  the  De- 
capod Crustaceans,  the  anterior  legs  are  become 
strictly  arms^  terminating  in  a  kind  of  didactyle 
hand,  consisting  of  a  large  joint,  incrassated 
usually  at  the  base,  and  furnished  on  its  inner 
side  with  a  smaller  moveable  one,  constituting 
together  a  kind  of  finger  and  thumb,  with  which 
it  is  enabled  to  seize  firmly  and  hold  strongly  any 
object  that  its  inclinations  or  fears  point  out  to  it. 
This  hand  we  call  the  chela  or  claw,  or  more 
properly  pincers,  of  the  lobster  or  crab.  We 
find  it  also  in  the  scorpion  and  book-crab,^ 
which  on  shore  are  in  some  sort  analogous  to 
the  long- tailed  and  short-tailed  Crustaceans,  or 
lobsters  and  crabs  of  the  waters.  This  structure 
of  the  hand,  in  these  creatures,  is  particularly 
fitted  to  their  wants  and  situation.    A  hand  like 

1  Chelifer. 


38  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

ours,  consisting  of  a  quadruple  set  of  fingers 
and  an  opposite  thumb,  to  be  of  sufficient  power 
for  tlieir  purposes,  must  be  so  disproportioned  to 
their  size,  as  to  be  an  incumbrance  rather  than  a 
useful  instrument  of  prehension;  but  as  now 
constructed,  it  has  the  requisite  strength  for  the 
purposes  of  the  animal,  without  being  dispropor- 
tioned to  its  size,  and  inconvenient  for  its  use. 
Thus  we  see  how  nicely  every  thing  is  calculated 
and  adjusted  by  Supreme  Wisdom,  to  the  nature 
and  circumstances  of  every  animal  form. 

But  these  great  claws  are  by  no  means  uni- 
versal amongst  the  Crustaceans.  In  some  the 
claws  are  very  small,  but  the  loss  is  often  made 
up  to  these  by  an  increase  as  to  number,  so  that 
if  they  cannot  lay  hold  of  large  animals,  they  can 
seize,  at  the  same  time,  several  small  ones.  We 
have  seen  that  in  the  king*crab  all  the  legs 
have  these  prehensory  claws,  and  they  vary  in 
number  in  many  of  the  smaller  Crustaceans,  as 
the  shrimp,^  prawn,*  pandle,'  &c.  The  fore- 
leg of  some  of  these  has  prehensory  claws,  that 
are  formed  like  the  mandibles  or  cheliceres  of 
spiders  and  the  arms  of  the  Mantis — ^whence 
they  are  called  mantis-crabs.  Instead  of  a  for- 
ceps, consisting  of  a  finger  and  thumb,  the 
claw  that  arms  the  extremity  of  the  leg  is  folded 
down,  and  received  into  a  channel  of  the  shank, 

*  Crangon  vulgaria.       =  PaltBinon  serralus.       '  Pandalus, 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPES.  39 

and  kept  from  dislocatioii  by  a  tooth,  or  spine,  at 
the  base:  this  structure  may  be  seen  in  the 
shrimp. 

There  is  another  circumstance,  distinguishing 
the  decapod  and  stomapod  Crustaceans,  that  is 
peculiar  to  them,  their  eyes  are  placed  upon 
jointed  footstalks,  so  that  when  they  want  to  ex- 
phre  and  examine  what  passes  around  them» 
they  can  immediately  erect  these  organs,  and  so 
greatly  enlarge  their  sphere  of  vision,  but  when 
they  have  retired  to  their  retreats  in  the  cavities 
of  the  rocks,  or  to  burrows  that  they  have 
formed,  they  can  place  them  in  repose,,  in  a 
cavity  provided  for  them  by  their  Creator,  in  the 
head. 

Any  person,  who  casts  an  eye  over  these 
creatures,  will  be  struck  by  repeated  analogical 
forms,  representing  some  terrestrial  animals  of 
the  same  Sub-kingdom.  Thus  a  large  number  of 
those  distinguished  by  the  shortness  of  their 
tails,  the  crabs^  present,  both  in  their  retrogres- 
sive and  lateral  motions  and  general  aspect,  an 
astonishing  resemblance  to  many  Arachnidans ; 
swae  imitating  spiders,  and  others  phalangians  ;^ 
and,  amongst  the  long-tailed  tribe  the  lobsters, 
one'  very  accurately  represents  a  scorpion,  and 
another  a  mantis.^ 


'  Macropodia  Phalangium.  ^  Tkalassina  Scorpioides. 

^  Squilla  Mantis. 


40  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

We  have  seen  the  same  tendency  in  the  An- 
nelida/iis  to  approach  or  imitate  terrestrial  forms, 
as  if  the  marine  and  aquatic  animals  were 
anxious  to  quit  their  fluid  medium,  and  to  be- 
come inhabitants  of  the  dry  land.  The  animal 
living  on  shore  and  in  the  woods  at  St.  Vincent, 
taken  for  a  MoUuscan  by  Mr.  Guilding/  appears 
almost  like  a  creature  that  had  succeeded  in 
such  an  attempt. 

All  these  resemblances  and  approximations 
show,  that  the  great  Creator  embraced  at  one 
view  all  the  forms  to  which  he  intended  to  give 
being,  and  created  no  individual  without  fur- 
nishing it  with  organs  which  give  it  some  re- 
lation to  others;  or  so  moulding  its  outward 
form,  as  to  cause  it  to  represent  some  others  to 
which  it  is  clear  it  is  not  brought  near  by  any 
characters,  common  to  both,  that  indicate  af- 
finity. What  can  more  evidently  and  strongly 
manifest  design^  and  that  of  a  mind  compre- 
hending simultaneously  the  whole  world  of  cre- 
ated beings,  than  thus  to  concatenate  all  link  to 
link  and  wheel  within  wheel,  through  all  their 
intricate  revolutions  and  ramifications  connect- 
ing and  connected,  and  all  the  while  reflecting 
others  of  ia  higher  or  a  lower  grade  with  mimic 
features  ?  this  shows  the  hand,  the  art,  the  wis- 
dom, the  power,  and  the  goodness  of  that  un- 

1  Vol.  I.  p.  347.  Plate  VIII.  Fig.  1. 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPES.  41 

fathomable  depth  and  immeasurable  heighth  of 
Deity,  which  comprehends  all  things  and  is 
comprehended  by  none ;  and  to  whom  ail  things 
owe  their  being,  and  their  form,  and  their 
organs,  and  their  several  places  and  functions. 

The  general  characters  of  the  present  class 
are — 

Body  apterous,  covered  by  a  calcareous  crust, 
divided  into  segments.  Legs  jointed,  10 — 16. 
Mouth  composed  of  a  Up^  tongue^  a  pair  of  man- 
dibles^  often  bearing  a  feeler,  and  two  pairs  of 
maxUhB^  covered  by  maxillary  legs.  Spinal 
chord  knotty,  terminating  anteriorly  in  a  small 
hratH.  A  heart  and  vessels  for  circulation.  Res- 
piration by  gills. 

These  are  divisible  into  five  orders. 

1.  Decapods.  Gills  situated  under  the  sides 
of  the  shell.  Ten  thoracic  legs. .  Eyes  on  a 
jointed  footstalk. 

2.  Stomapods.  Gills  attached  to  five  pairs  of 
appendages,  or  spurious  legs,  under  the  ab- 
domen.    Eyes  as  in  the  Decapods. 

3.  LiOmipods.  No  abdominal  appendages. 
Eyes  sessile. 

4.  Amphipods.     Head  distinct.     Eyes  sessile. 

5.  Isopods.  Head  distinct.  Eyes  sessile. 
Legs  simple,  equal. 

1.  Decapods.     This  order   naturally   resolves 
itself  into  two  sections,  viz.      The  short-tailed 


42  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Decapods  or  Crabs^^  which  have  their  abdomen 
folded  under  the  trunk:  and  the  long-tailed 
Decapods  or  Lobsters,  Crcof-Jisk^  &c.*  whose  ab- 
domen is  always  extended. 

Writers  on  the  Crustaceans  usually  begin  with 
the  short-tailed,  and  then  proceed  to  the  long- 
tailed  Decapods,  and  this  arrangement  seems 
natural,  when  the  transit  is  to  those  with  sessiie 
eyes,  such  as  the  locust-crab ;'  but  yet  when  we 
consider  how  nearly  related  to  the  spiders  the 
former  animals  are,  and  that  in  the^  latter, 
though  the  head  is  not  formed  by  a  distinct 
suture  dividing  it  from  the  thorax,  yet  its  contour 
is  strongly  marked  out  externally  by  an  im- 
pression, and  internally  by  a  ridge,  at  least  in 
the  lobster  and  cray-fish, — it  seems  as  if  the  two 
tribes  should  form  two  parallel  lines,  and  pro- 
ceed, side  by  side,  towards  the  Arachnidans  and 
Myriapods. 

I  shall,  however,  follow  the  usual  plan,  and 
give  now  some  account  of  the  crabs.  Of  these, 
none  are  more  remarkable  than  what  have  been 
denominated  land-crabs^  from  their  usually  living 
on  shore,  and  making  for  the  sea  only  at  certain 
seasons*  Of  the  most  noted  species  of  these  I 
have  already  given  a  full  account,*  but  I  shall 
here  notice  some  others,  having  the  same  habits, 
that  will  interest  the  reader.    Aristotle,  long  ago, 

1  Brachyuri,  •  Macrouru 

**  Orchesia  Utterea.  *  Vol.  I.  p.  124. 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPfiS.  43 

noticed  a  crab  of  this  description,  found  in 
Phcenicia,  under  the  name  of  the  Hwneman^ 
which  he  says  runs  so  fast  that  it  is  not  easy  to 
OTertake  it.*  Olivier  found  this  account  true 
of  those  he  saw  on  the  coast  of  Syria ;  and  Bosc 
obserred  a  species'  in  Carolina,  which  he  had 
some  trouble  to  overtake  on  horseback  and  shoot 
with  a  pistol.  These  horsemen  crabs  are  found 
only  in  warm  climates,  where  they  inhabit  sandy 
spots  near  the  shore,  or  the  mouths  of  rivers. 
They  make  burrows  in  the  sand,  to  which  they 
retreat  when  alarmed,  and  in  which  they  pass 
the  ni^t. 

Another  kind  of  land*crab^  is  distinguished 
by  the  extraordinary  disproportion  of  its  claws ; 
one  of  them,  sometimes  the  left  and  sometimes 
the  right,  being  enormously  large,  while  the 
other  is  very  small,  and  often  concealed,  so  that 
the  animal  appears  single-handed.  This  forma- 
tion, however,  is  not  without  its  use,  for,  when 
retired  into  its  burrow,  it  employs  this  large 
claw  to  stop  up  the  mouth  of  it,  which  secures  it 
£rom  intrusion,  and  this  organ  is  in  readiness  to 
seize  such  animals  as  form  its  food  and  come 
within  its  reach.  They  have  the  habit  of  hold- 
ing up  the  great  one,  as  if  they  were  beckoning 
some  one;  but  this  doubtless  is  an  attitude  of 

*  Ixxevc.     Gr.  *  Hist,  Anim,  1.  iv.  c.  2. 

^  Ocypode  Hippeus^  probably  Cancer  Cursor,     L. 
'*   Gekisimus  vocans. 


44  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

defence-  These  crabs  live  in  moist  places,  near 
the  shore*  They  attack,  in  crowds,  any  carrion, 
and  dispute  the  possession  of  it  with  the  vul- 
tures ;  they  do  not  willingly  enter  the  water, 
except  when  they  lay  and  hatch  their  eggs,  and 
it  is  conjectured  that  their  yoiing  are  for  some 
time  entirely  aquatic.  One  kind  of  them,^  which 
forms  numerous  burrows,  remaining  in  them 
during  three  or  four  months  in  the  winter, 
usually  stops  them  up,  so  that  the  animals  are 
obliged  to  reopen  them  when  the  warmth  of  the 
vernal  sun  bids  them  come  forth  again  from 
their  winter  quarters.  They  are  devoured  by 
numerous  animals, — otters,  bears,  birds,  tor- 
toises, and  other  reptiles,  all  prey  upon  them, 
but  their  multiplication  is  so  excessive,  that 
there  seems  no  sensible  diminution  of  their 
numbers. 

The  next  tribe  of  Decapods  are  the  long- 
tailed  ones,  which  do  not  fold  their  abdomen 
under  their  body.  This  part  is  usually  furnished 
at  the  extremity  with  several  plates,  which  the 
animal  expands  so  as  to  form  a  fan  of  five  or  six 
leaves ;  they  are  easily  seen  in  the  common 
lobster  ;*  like  the  tail  of  birds,  they  are  useful  to 
the  animal  in  its  paissage  through  an  elemeut 
that  requires  to  be  moved  by  organs  of  a  firmer 

*  G.  Pufjfillator.  -  Asiacus  Gammarus. 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPES.  46 

consistence  than  feathers.  The  lateral  ones  in 
the  species  just  named,  having  a  kind  of  articu^ 
lation,  so  that  they  can  be  partially  depressed, 
and  push  against  the  plane  they  are  moving 
upon ;  they  do  not,  like  the  crabs,  quit  the 
water,  and  are  some  of  them,  as  the  cray-fish,^ 
fresh-water  animals. 

I  shall  begin  with  a  tribe  which,  in  some 
degree,  connects  the  crab  with  the  lobster,  these 
are  what  are  denominated  Hermit-crabs^  whose 
abdomen  being  naked,  and  unprotected  by  any 
hard  crust,  their  Creator  has  given  them  an 
instinct,  which  teaches  them  to  compensate  this 
seeming  defect,  by  getting  possession  of  some 
univalve  shell,  suited  to  their  size,  which  becomes 
their  habitation,  and  which  they  carry  about 
with  them  as  if  they  were  its  proper  inhabitants. 
These  crabs  are  particularly  formed  for  the 
habit  that  distinguishes  them.  Their  naked  tail 
has  a  tendency  to  a  spiral  convolution,  fitting 
them  to  inhabit  spiral  shells,  which  they  usually 
select  for  their  mansion,  though,  from  recent 
observations,  it  has  been  found  that  any  univalve 
will  answer  their  purpose.  Their  tail  is  termi- 
nated by  an  apparatus  of  moveable  and  hard 
pieces/  which  appear  intended  to  enable  the 
animal  to  fix  itself  more  firmly  in  the  spire  of 


*  A$tacu$ fluviatHis,  *  PaguruSy  Plate  X.  Fig.  2. 

s  Ihld.  2.  a,  a,  a. 


46  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS, 

the  shell.  Usually  the  right  hand  claw,  which 
is  disengaged  from  the  shell »  is  double  the  size 
of  the  other  which  is  not,  and  is  that  which  is 
most  employed ;  but  in  narrow-mouthed  shellsi 
such  as  the  volute,  in  which  Freycinet  found 
one,^  both  claws  are  disengaged,  and  are  of  equal 
size.  The  reason  of  this  formation  is  evident. 
The  fourth  and  fifth  pairs  of  legs  *  are  much 
smaller  and  shorter,  than  the  anterior  ones,  they 
have,  below  the  claw,  a  piece  resembling  a 
rasp,  which  appears  formed  to  assist  them  in 
moving  in  the  shell,  whether  they  wish  to  move 
outwards  or  inwards,  and,  on  one  side,  they  have 
a  series  of  egg-bearing  appendices.'  This  whole 
structure  proves  that  they  are  formed  with  this 
particular  view  of  inhabiting  the  shells  of  a  very 
dilSerent  tribe  of  animals.  Some  of  these  hermit- 
crabs,  for  there  are  several  species  of  them,  may 
be  called  terrestrial^  while  others  are  aquatic. 
In  some  of  the  Indian  isles,  the  shores  are  co- 
vered with  them.  When  the  heat  is  most  intense, 
tliey  seek  the  shelter  of  the  shrubs,  and  when 
the  fi'eshness  of  the  evening  breathes,  they  run 
about  by  thousands,  rolling  along  their  shells  in 
the  most  grotesque  manner,  jostling  each  other, 
stumbling,  and  producing  a  noise  by  the  shock 
of  their  encounters,  which  announces  their  ap' 

*  Pagurus  clibanarim.     See  Plate  X.  Fig.  2. 
2  Ibid.  bb,c  c.  3  /^i^.  d,  d,  d,  dr 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYlX)PE8.  47 

proach  before  they  appear.  When  they  perceive 
any  danger,  they  hastily  conceal  themselves  in 
any  ready  made  holes  they  meet  with,  or  under 
the  roots,  or  in  the  trunks  of  decayed  trees,  seldom 
making  for  the  sea,  how  near  soever  they  may 
be.  At  Guam,  a  very  large  species  frequents 
forests  more  than  a  mile  from  the  sea ;  and  in 
Jamaica,  another  species,  called  there  the  soldier,' 
has  been  found  in  great  quantities  <m  elevated 
ground,  more  than  four  leagues  from  it. 

The  common  species*  is  aquatic,  and  usually 
inhabits  the  whelk ;  it  is  stated  annually  to  leave 
its  shell,  at  the  time  of  its  moult,  and  after  this 
great  crisis  is  over,  to  seek  another  suited  to  its 
increased  magnitude.  Aristotle,  Belon,  and 
others  affirm  that  these  animals  quit  their  shell 
to  seek  their  prey,  and  that  when  danger 
threatens  them,  they  retreat  to  it  backwards, 
hot  observations  have  not  been  made  by  modem 
authors  which  confirm  this  statement.  Their 
sexual  intercourse,  however,  could  not  take  place 
without  their  first  leaving  their  mansion. 

Why  our,  so  called,  hermits  are  gifted  with 
this  singular  instinct,  is  not  easy  to  conjecture. 
Many  other  creatures  make  use  of  houses  that 
they  had  no  hand  in  erecting,  as  the  bees,  the 
cuckoo,  and  sometimes  the  bear,  &c. ;  but  I  do 
not  recollect  any  that,  as  it  were,  clothe  themselves 

'  Pagurus  Diogenes,  ^  P,  Bemhardus, 


48  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

with  the  cast  garments  of  other  animals.  Pro- 
vidence, besides  the  defence  of  their  otherwise 
unprotected  bodies,  has  no  doubt  some  object  of 
importance  in  view  in  ^ving  them  this  instinct. 
Perhaps  they  may  accelerate  the  decomposition 
of  the  shells  they  inhabit,  and  cause  them  sooner 
to  give  way  to  the  action  of  the  atmosphere ;  and 
as  all  exuviae  may  be  termed  nuisances  and  de- 
formities, giving  to  these  deserted  mansions  an 
appearance  of  renewed  life  and  locomotion,  re- 
moves them  in  some  sort  from  the  catalogue  of 
blemishes.  By  this  physical  hypocrisy,  of  as- 
suming the  aspect  of  a  different  animal,  which 
is  known  as  not  having  powerful  means  of  de- 
struction, these  creatures  may  deceive  the  un- 
wary, and  make  them  their  prey,  which  if  they 
wore  the  livery  of  their  own  tribe,  would  be  on 
their  guard  and  escape  them. 

Next  to  the  Hermit-crabs,  or  rather  Hermit-lob- 
sters,^ comes  a  very  interesting  genus,  which  might 
be  denominated  Tree-Iobstersy  from  the  singular 
circumstance  of  their  quitting  the  sea,  like  the 
Climbing-perch,'  and  in  the  night  ascending  the 
cocoa-nut,  and  other  palm-trees,  for  the  sake  of 
their  fruit.  The  species  which  manifests  this  re* 
markable  instinct  is  gigantic,  and  must  exhibit  a 
striking  spectacle  when  engaged  in  ascending  the 
stem  of  a  cocoa-tree;  but  Mr.  Cummings  ob- 

•  Biryus  Latro,     Plate  X.  Fio.  K         *  Vol.. I.  p.  123. 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPES.  4T> 

served  its  proceedings  in  the  Polynesian  Is- 
lands, where  he  saw  it  ascending  the  palm-trees 
and  devouring  their  fruit.  I  have,  in  a  former 
chapter,^  stated  that  the  Climbing  perch  ascends 
the  fan-palm  in  pursuit  of  certain  Crustaceans, 
perhaps  related  to  the  Birgtts,  which  frequent  it. 
Freycinet  observed  these  crabs,  in  the  Marian 
Islands,  and  says  that  their  claws  have  wonder- 
ful strength,  for  when  the  animal  has  seized  a 
stick,  an  infant  may  be  suspended  from  them. 
They  are  very  fond  of  the  fruit  of  the  cocoa- 
palm,  and  may  be  fed  with  it  for  months  without 
suffering  from  want  of  water.  Whether,  like  the 
land-crab,  they  have  a  reservoir  capable  of 
containing  a  sufficient  quantity  of  that  fluid  to 
keep  the  gills  moist,  has  not  been  ascertained : 
probably  they  have. 

Amongst  the  larger  species  of  the  long-tailed 
Section,  there  is  one  of  a  most  ferocious  aspect, 
having  its  head,  the  base  of  its  long  antennae, 
and  its  thorax,  beset  with  sharp  spines.  This  is 
called  in  the  London  market  the  Thorny  lobster ^^ 
and  is  stated  sometimes  to  be  nearly  a  yard  in 
length :  it  is  also  called  the  Cray-fish^  and  by 
the  French,  who  esteem  it  highly,  the  Langouste: 
it  is,  however,  far  inferior  to  the  common  lobster, 
from  which  it  is  distinguished  by  having  no 
pincers,  its  legs  terminating  in  a  strong  simple 

»  Vol.  1.  p.  126. 

-  Palinurus  vulgaris,  Leach.     Malacostr.  Podophth.  t.  xxx. 

VOL.  II.  E 


50  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

claw,  set  with  bunches  of  bristles,  a  circum- 
stance indicating  a  different  mode  of  taking  its 
prey.  From  the  amplitude  of  their  fan-like  tail, 
and  from  their  natatory  plates,  these  lobsters 
seem  formed  for  rapid  motion  in  the  water* 

The  next  species  that  I  shall  mention  is  of 
much  more  importance  to  us,  and  has  been  cele- 
brated by  epicures  from  ancient  times.  Instead 
of  unarmed  hands  and  legs,  the  LobsteVj^  as 
every  one  knows,  has  the  former  armed,  often 
with  an  enormous  pair  of  claws,  which  must  be 
of  vast  power,  and,  besides,  the  two  antmor  pairs 
of  their  legs  are  furnished  with  small  pincers.  It 
is  observable  that  the  moveable  finger  of  the  claw 
of  the  hands  is  on  their  inner  side,  while,  in  these 
two  pairs  of  legs,  that  on  the  outside  is  move- 
able. Aristotle's  Carabus^  is  generally  referred 
to  the  thorny  lobster;  but  in  one  place  he  ex- 
pressly mentions  its  using  its  pincers  to  catch 
and  carry  its  food  to  its  mouth,  which  could  not 
apply  to  that  animal,  though  it  agrees  well 
with  the  common  lobster ;  yet  in  another  place» 
under  the  same  name,  he  appears  to  mesm  the 
other.^  It  is  not  known  exactly  to  what  use 
these  smaller  pincers  are  applied;  it  must  be 
observed,  however,  that  if  the  legs. are  regarded 
as  naturally  pointing  towards  the  head,  as  in 
Dr.  Leach's  figure  of  Nephrops,  the  moveable 

*  Astacus  Gammarus, 

«  GtJ  Kapafioi,  Hist.  Anim,  1.  viii.  c.  2.         »  Ibid,  1.  ii.  c.  2. 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPES.  51 

thumb  in  all  is  on  the  same  side.  The  antennae 
in  this  genus  are  about  the  length  of  the  body. 
The  pincers  of  the  hand  are  very  powerful  and 
tubercular ;  they  are  used  by  these  animals  both 
to  seize  their  prey  and  for  self  defence^  and  they 
contain  very  powerful  muscles.  When  in  the 
water  the  lobster  seizes  anything  presented  to  it, 
and  holdd  it  so  strongly  that  it  is  impossible  to 
extricate  it  without  breaking  the  claw. 

All  Crustaceans  cast  their  crust  annually.  At 
first  it  seems  wonderful  how  this  can  be  accom^ 
plished.  With  insects,  in  whom  it  takes  place 
only  in  the  larves,  and  whose  form  and  sub- 
stance are  usually  adapted  to  it,  a  longitudinal 
fissure  of  the  skin  of  a  soft  caterpillar,  or  grub, 
when  the  animal  grows  too  big  for  it,  we  can  con- 
ceive to  be  no  difficult  task :  but  with  animals 
covered  with  a  hard  crust,  and  in  whom  not 
only  the  covering  of  the  head,  trunk,  and  abdo- 
men is  to  be  cast,  but  also  that  of  the  legs  and 
other  organs,  it  seems  an  operati<m  infinitely 
more  arduous.  But  He  who  gave  them  this 
defence,  instnicts  them  also  how  to  rid  them- 
sdves  of  it  when  it  grows  too  strait  for  them, 
and  has  moulded  their  structure  accordingly. 

These  animals  are  not,  like  most  insects,  li- 
mited to  an  existence,  terminated  within  the 
period  of  one  revolution  of  the  earth  round  the 
sun,  but  sometimes  witness  several ;  and  some 
are  said  even  to  live  twenty  years,   and  keep 


52  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

growing  during  the  greater  part  of  their  li£e« 
But  this  would  be  impossible,  since  it  is  inca- 
pable of  extension,  unless  they  could  give  room 
for  the  expansion  of  their  body,  by  occa- 
sionally rejecting  the  case  which  incloses  it. 
At  a  certain  time  of  the  year,  about  the  end 
of  the  spring,  when  food  is  plentiful,  they  begin 
to  feel  themselves  ill  at  ease:  they  then  pro- 
bably seek  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and  other 
close  places,  in  which  they  can  undergo,  in  con- 
cealment and  security,  a  change  which  exposes 
them,  in  a  defenceless  state,  to  danger. 

But  we  should  have  known  nothing  of  the 
manner  in  which  this  great  work  is  effected, 
had  not  the  illustrious  French  naturalist,  Reau- 
mur, adopted  methods  which  enabled  him  to 
ascertain  their  mode  of  proceeding.  In  the 
spring,  in  boxes  pierced  with  holes,  which  he 
placed  both  in  the  river,  and  in  an  apartment, 
he  put  the  fresh-water  cray-fish,*  of  the  same 
genus  with  the  lobster.  He  observed  that  when 
one  of  these  was  about  to  cast  its  crust,  it  rubbed 
its  feet  one  against  the  other,  and  gave  itself 
violent  contortions.  After  these  preparatory 
movements,  it  swelled  out  its  body  more  than 
usual,  and  the  first  segment  of  its  abdomen 
appeared  more  than  commonly  distant  from  the 
thorax.  The  membrane  that  united  them  now 
burst,  and  its  new  body  appeared.    After  rest- 

'  Astacvs  fluviatilis. 


.CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPES.         53 

iDg  for  some  time,  it  recommenced  agitating 
its  legs  and  other  parts,  swelling  to  the  utmost 
the  parts  covered  by  the  thorax,  which  was 
thus  elevated  and  separated  from  the  base  of 
the  l^s ;  the  membrane  which  united  it  to  the 
underside  of  the  body  burst  asunder,  and  it  only 
remained  attached  towards  the  mouth.  In  a  few 
minutes,  from  this  time,  the  animal  was  entirely 
stripped  except  the  legs.  First  the  margin  of 
the  thorax  was  seen  to  separate  from  the  first 
pair  of  legs ;  at  that  instant,  drawing  back  its 
head,  after  reiterated  efforts,  it  disengaged  its 
eyes  from  their  cases,  and  all  the  other  organs 
of  the  anterior  part  of  the  head  ;  it  next  uncased 
one  of  its  fore  legs,  or  all  or  part  of  the  legs  of 
one  side,  which  operation  is  so  difficult  that 
young  ones  sometimes  die  under  it.  When  the 
l^s  are  disengaged,  the  animal  casts  off  its 
thorax,  extends  its  tail  briskly,  and  pushes  off 
its  covering  and  that  of  its  parts.  After  this 
last  action,  which  requires  the  utmost  exertion 
of  its  remaining  vigour,  it  sinks  into  a  state 
of  great  weakness.  Its  limbs  are  so  soft  that 
they  bend  like  a  piece  of  wet  paper;  but  if 
the  back  is  felt,  its  flesh  appears  unexpectedly 
firm,  a  circumstance  arising,  perhaps,  from  the 
convulsive  state  of  the  muscles.  When  the 
thorax  is  once  disengaged,  and  the  animal  has 
begun  to  extricate  its  legs,  nothing  can  stop  its 
progress.     Reaumur  often  took  them  out  of  the 


54  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

water  with  the  intention  of  preserving  them  half 
uncased,  but  they  finished,  in  spite  of  him,  their 
moult  in  his  hands.  Upon  examining  the 
exuviae  of  these  animals,  we  find  no  external 
part  wanting ;  every  hair  is  a  case  which  coveis 
another  hair.  The  lower  articulations  of  the 
legs  are  divided  lon^tudinally  at  a  suture  which 
separates  during  the  operation,  but  which  is  not 
visible  in  the  living  animal. 

When  we  consider  this  apparently  arduous 
and  complex  operation,  we  see  the  most  evi* 
dent  proofs  of  design,  and  that  the  Creator 
has  so  put  together  the  difierent  parts  of  the 
animal's  structure,  that  there  is  no  occasion  to 
divide  the  crust  itself  in  <n*der  to  liberate  it. 
Instead  of  a  solid  tube,  he  has  inclosed  Jthe  leg 
in  joints  that  are  furnished  vrith  the  means  of 
dividing  longitudinally,  upon  sufficient  expan- 
sion of  the  included  limb,  and  so  opening  a  way 
for  its  liberation.  In  thef  whole  body  all  the 
segments  and  parts  -  are  so  united  by  a  mem- 
brane which  can  yield  to  the  expansive  efibrts  of 
the  animal,  that  the  entire  liberation  of  it  firom 
the  armour  that  encases  it,  is  accomplished  with 
infinitely  more  ease  than  we  should  expect,  even 
after  a  careful  investigation  of  it.  Besides 
membranous  ligaments,  so  arranged  by  the  Wis- 
dom of  the  Creator  as  to  yield  to  the  efibrts  of 
these  creatures  to  liberate  themselves  from  thdr 
too  strait  garment,  he  has  also  furnished  them. 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPES.  55 

as  Reaumur  remarks,  with  a  slimy  secretion, 
which  moistens  the  interval  between  the  old  and 
new  shell,  and  facilitates  their  separation. 

The  time  requisite  for  hardening  the  newly 
acquired  crust,  according  to  its  previous  state,  is 
from  one  to  three  days.  Those  animals  that  are 
ready  to  moult  have  always  two  stony  substances 
called  crafas'-eyes,  placed  in  the  stomach,  which, 
from  the  experiments  of  Reaumur  and  others, 
appear  destined  to  furnish  the  matter,  or  a 
portion  of  it,  of  which  the  shell  is  formed,  for  if 
the  animal  is  opened  the  day  after  its  moult, 
when  the  shell  is  only  half  hardened,  these  sub^ 
stances  are  found  only  half  diminished,  and  if 
opened  later  they  are  proportionably  smaller. 
Thus  has  Creative  Wisdom  provided  means  for 
the  prompt  consolidation  of  the  crust  of  these 
creatures,  so  that  it  is  soon  rescued  from  the 
dangers  to  which,  in  its  naked  state,  it  is  exposed. 
Reaumur  measured  several  cray-fish,  before,  and 
after  their  moult,  and  found  that  their  augmen- 
tation amounted  to  about  one-fifth,  this  amount 
probably  decreases  as  they  approach  nearer  to 
their  adult  state.  From  a  chemical  analysis  of 
the  crust  of  the  lobster  it  has  been  ascertained 
that  it  consists  of  gelatine  united  to  calcareous 
earth ;  it  difiers  from  the  shells  of  MoUuscans  in 
having  a  much  greater  proportion  of  gelatine, 
whereas  in  the  latter  the  calcareous  earth  greatly 
predominates. 


56  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

It  is  asserted  that  hirds^  aad  other  animals  in 
tropical  countries,  have  two  moults  within  the 
year,  after  the  two  rainy  seasons  are  passed,  and 
two  broods ;  whether  this  is  the  case  with  Crusta- 
ceans has  not  been  ascertained.  Most  other 
Condylopes  do  not  suryive  the  laying  of  their 
eggs,  but  the  Crustaceans  are  evidently  exempted 
from  this  law,  and  emulate  the  higher  animals 
in  the  duration  of  their  existence. 

It  may  be  observed  that  the  moult  of  Crusta- 
ceans differs  in  one  respect  from  that  of  birds, 
which  only  change  their  feathers,  and  that  of 
quadrupeds  who  only  change  their  fur,  since 
they  disengage  themselves  from  their  whole 
external  skin  with  all  its  appendages,  whether  of 
fur,  or  any  other  substance.  Their  moult  re- 
sembles rather  that  of  trees,  whose  outer  skin, 
under  the  form  of  bark,  peels  off*  annually,  and 
is  succeeded  by  another  formed  under  it,  as  is 
particularly  evident  in  the  birch,  plane,  &c. 

It  is  to  the  researches  of  the  same  learned,  and 
patient,  and  penetrating  experimenter  and  natu- 
ralist that  we  are  indebted  for  what  knowledge 
we  possess  of  the  means  employed  by  nature  for 
the  reproduction  of  the  mutilated  orgai^  of 
Crustaceans.  Having  cut  off*  the  legs  of  some 
crabs  and  lobsters,  and  placed  them  in  covered 
boats,  communicating  with  the  water,  and  des«» 
tined  to  keep  fishes  or  Crustaceans  alive,  at  the 
end  of  some  months,  he  saw  that  the  mutilated 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOP£S.  57 

legs  bad  been  replaced  by  new  onies»  perfectly 
resembling  the  old,  and  almost  as  large.  The 
time  necessary  for  this  Teproduction  was  not 
fixed,  but  depended  upon  the  warmth  of  the 
season,  and  the  supply  of  food  furnished  to  the 
animal,  and  likewise  upon  the  part  in  which  the 
mutilation  took  place.  The  point  of  union  of 
the  second  and  third  joints,  is  the  part  of  the 
leg  where  a  fracture  is  most  easily  made,  and  the 
reproduction  is  most  rapid.  At  this  point  there 
are  many  sutures  which  appear  distinct  from 
articulations ;  it  is  in  these  sutures,  particularly 
the  intermediate  one,  that  the  separation  usually 
occurs,  and  many  Crustaceans,  if  they  are 
wounded  in  some  other  part  of  their  leg,  cast  the 
remainder  off  at  this  suture  to  facilitate  the 
reparation  of  their  loss.  So  much  only  is  re- 
produced in  each  leg  as  is  necessary  to  render  it 
again  complete. 

When  a  leg  is  mutilated  in  the  summer,  if 
examined  a  day  or  two  after  the  experiment, 
the  first  circumstance  observable  is  a  kind  of 
covering  membrane  of  a  reddish  hue  ;  in  five  or 
six  days  more  this  membrane  becomes  convex ; 
next  it  is  protruded  into  a  conical  shape,  and 
keeps  gradually  lengthening  as  the  germinating 
leg  is  developed ;  at  last  the  membrane  is  rup- 
tured and  the  leg  appears,  at  first  soft,  but  in  a 
few  days  it  becomes  as  hard  as  the  old  one ;  it 
now  wants  only  size  and  length,  and  these  it 


58  FUNCTIONS  AMD  INS-ITNGTS. 

acquires  in  time ;  for  at  every  moult  it  augments 
in  a  more  rapid  proportion  than  the  legs  that 
have  their  proper  size.  The  antennas,  maxillae, 
&c.,  are  reproduced  in  the  same  manner,  but  if 
the  tail  is  mutilated,  it  is  neyer  reproduced,  and 
the  animal  dies.  When  attacked.  Crustaceans, 
as  well  as  some  of  their  analogii^s,  the  grass- 
hoppers, often  cast  tlieir  l^s  as  it  were  volun- 
tarily. 

When  we  reflect  on  this  history,  we  cannot 
help  admiring  and  adoring  the  goodness  of  the 
Creator,  and  his  care  over  the  dreatures  he  has 
made,  in  giving  to  these  animals,  which,  both 
from  the  multiplicity  and  exposure  of  their  legs, 
and  other  organs,  and  their  numerous  enemies, 
are  particularly  liable  to  mutilations,  a  power 
that  enables  them,  in  a. short  period,  to  pursue 
the  course  directed  by  instinct,  with  undimi- 
nished or  little  diminished  powers. 

The  Stomapodsy  or  mouth-legged  Crustaceans, 
so  named  because  the  maxillary  legs  do  not 
differ  materially  from  the  thoracic  ones,  form 
the  second  Order  of  the  Class,  and  the  species 
belonging  to  it,  on  account  of  their  general 
resemblance  to  the  orthopterous  tribe  forming 
Linn6's  genus  Mantis^  are  called  Sea-Maniises. 
One  of  them,^  in  its  anterior  legs,   accurately 

*  SqtiUla  Mantis, 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDVLOPES.         59 

represents  that  genus.  But  the  most  remarkable 
animals  belonging  to  the  Order  are  the  Phyllo- 
somes^  of  Dr.  Leach,  which  in  some  respects  are 
analoguesL  of  the  Spectresj^  not  having  the  rap- 
torious  fiofre  leg  of.  the.Squillse,  but  their  thorax, 
which  consists  of  two  s^ments,  the  first  very 
much  dilated,  approaches  nearer  to  that  of  Mantis 
strumaria.^.  It  has  been  taken  in  several  tropical 
seas,  and  when  living,  it  is  said^to  be  as  trans- 
parent as  crystal,  except  its  eyes,  which  are 
dLy-blue. 

The  subsequfsnt  Orders  of  the  Crustaceans^ 
called  by. the  general  name  of  Malacostracans^ 
are  distinguished  from  the  preceding  by  having 
sessile  eyes,  imbedded  in  the  substance  of  the 
bead,  and  though  they  contain  many  singular 
creatures,  we  know  little  of  their  habits  and 
history. 

Many  of  the.  animals  belonging  to  Latreille's 
Liemodipodsj  or  throat-footed  Crustaceans,  which 
begin  the  sessile-eyed  tribes,  have  very  slender 
bodies,  and  their  legs  are  separated  by  a  con- 
siderable interval,  like  those  of  geometric  larves 
or  loqpers  amongst  insects,  whose  motions  they 
also  imitate.  One  remarkable  creature  is  in- 
cluded in  this  Order,  which  is  parasitic  upon  the 
whale,^  and  by  its  hooked  claws  is  enabled  to 

*  Plate  X.  Fig.  3.  P,  bremcorne  ? 

«  Phasma.  ^  Stoll.  Spectr.  t.  xl./.  42. 

^  Cyamus  Ceti. 


60  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

maintain  its  station  amidst  the  fluctuations  of 
the  waves.  This  animal,  like  the  king-crab,  has 
both  compound  and  simple  eyes. 

Next  to  these  succeed  the  Order  oiAmphipods, 
including  a  number  of  genera,  consisting  usually 
of  minute  animals ;  many  of  them,  like  the  grass- 
hoppers, and  several  other  msects,  are  gifted 
by  their  Maker  with  the  faculty  of  leaping. 
When  one  meets  with  a  heap  of  sea-weeds  upon 
the  beach,  recently  left  by  the  tide,  if  we  turn  it 
over  we  shall  often  see  under  it  myriads  of  little 
animals  belonging  to  this  Order,  jumping  about 
in  all  directions,  which  are  thus  enabled,  either 
to  find  shelter  under  another  mass  of  moist  sea- 
weed, or  perhaps  to  reach  their  native  waves  in 
safety.  Whether  these  Crustaceans,  like  their 
analogues  on  shore,  feed  on  vegetable  substances, 
has  not  been  ascertained;  they  are  generally 
found  as  above  stated;  and  there  may  be  Jier- 
bivorous  species  amongst  the  Crustaceans,  as 
well  as  in  almost  every  other  class  of  animals. 

The  last  Crustacean  Order  is  called  by  La- 
treille,  Isopodsy  from  their  legs  being  usually  of 
the  same  length ;  though  a  large  proportion  of 
these  are  aquatic  animals,  yet  the  Order  termi- 
nates in  those  that  are  ten-estrial.  Several  of  the 
former  are  furnished  with  one  or  more  pair  of 
didactyle  legs,  but  the  terrestrial  ones  never 
have  these  prehensory  organs. 
Amongst  the  Cnistaceans,  Latreille  has  in- 


CRUSTACEAN  CONDYLOPES.  61 

eluded  the  Trihbites,  a  remarkable  tribe  of 
animals,  at  present  found  only  in  a  fossil  state, 
and  like  the  chitons,  certain  wood-lice/  and  the 
aimadillo,^  rolling  themselves  up  in  a  ball. 
They  may  form  part  of  a  branch  connecting  the 
Crustaceans  and  MoUuscans,  but  I  leave  the 
discussion  of  this  point  to  abler  hands. 

Thus  have  we  at  length  arrived  at  animals, 
the  majority  of  which  are  terrestrial^  at  least  in 
their  perfect  state,  for  many  terrestrial  Condy- 
lopes  have  aquatic  larves  and  pupes,  but  few,  or 
none,  I  believe,  inhabit  salt  water,  except  per- 
haps some  species  of  bugs.^ 

The  great  Crustacean  host,  of  which  probably 
we  do  not  know  half  the  species,  is  certainly  a 
most  valuable  gift  to  mankind,  as  well  as  to  the 
various  inhabitants  or  frequenters  of  the  waters, 
especially  of  the  ocean,  varying  as  they  do  in 
size,  from  the  great  thorny  lobster  to  the  minute 
tribes  of  Entomostracans ;  they  probably  become 
the  prey  of  many  sea  animals,  besides  the  Ce- 
phalopods,  which  are  stated  to  make  such  havoc 
among  them/  When  we  further  consider  their 
powers  of  infinite  multiplication,  we  see  that 
however  great  the  consumption  of  them,  there 
appears  no  diminution  of  their  numbers,  so  that 
(Mie  kind  of  animals,  by  the  will  of  Him  who 

*  Armadillo  vulgaris.  •  Dasypus. 

*  Salda  Zo$tar<3P,  F.  &c.  *  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  314. 


02  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

created  all  things,  and  who  gave  a  law  to  each 
species,  which  regulated  their  numbers,  and  the 
momentum  of  their  action,  doing  or  suffering,  is 
made  to  compensate  for  another,  and  the  law  of 
preservation  to  act  as  an  equipoise  to  the  law 
of  destruction. 

When  we  look,  however,  at  these  aninlals,  es- 
pecially the  larger  kinds,  and  survey  their  offen- 
sive organs  and  weapons,  and  the  coat  of  mail 
that  defends  them,  we  feel  convinced-  that  they 
also  are  employed  to  keep  down  the  numbers  of 
other  inhabitants  of  the  ocean,  more  especially 
as  the  great  body  of  them  are  evidently  pre- 
daceous :  and  this,  on  such  a  survey,  seems  to 
us  their  priinary  function.  God  numbers  and 
weighs  them  both  with  those  they  destroy  and 
those  that  destroy  them ;  his  bridle  is  in  their 
mouth,  and  they  go  as  far  as  he  permris  them : 
and  when  he  gives  the  word — Peace,  be  still — the 
mutual  conflict  relax'es,  or,  in  some  parts,  is  inter* 
mitted,  till  the  general  welfare  calls  for  its  revival. 

It  may  be  observed  with  r^ard  to  this  con- 
stant scene  of  destruction,  this  never  universally 
intermitted  war  of  one  part  of  the  Creation  upon 
another,  that  the  sacrifice  of  a  part  maintains 
the  health  and  life  of  the  whole ;  the  great  doc* 
trine  of  vicarious  suffering  formis  an  article  of 
physical  science ;  and ;  we  discover,  standing 
even  upon  this  basis,  that  the  sufferings  and 
death  of  one  being   may  be,   in   the  Divine 


Bf YRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  63 

counsds,  and  consistently  with  what  we  know  of 
the  general  operations  of  Providence,  the  cause 
and  instrament  of  the  spiritual  life  and  final  sal- 
yation  of  infinite  hosts  of  others.  Thus  does  the 
animal  kingdom,  in  some  sort,  preach  the  Gos- 
pel. OF  Christ. 


Chapter  XVI. 
Functions  and  Instincts.     Myriapod  Condyhpes. 

There  are  two  Classes  of  Condylopes,  extremely 
dissimilar  in  their  external  form  and  the  number 
of  their  legs,  and  yet  in  some  respects  related  to 
each  other,  at  each  of  which  we  may  be  sakl 
now  to  have  arrived ;  both  are  almost  exclu- 
sively  terrestrial,  and  both  remarkable  fear  their 
ferocious  aspect ;  the  one  the  analogue  of  the 
crab^  and  the  other  apparently  related  to  the 
Isopod  Crastaceans,  the  oniscus  and  armadillo* 
It  will  be  easily  se^n  that  I  am  speaking  of  the 
Arachnidans  and  Myriapods. 

Regarding,  therefore,  the  long-tailed  Decapod 
Crustaceans  as  leading,  by  the  Order  of  Isopods 
which  we  last  considered,  towards  the  Myriapods, 
and  the  short-tailed  ones  or  crabs,  as  tending 
towards  the  Arachnidans.  I  shall  give  a  brief 
account  of  the  former  of  these  Classes  in  the  pre- 
sent chapter;  and  I  am  the  more  induced  to 


64  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

assign  them  precedency  because  of  their  evident 
connection  with  certain  Annelidansy  which  indeed 
Aristotle,  and  other  ancient  Naturalists,  thought 
was  so  close,  that  they  considered  them  as  be- 
longing to  the  same  genus/  and  it  is  worthy  of 
remark  that,  in  the  Class  just  named,  the  repre- 
sentatives, if  they  may  be  so  called,  of  the 
Myriapods,  are,  like  them,  divided  into  two 
tribes,  one  with  a  cylindrical  and  the  other  with 
B,Jlat  body.* 

The  Myriapods  exhibit  the  following  general 
characters. 

Animal  undergoing  a  metamorphosis  by  ac- 
quiring in  its  progress  from  the  egg  to  the  adult 
state  several  additional  segments  and  legs.  Body 
without  wings,  divided  into  numerous  pedigerous 
segments,  with  no  distinction  of  trunk  and  ab- 
domen. Head  with  a  pair  of  antennae ;  two 
compound  eyes ;  a  pair  of  mandibles  ;  under-lip 
connate  with  the  maxillae. 

The  class  naturally  divides  itself  into  two 
Orders,  distinguished  both  by  their  form  and 
habits. 

1 .  Chilognathans.  *     Body  generally  cylindri- 

^  Aristot.  Hist,  Animal.  1.  ii.  c.  14.  Plin.  Hist.  Nat,  1.  ix, 
c.  43. 

«  See  Vol.  I.  p.  347,  and  Plate  VIII.  Fio.  1.  4. 

^  Chilognatha^  so  called  because  their  lip  is  formed  of  the 
jaws,  from  Gr.  x'^'^^y  ^J'P>  *^^  yvaOoc,  a  jaw. 


MYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  65 

cal ;  segments  half  membranaceous  and  half 
cnistaceous,  each  half  bearing  a  pair  of  legs ; 
auteniue  seven-jointed,  filiform,  often '  a  little 
thicker  towards  the  end.  These  are  called  Milli- 
pedes.   Jultis  Li. 

.  2.  Chilopodam^  Body  depressed;  s^ments 
coYoed  by  a  coriaceous  plate,  bearing  each  only 
a  single  pair  of  legs;  antennce  of  fourteen  or 
more  joints,  setaceous.  These  are  called  Centi- 
pedes.    Scolopendra  L. 

1.  Very  little  is  known  with  respect  to  the 
habits  and  instincts  of  the  animals  belonging  to 
either  of  these  Orders,  except  that  they  frequent 
close  and  dark  places,  being  usually  found  under 
stones,  under  bark,  in  moss,  and  the  like. 

Latreille  names  the  three  families  into  which 
he  divides  the  first  of  them,  Oniscifomiy  Angui- 
farm^  and  Penicillate;  one*  resembles  a  wood- 
louse,  like  the  mammalian  armadillo,  the  tri- 
lobites,  and. chitons,  when  alarmed,  rolls  itself 
up  into  a  spherical  ball;  besides  the  ordi- 
nary dorsal  and  ventral  segments,  these  have, 
on  each  side  underneath,  between  the  lateral 
margin  and  the  legs,  a  series  of  rounded  plates, 
which  Latreille  conjectures  may  be  related  to 
the  organs  of  respiration,  which  seems  to  give 
them  some  further  affinity   to  the   Trilobites. 

^  Chilopoda,  so  called  because  their  lip  is  formed  of  the  footy 

from  Gr.  x**^^?  ^  ^ip^  ^^^  ^^£>  ^  ^^^^' 
*  Glomeris, 

VOL.  II.  F 


66  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

They  are  found  mostly  under  stones,  and  creep 
out  before  rain. 

Another,*  in  its  cylindrical  body,  gliding  mo- 
tion, and  coiling  itself  up  spirally^  presents  a 
striking  resemblance  to  a  snake.  Some  species* 
emit,  through  pores,  that  have  beeo  mistaken 
for  spiracles,  a  strong  and  rather  unpleasant 
odour. 

The  penidUate  family,  of  which  only  a  sin^e 
species  is  known,"  is  remarkable  for  several  pen- 
cils or  tufts  of  long  and  short  scales,  which  dis- 
tinguish the  sides  of  the  body.  These  are  found 
principally  under  the  bark  of  trees. 

The  myriapods  belonging  to  this  order  De 
Geer  describes  as  very  harmless  animals.  They 
appear  to  feed  upon  decaying  vegetable  or 
animal  matter.  The  author  just  named  thinks 
that  the  common  Julas*  or  Gaily  worm,  feeds 
upon  earth ;  one  that  he  kept  devoured  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  the  pupe  of  a  fly ;  other 
species  are  stated  to  eat  strawberries  and  en- 
dive ;  and  Frisch  fed  one,  that  he  kept  a  leog 
time,  upon  sugar. 

2.  The  Chilopodans  or  Centipedes,  which  con- 
stitute the  secotid  order,  Latreille  divides  into 
two  families,  which  he  denominates  Imequipedes 
and  JEquipedes.     The  Inaquipedesy  so  called  be- 


*  Julus,  &c.  '  J.fiBtidisdm^u. 

•  Pollyxenus  lagurus,  ♦  /.  terrestrU, 


MYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  67 

cause  the  «x  last  pairs  of  legs  are  suddenly 
longer  than  the  rest,  belong,  as  at  present 
known,  to  a  sin^e  genus/  which  being  less 
depressed  than  the  other  Centipedes,  seems  to 
connect  the  two  Orders.  They  are  not  found  in 
England,  but  in  France  they  are  stated  to  fre- 
quent houses  and  outbuildings,  where  they  con- 
ceal themselves  during  the  day,  between  the 
beams  and  joists,  and  sometimes  under  stones ; 
but  when  night  comes  they  may  be  seen  running 
upon  the  walls,  with  great  velocity  coursing 
their  prey,  which  consists  of  insects,  woodlice, 
and  other  minute  creatures ;  these  they  puncture 
with  their  oral  fangs,  and  the  venom  they  instill 
acts  very  quickly,  thus  enabling  them  easily  to 
secure  their  victim. 

The  JEquipedesy  so  called  because  all  their  legs, 
except  the  last  pair,  are  nearly  equal  in  length, 
are  sub-divided  into  several  genera,  the  most 
lemiurkable  of  which  is  distinguished  by  the 
ancient  name  of  Scolopendra.  Some  species  of 
this  genus  grow  to  an  enormous  size ;  a  specimen 
of  the  giant  centipede^  in  the  British  Museum 
is  more  than  a  foot  long.  The  arms  of  the  ani- 
mals of  the  present  Order  are  more  tremendous 
than  those  of  the  Millipedes,  for  their  second 
pair  of  legs  terminates  in  a  strong  claw,'  which 


*  Cermatia.  Ulig.  Leach.     ScuHgera,  Lam.  Latr. 

■  Sc.  Oigas.  *  Introd.  to  Ent.  t.  vii./.  13.  a. 


68  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

is  pierced  at  the  apex  for  the  emission  of  poison ; 
in  this  family  the  first  or  hip-joints  of  these  legs 
are  united  and  dilated  so  as  to  form  a  lip.^  In 
warm  climates,  the  centipedes  are  said  to  be  very 
venomous. 

As  the  anguiform  Chilognathans  represent  the 
living  and  moving  serpent,  so  the  family  I  am 
now  considering,  the  equipede  ChilopodanSy  may 
be  regarded  as  representing  the  skeleton  of  a 
dead  one.  The  head,  with  its  poison-fangs,  the 
depressed  body,  formed  of  segments  representing 
vertebral  joints,  and  the  legs  curving  inwards, 
and  resembling  ribs,  all  concur  to  excite  the 
above  idea  in  the  mind  of  the  beholder. 

Like  the  last  family,  these  also  frequent  close 
places,  and  sometimes  creep  into  beds;  they 
devour  insects,  and  similar  small  animals,  which 
Latreille  found  the  puncture  of  their  envenomed 
fangs  arrested,  and  killed  instantaneously;  and 
it  is  sometimes  attended  with  serious  inconve- 
niences to  man  himself.  One  species,'  in  some 
parts  of  the  West  Indies,  goes  by  the  name  of 
the  Mischievous ;  *  and  the  pain  caused  by  the 
bite  of  the  Giant  Centipede,  though  it  is  never 
mortal,  is  greater  than  that  produced  by  the 
sting  of  the  scorpion. 

Some  centipedes  emit  a  phosphoric  light ;  of 
this  description  is  one  distinguished  by  the  name 

'  Introd.  to  Ent.  PL  vii. /.  l\.  d,b. 

'  Scolopendra  marsitans,  '  Mal/aisante, 


MYBIAPOD  CONDYLOPE8.  69 

of  the  pliosphofic^^  which  is  stated  by  Linn4  to 
have  fallen  from  the  air  upon  Captain  Ekeberg's 
vessel  in  the  Indian  Ocean,  a  hundred  miles 
from  land.  But  the  light*giying  centipede  best 
known  is  the  electnc,^  which  is  remarkable  for 
emitting  a  yivid  phosphoric  light  in  the  dark ; 
this  is  produced  by  a  viscid  secretion,  which,  as 
I  have  observed,  when  adhering  to  the  fingers, 
gives  light  independently  of  the  animal.  This 
species  also  frequents  beds.  Its  object  in  this 
may,  perhaps,  be  to  search  for  bugs  and  other 
insects  that  annoy  our  species  during  repose. 

The  function  which  the  Creator  has  devolved 
upon  the  Myriapods  of  the  first  Order,  seems  to 
be  that  of  removing  putrescent  vegetable  and 
animal  matter  from  the  spots  that  they  frequent ; 
and  that  of  the  second  to  keep  within  due  limits 
the  minor  inhabitants,  especially  the  insect,  of 
the  dark  places  of  the  earth.  Viewed  in  this 
light,  however  disgusting  they  may  seem  to  us 
in  their  general  aspect,  we  may  regard  them  as 
beneficial,  and  as  contributing  their  efibrts  to 
maintain  in  order  and  beauty  the  globe  we  in- 
habit. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  great  Hebrew 
Legislator,  amongst  the  unclean  animals  which 
it  was  unlawful  for  the  Israelites  to  eat  or  to 

S.  pkosphorea,  •  Geophilus  eUctricus, 


70  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

touch,  enumerates  those  which  multiply  feet} 
In  the  common  version  it  is  translated,  Hath 
more  feet ;  but  the  marginal  reading  is  nearest  to 
the  Hebrew,*  and  seems  to  allude  to  a  circum- 
stance upon  which  I  shall  hereafter  enlarge, 
namely,  that  these  animals  increase  the  number 
of  their  legs  with  their  growth.  As  a  subject 
intimately  connected  witU  Zoology  in  general, 
and  leading  to  a  very  profitable  study  of  the 
animal  kingdom  in  a  moral  point  of  view,  it  will 
not  be  foreign  to  the  object  of  the  present  treatise 
if  I  add  here  a  few  remarks  upon  the  distinctioa 
of  animals  into  clean  and  unclean,  observable  ia 
many  parts  of  Holy  Writ.  This  distinction  was 
originally  to  indicate  those  which  might  or  might 
not  be  offered  up  in  sacrifice,  and,  afterwards, 
when  animal  food  was  permitted,  to  signify  to 
the  Jews  those  that  might  and  those  that  might 
not  be  eaten.  When  Noah  was  commanded, 
Of  evei^  clean  beast  thou  shalt  take  to  thee  bji 
sevens^  the  male  and  his  female;  and  of  beasts  that 
are  not  clean,  by  two^  the  male  and  his  female^-^it 
is  evident  that  the  distinction  was  familiar  to  the 
Patriarch.  The  unclean  animals,  with  respect  to 
their  habits'  and  food,  belonged  to  two  great 
classes,  namely  Zoophagous  animals,  or  those 
which  attack  and  devour  living  animals;  and 
Necrophagous  animals,  br  those  which  devour 

•  Levit,  xi.  42.  -  D>^:n  naiD  *  "Genes,  vii.  2. 


MYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  71 

dead  ones,  or  any  other  putrescent  substances. 
Of  the  first  description  are  the  caniiM  ^  and  fdine^ 
tribes  amongst  quadrupeds;  the  eagles^  and 
hawks ^  amongst  birds;  the  crocodiles^  and  ser- 
pents^ amongst  reptiles;  the  sharks''  and  pikes ^ 
amongst  fishes;  the  tiger-beetles^  and  ground- 
beetles^^  amongst  insects;  and  to  name  no  more, 
the  centipedes  in  the  class  we  are  treating  of. 

With  regard  to  the  necrophagous  tribe,  I  do  not 
recollect  any  mammalians  that  are  exclusively  of 
that  description,  for  the  hytgna^^  ^nd.  glutton  ^  are 
ferocious,  and  eagerly  pursue  their  prey,  they 
will,  however, devour  any  carra^^es  they  meet  with, 
and  even  disinter  them  when  buried;  but  the 
vulture  amongst  the  birds  will  not  attack  the 
living  when  he  can  gorge  himself  with  the  de(id ; 
the  carrion  crow  belongs  also  to  this  tribe; 
amongst  insects^  the  burying^^  carrion^^  and  dis^ 
secting  beetles^^  the  flesh-fly^  and  many  other 
two-winged  flies,  feed  upon  putrescent  fi^sh ;  and 
numberless  others  satiate  themselves  with  all 
unclean  and  putrid  substances,  whether  animal 
or  vegetable.  In  the  present  class,  the  millipedes 
belong  to  the  necrophagous  tribe. 


*  Cants                  '  Ftlis. 

'  Aquila. 

*  Falco.                 *  Sauria, 

*  Ophidia, 

'  SqualvLS.               '  Esox, 

*  Cicindela, 

*"  Carahus,  Harpalus,  &c. 

"   Canis  HytBna^  L. 

"  Necrophorus.         "  Silpha. 

**  Derpiestes. 

"  Sarcophaga  camaria. 

72  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

A  third  description  of  animals,  appearing  to 
be  intermediate  between  the  clean  and  unclean, 
and  partaking  of  the  characters  of  both,  was 
added  to  the  list — for  instance,  those  that  are 
ruminant  and  do  not  divide  the  hoqfy  as  the  camels 
which,  though  it  has  separate  toes,  they  are 
included,  in  an  undivided  skin ;  and  those  that 
divide  the  hoqfy  but  are  not  ruminant,  as  the  swine. 

It  appears  clear  from  St.  Peter's  vision,  recor- 
ded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,^  that  these 
unclean  animals  were  symbolical,  and  in  that 
particular  case  represented  the  Gentile  world, 
with  whom  it  was  not  lawful  for  the  Jews  to  eat 
or  associate,^  doubtless,  lest  they  should  be  cor- 
rupted in  their  morals  or  faith,  and  seduced  into 
Idolatry,  and  its  natural  consequences,  with 
regard  to  morality,  by  them.  In  other  passages 
of  Scripture,  unclean  animals  are  employed  to 
symbolize  evil  and  unclean  spirits  as  well  as  men^ 
as  the  serpent,  the  dragon,  or  crocodile,^  the 
lion,*  and  the  scorpion.' 

By  way  of  corollary  to  the  present  short 
chapter,  I  shall  devote  a  few  pages  to  a  very 
interesting  subject,  intimately  connected  with 
the  animals  whose  history  and  habits  I  have  just 
described,  and  which  marks  out  the  plan  upon 
which  the  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of  the 

*  Acts,  X.  10—15.         •  Ibid.  ver.  28.         »  Revel,  xx.  2, 

*  I  Pet.  V.  8.  *  Luke,  x.  19, 


MYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  73 

Creator  have  been  manifested  in  animal  struc- 
tures.    I  allude  to  what  has  been  named  the 
conversion  of  organs,  by  which  term  is  meant, 
not  only  in  particular  instances,  multiplying  the 
functions  of  any  given  organ,  as,  for  instance, 
when  the  tail  of  an  animal  is  employed  like  a 
Aomf,  to  take  hold  of  the  branch  of  a  trae,  and 
80  assist  in  locomotion,  as  in  the  chameleon,  and 
certain  monkeys ;  ^  and  the  tongue  is  also  made 
to  subserve  to  prehension,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
giraffe;  but  likewise  when   the  organ  is  con- 
verted from  one  use  to  another,  as  when  the 
anterior  leg  is  taken  from  locomotion,  and  given 
to  prehension,  as  the  human  hand ;  or  as  when 
all  the  ordinary  oi^ans  of  locomotion  in  one 
tribe  are  in  another  converted  into  oral  organs, 
either  to  assist  in  mastication,  or  to  discharge 
the  office  of  a  lip,  as  in  the  Crustaceans  and  cen- 
tipedes.    In  the  investigation  of  this  curious  and 
interesting  subject,  the  class  of  Myriapods  affords 
an  example,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of  the  gradual 
conversion  of  locomotive  organs  into  auxiliary 
oral  ernes.     Something  of  this  kind  I  have  before 
stated,^  is  discoverable  in  certain  Annelidans, 
either  related  to  those  animals  or  their  analogues. 
In  the  Introduction  to  Entomology  it  is  ob- 
served,  with  respect   to    the   larves  of   many 
Hexapod  Condylopes,  that  their  progress  towards 

*  Ateles.  «  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  346. 


74  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

what  is  called  their  perfect  state,  is  by  lasting 
their  spurious  legs  or  prolegs^  and  by  acquiring 
organs  oi  flight ;  whereas  in  the  Myriapods^  tlie 
reverse  of  this  takes  place ;  instead  of  losing  I^ 
and  shortening  their  body,  some  of  them  when 
first  hatched,  have  only  six  legs,  representing 
the  six  legs  of  Hexapods,  and  all  in  their  pro* 
gress  to  their  adult  state  acquire  a  large  number 
of  what  may  be  denominated  spurious  legs,  which 
support  many  additional  segments. 

As  the  Chilognathansy  in  their  young  state, 
come  nearest  to  the  insect  or  hexapod  tribes,  I 
shall  begin  by  stating  the  changes  they  undergo. 
In  the  most  common  species,^  according  to  De 
Geer's  description  and  figure,  the  animal  is 
divided  into  three  principal  parts,  as  in  Hexa- 
pods ;  first,  there  is  a  Iiead  with  antennae,  and 
the  usual  oral  organs,  though  a  little  aberrant  in 
their  structure ;  next,  there  is  a  trunks  consisting 
of  three  segments,  each  bearing  a  pair  of  1^; 
and  lastly,  there  is  an  abdamen^  divided  into  five 
segments,  without  legs.*  With  regard  to  their  oral 
organs,  they  correspond  with  those  of  Hexapods, 
both  in  number  and  kind,  for  in  the  mouth, 
above  is  a  representative  of  the  upper-lip ;  beloir 
this  is  a  pair  of  mandibles  or  upper-jaws ;  next 
follows  a  lower-lip,  consisting  of  three  pieces 
united  together,  the  two  lateral  ones  analogous 

»  Julus  terresiris.       «  De  Geer,  vii.  583.  t.  xxxvL/.  20,21. 


MYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES,  75 

bolh  to  the  lower-jaws  of  Hexapods,  and  the 
first  pair  of  maxillae  of  Crustaceans  ;  and  the 
intermediate  one,  resolvable  into  two  pieces, 
representing  the  lip  of  the  former  and  the  second 
pair  of  maxillae,  according  to  Savigny,  of  the 
latter,  from  his  figures/  the  maxillary  and  labial 
feelers  appear  to  have  their  representatives ;  yet 
though  he  has  figured  he  does  not  notice  them 
as  feelers.^ 

The  six  original  or  natural  legs  of  the  lulus 
are  its  first  organs  of  locomotion,  which  when 
the  animal  is  arrived  at  its  complete  develope- 
ment^  as  to  number  of  legs  and  segments, — are 
said  still  to  maintain  their  original  function, 
although  probably  diminished  in  energy;  the 
two  first  pairs  are,  however,  as  it  were,  applied 
to  the  mouth,  the  segments  that  bear  them  being 
very  short.  The  sciatic  joint  or  hip^  of  the  first 
pair  forms  a  single  piece ;  those  of  the  second 
are  also  united  and  more  elevated ;  but  those  of 
the  third  are  distinct :  so  that  in  this  Order  of 
the  Myriapods  we  see  the  first  tendency  towards 
employing  what  in  Hexapods  wear  the  form  and 
perform  the  functions  of  legs  as  auxiliaries  of 
the  mouthy  and  of  the  locomotive  function  being 
dewlved  upon  organs  which  have  no  represen- 

•  Anim.  sans  Vertebr.  Mem.  ii.  t.  i./.  1.  o.  2.  o. 
«  He  says  that  the  pieces  forming  the  labium  are  Denuces  dcs 
pdlpes.  Ibid.  p.  44. 


76  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

tative  in  Hexapods,  except  in  their  incipient 
state. 

To  proceed  next  to  the  Chilopodans — ^it  has 
not  yet  been  ascertained  what  changes  they 
undei^o  in  the  progress  of  their  growth,  save  that 
the  number  of  legs  and  segments  increases  till 
they  have  arrived  at  their  full  size/ nor  is  it  known 
how  many  they  have  when  first  hatched,  but, 
from  their  structure,  it  seems  evident  that  the 
analogues  of  the  two  first  pair  of  l^s  of  the 
Chilognathans,  can  never  be  employed  in  loco- 
motion ;  and  further,  that  not  only  is  their  first 
or  hip-joint  united  with  its  fellow,  so  as  to  form 
a  kind  of  auxiliary  lip,  but  the  other  articulations 
are  converted  into  prehensory  organs,  instead  of 
a  locomotive  one,  in  the  first  pair  armed  at  the 
end  with  a  minute  forceps,  and  in  the  second 
with  a  fang  resembling  the  tooth  of  a  serpent, 
having  a  pore  at  the  extremity  for  the  emission 
of  poison,  connected  with  an  loterium  or  poison 
bag. 

Here  then,  in  these  two  Orders  of  the  Myria- 
pods,  we  have  a  regular  conversion  of  organs: 
those  that  in  the  Millipedes  are  used  for  loco- 
motion, in  the  Centipedes,  exchange  that  function 
for  that  of  prehension,  both  agreeing  in  being 
auxiliary,  at  their  base,  to  mastication,  but  the 
latter  with  a  greater  momentum. 

The  reason  of  this  change  in  the  functions  of 

'  De  Geer,  vii.  562. 


MYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPE8,  77 

these  organs  we  shall  readily  see  when  we  con- 
sider the  habits  and  food  of  these  respective 
Orders.  The  Chilognathans  deriving  in  gene- 
ral their  nutriment  from  putrescent  substances 
whether  animal  or  vegetable,  have  no  resistance 
to  overcome,  and  therefore  require  not  the  aid  of 
additional  prehensory  organs  to  enable  them  to 
execute  their  offices;  while  the  Chilopodans, 
having  to  contend  with  living  animals,  must  put 
them  Hors  de  combat^  either  by  killing  them,  or 
deadening  their  efforts,  before  they  can  devour 
them.  In  this  last  Order  we  find  that  though 
the  two  first  pairs  of  legs  have  a  new  office,  the 
third  pair  are  still  used  for  locomotion. 

From  the  oral  organs  and  their  auxiliaries  of 
the  Myriapods  to  those  of  the  Crustaceans^  the 
interval  is  not  very  wide  ;  and  amongst  the  latter 
the  Isopods,  especially  the  terrestrial  ones,  as 
might  be  expected,  approach  the  nearest  to 
them.  De  Geer  observes  that  the  common 
wood-louse,'  which  in  its  adult  state  has  fourteen 
l^s ;  when  it  first  leaves  the  egg,  has  only  six 
pairs  and  six  segments;^  thus  doubling  the 
number  of  the  Hexapods  and  Jnlus ;  and  in  this 
animal  and  its  relation,  Ligia^  the  thoracic  legs 
are  all  used  in  locomotion ;  but  when  we  ex- 
amine the  aquatic f  especially  the  marine^  genera 
of  this  Order,  as  Idotea^  Stenosoma^  &c.,  we  find 

*  Oniscus  Asellus,  *  vii.  551. 


78  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

that  the  first  pair  of  thoracic  lege  is  taken  from 
that  function,  and  made  auxiliary  to  the  organs 
of  the  mouth. 

Leaving  the  Isopods,  if  we  go  to  the  Decapods, 
amongst  those  with  a  long  tail,^  which  from  their 
cylindrical  form  and  other  circumstances,  are 
nearer  to  the  Chilognathan  Myriapods  than  to 
the  Chilopodan,  taking  the  lobster  for  our  type, 
we  find  the  organs  analogous  to  the  six  legs  of 
Hexapods,  exhibiting  a  new  character :  for  fr<Mn 
the  outer  side  of  their  basal  joint  issues  an  organ 
which  is  peculiar  to  these  legs.  The  organ  I 
allude  to  is  called,  by  M.  Savigny,  ^ijlagrum  or 
whip ;  and,  by  M.  Latreille,  ^JlagelUform  palpus 
or  feeler;  it  usually  consists  of  two  parts,  an 
elongated  exarticulate  base,  representing  the 
handle  of  the  whip ;  and  an  annulated  -or  jointed 
part  generally  forming  an  angle  with  it,  repre- 
senting the  la^:  the  mandibles  also  have 
feelers  of  the  usual  structure.  The  organs  above 
alluded  to,  shew  that  all  the  representatives  ^ 
the  legs  of  Hexapods  in  the  lobster,  are  con- 
verted to  a  new  function — whether  precisely 
analogous  to  that  of  feelers  is  not  clear. 

In  the  lobster  the  basal  joints  of  the  first  pair 
of  maxillary  legs  are  dilated,  and  the  whole 
organ  may  be  regarded  as  maxillif<H*m ;  but  in 
the  second  it  is  palpiform,  and  in  the  third  it 
resumes  the  joints  and  appearance  ci  a  cms- 

*  Macrouri. 


MYRIAPOD  CaNDYLOPES.  79 

taceoos  leg,  and  is  densely  ciliated,  which  seems 
to  indicate  that  it  is  used  in  swimming. 

In  the  common  crab/  amongst  the  short-tail 
Decapods,^  the  legs  in  qBestion  seem  all  taken 
from  locomotion,  and  the  second  pair  does  not 
differ  from  those  of  the  lobster;  but  the  last, 
though  consisting  of  the  same  number  of  joints, 
is  very  different,  the  two  intermediate  joints 
being  dilated,  and  the  two  legs  together  forming 
as  it  were  a  pair  of  fblding^oors,  which  close 
the  month  externally,  the  three  last  joints  re- 
sembling those  of  the  legs.  These  animals, 
therefore,  in  some  sort,  the  flatness  of  their 
body  and  this  double  auxiliary  lip  considered, 
pneseut  the  same  analogy  to  the  Chilopodan  My- 
riapods,  that  the  lobster  does  to  the  Chilegna- 
than.  In  both  we  see,  by  thdr  feders,  there  is 
a  further  conversion  of  these  organs  into  instru- 
ments connected  with  the  mouth  ;  so  as  to  bring 
them  nearer  to  ihe  nature  and  use  of  maxillae  or 
nnder  jaws,  and  of  a  labium  or  under-lip. 

It  appears  from  the  experiments  and  observa- 
tions of  Rathke'  that  the  long-tailed  Decapod 
Crustaceans  do  not  cbafloige  ibbe  form,  or  increase 
the  number  of  locomotive  organs,  that  distin- 
gmsh  them  when  they  issue    from  the  egg.^ 

*  Cancer  Poffums,  *  Braehyuru 

'  Recherches  sur  ie  developement  des  Ecreviwes.  AhetraMi^t 
of  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.  xix.  442. 

♦  /Wd.  463. 


80  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Once  residing  a  few  weeks  on  the  northern  coast 
of  Norfolk,  where  the  sea,  at  low  water,  retires 
to  a  considerable  distance  from  the  high  water 
mark,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  the 
proceedings  of  a  species  of  crab  very  common 
there,^  and  varying  greatly  in  size,  some,  if  my 
memory  does  not  deceive  me,  scarcely  exceeding 
the  size  of  a  pea,  others  being  three  or  four 
inches  in  diameter,  and  all  exactly  correspond- 
ing in  every  particular;  so  that  it  seems  pro- 
bable that  the  short-tailed  tribe  also  undergo  no 
change,  except  of  size,  though,  as  we  have  seen 
above,  the  terrestrial  Isopods  acquire  additional 
legs  in  their  progress  to  maturity.  The  legs, 
however,  of  these  Crustaceans  cannot  be  re- 
garded as  analogues  of  the  l^s  of  Hexapads,  but 
rather  of  the  acquired  legs  of  the  Myriapods. 

In  order  to  form  a  clear  notion  of  the  object  of 
Providence  in  thus,  as  it  were,  taking  certain 
organs  from  locomotion,  and  forming  a  new  set 
for  that  purpose,  and  multiplying  those  con- 
nected with  the  seizing  and  mastication  of  the 
food  of  the  animals  in  which  this  metamorphosis 
takes  place,  it  would  be  necessary  to  watch  their 
proceedings  in  their  native  element,  the  water, 

1  Cancer  Misnas.  L.  Mr.  Westwood,  in  a  letter  received 
since  this  went  to  press,  expresses  his  conviction  that  Crustaceans 
do  not  undergo  any  metamorphosis.  Besides  a  variety  of  other 
arguments  which  he  will  himself  bring  forward  in  due  time,  ne 
lately  met  with  young  specimens  of  this  crab  at  Conway,  in  N. 
Wales,  only  ^  of  an  inch  in  length,  which  did  not  differ  from 
adult  ones. 


MYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  81 

to  ascertain  the  nature  of  their  food,  their  mode 
of  taking  it,  and  other  circumstances  connected 
with  its  conyersicm  into  a  pulp  proper  for  diges- 
tion; but  as  few  can  have  an  opportunity  of 
doing  this,  we  can  only  conjecture  that  this 
multiplicity  of  organs  is  rendered  necessary  by 
the  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed,  and 
the  element  they  inhabit;  for,  as  we  have  seen, 
no  such  conyersion  occurs  in  the  terrestrial  Crus- 
taceans ;  probably  the  denser  medium  requires  a 
more  complex  structure  and  more  powerful  action 
in  the  instruments  connected  with  the  nutriment 
of  the  animal. 

Having  considered  these  instances  of  the  legs 
of  Hexapods  being,  as  it  were,  metamorphosed 
into  organs  more  especially  connected  with  nu- 
trition, I  shall  next  mention,  more  briefly,  some 
cases  in  which  the  oral  organs  themselves  are 
modified  to  discharge  other  functions  than  what 
is  usually  their  primary  one. 

To  begin  with  the  Arachnidans  or  spiders. 
In  these  the  two-jointed  mandibles  or  cheliceres, 
as  Latreille  calls  them,  are  not  organs  of  masti- 
cation solely  ;  for  though,  from  the  vast  strength 
and  power  of  the  first  joint  and  its  flat  internal 
surface,  we  may  conjecture  that  it  assists  in 
pressing  the  juices  out  of  their  prey,  yet  at  the 
extremity  of  the  second  is  a  poison  fang,  being 
furnished,  like  the  tooth  of  a  viper  or  centipede, 

VOL.   II.  G 


82  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

with  a  pore  for  emitting  Tenom,  which  though 
not  easily  discoyered  in  the  smaller  species,  is 
visible  under  a  lens  in  the  larger;  with  these 
fangs,  which  communicate  with  a  poison  vesicle, 
the  spider  dispatches  the  insects  strug^ing  in  his 
toils,  which  otherwise  he  could  not  so  easily 
master,  and  having  sucked  out  their  juices  casts 
away  the  carcase.  The  fang,  by  folding  upon 
the  apex  of  the  basal  joint  of  the  organ  we  are 
considering,  which  is  toothed  on  each  side,  and 
has  a  channel  to  receive  it  when  unemployed, 
can  be  formed  into  a  forceps,  resembling  that 
which  arms  the  anterior  thoracic  leg  of  the  shrimp, 
or  that  of  the  mantis,  and  which  is  probably,  in 
some  circumstances,  used  for  prehension. 

The  subject  of  poison-fangs  affords  a  striking 
exaniple  of  the  adaptation  and  modification 
of  different  parts  and  organs  to  the  discharge 
of  the  same  or  similar  functions,  according  to 
the  circumstances  in  which  an  animal  is  placed ; 
the  viper,  the  centipede,  and  the  spider  have 
their  sting  in  their  mouthy  or  in  its  vicinity; 
the  scorpion  and  the  bee  and  wasp  have  it  at  the 
other  extremity  of  the  body  ;  while  the  male  of 
the  Omithorhynchusy  or  Duck-bill,  and  Echidna^ 
or  New  Holland  Porcupine,  have  it  in  their  kind 
legs.  Considering  the  evident  affinity  betwe^i 
these  last  animals  and  the  birds^  their  poison- 
spur  seems  evidently  analogous  to  the  spur  that 
distinguishes  the  males  of  many  gallinaceous 


NYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  83 

birds;  and,  reasoning  from  analogy,  we  may 
conclude  that  this  organ  is  given  to  the  males  of 
the  Mfnudremeg  a^  a  weapon  to  be  ii3ed  in  their 
mutual  combats. 

Whoever  examines  the  underside  of  a  spidier 
will  find  the  feelers  and  the  eight  legs  arranged 
nearly  in  a  circle,  with  their  first  hip-joints 
parallel ;  with  some  this  joint  in  the  feelers  is 
dilated,  but  in  others  it  is  of  the  same  shape  with 
the  analogous  joint  of  the  legs,  only  a  little 
longer.  It  forms  the  nrnxUla  or  under-jaw,  and 
between  the  first  pair  is  the  under-lip.  The 
function  of  the  maiciUae  is  to  assist  the,  so  called, 
mandibles,  in  pressing  out  the  juices  of  the  flies 
and  other  insects  submitted  to  their  action,  and 
the  analogous  and  parallel  joints  in  the  eight 
legp  add  scMine  momentum  to  it. 

The  Palpif  or  feelers — ^which  in  some  cas^s 
emerge  from  the  side  of  the  maxilla,  and  appear 
a  distinct  oigan,  and  in  others  are  nxerely  a 
continuation  of  it— in  one  sex  undergo  a  sin- 
gular conversion,  and  discharge  a  function  con- 
nected with .  r^roduction ;  and  in  the  other,  the 
female,  are  said  sometimes  to  assist  in  supporting 
the  egg  pouch,  which  many  of  these  creatures 
carry  about  with  them,  and  guard  with  maternal 
8<dicitude. 

It  has  been  made  a  question  by  physiologists 
what  the  mandibles,  and  maxillse  with  their 
palpi,    of  the   Arachnidans   really    represent; 


H4  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

whether  they  are  the  analogues  of  organs  bear- 
ing the  same  name  in  Hexapod  Condylopes,  or 
of  others  to  be  found  in  the  Crustaceans  or 
Myriapods.  Latreille,  in  his  latest  work,  regards 
the  pieces  immediately  following  the  upper  lip 
as  analogues  of  the  same  parts  in  the  Crus- 
taceans, namely,  a  pair  of  palpigerous  man- 
dibles, two  pairs  of  pediform  maxillae,  and  two 
pairs  also  of  maxillary  feet,  anal<^ous  to  the  four 
anterior  feet  of  insects.*  Of  the  above  organs, 
the  xnandibles  and  two  pairs  of  maxillae  may  be 
regarded  as  having  their  prototype  in  the  Hexa- 
pods;  for  the  second  pair  of  maxillae  of  the 
Crustaceans,  in  the  Chilognathans,  is  the  piece 
that  represents  the  labium,  or  under-lip,  of  the 
first  named  animals. 

Savigny,  however,  is  of  opinion  that  the  auxi- 
liary maxillee^  or,  according  to  Latreijle,  maxillary 
feetf  of  the  crab,  except  the  first  pair,  become 
the  mandibles  and  fimxillte  of  the  spider;  and 
that  the  thoracic  legs  of  the  same  animal,  with 
the  same  exception,  become  also  its  ambulatory 
legs  :^  thus  accounting  for  the  reduction  of  the 
number  of  the  latter  from  ten  to  eighty  perhaps 
he  was  induced  to  adopt  this  opinion,  with  re- 
spect to  the  oral  organs,  by  considering  the  man- 
dibles of  the  spider  as  analogous  to  the  poison*- 

'  Latr.  Caurs  D'Entomologie,  167. 
'  Anim.  sans  Vertibr.  ii.  57,  Note  a. 


HYBIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  8d 

fang  which  anus  the  second  pair  of  auxiliary 
feet  of  the  Scolopendra. 

I  feel,  howeyer,  rather  iucliued  to  adopt  the 
opinion  of  the  former  learned  entomologist,  from 
the  consideration  of  an  Arachnidan,  which  seems 
evidently  to  lead  towards  the  Hexapods.  The 
animal  I  allude  to  is  one  of  ancient  fame,  of 
which,  once  for  all,  I  shall  here  give  the  history. 

iEUian  relates  that  a  certain  district  of  £thi^ 
opia  was  deserted  by  its  inhabitants  in  conse^ 
quence  of  the  appearance  of  incredible  numbers 
ef  scorpions,  and  of  those  Phalangians^  which 
are  denominated  Tetragnatha^  or  having  four 
jaws.  An  event  mentioned  also  by  Diodorus 
Siculus  and  Strabo.^  Pliny  likewise  alludes  to 
this  event,  but  calls  the  last  animal  Solpuga^^  a 
name  which,  in  another  place,^  he  says  was  used 
by  Cicero  to  designate  a  venomous  kind  of  ant. 

The  epithet  Tetragtmthaj  applied  by  JElian, 
&c.  to  the  animal  which,  in  conjunction  with 
the  scorpion,  expelled  the  iBthiopians,  as  just 
stated,  from  the  district  they  inhabited,  seems 
clearly  to  point  to  the  Solpuga  of  Fabricius, 
for  any  person,  not  skilled  in  natural  science, 
would,  when  he  saw  the  expanded  forceps  of 
their  mandibles,  pronounce  that  they  had  four 

1  Bochart.  Hierozdic.  ii.  1.  iv.  c.  Id. 

<  Hist.  Nat.  1.  viii.  c.  29.    This  name  seems  derived  from 
the  Greek  y  Heliocentris. 
'  L.  xxix.  c.  4. 


86  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

jaws;^  and  the  animals  of  this  g^ius,  in  their 
general  form  and  aspect,  exhibit  no  small  re- 
semblance to  an  ant^  so  that  it  is  not  wonderful 
that  Pliny  should  regard  them  as  a  kind  of  ve^ 
nomous  ant.  It  seems,  therefore,  almost  cartain 
that  the  ancient  and  modem  Solpnga  are  syno- 
nymous. Pliny,  iudeed,  mentions  a  certain  kind 
of  spider— one  of  which  he  describes  as  wearing 
very  ample  webs — ^under  the  name  Tetragnathii; 
but  these  appear  to  have  no  connexion  with  the 
Phalangia  tetragnatha  of  ^lian,  &c. 

Olivier  was  the  first  modem  naturalist  who 
described  the  animals  now  before  us,  to  which 
he  gave  the  generic  appellation  of  Galeodes ;  but 
if,  as  the  above  circumstances  render  very  prob- 
able, they  are  really  synonymous  with  the  an- 
cient Solpuga^  that  name^  revived  by  Fabricius, 
should  be  retained. 

Whether  these  animals  are  really  as  venomous 
and  maleficent  as  they  were  said  to  be  of  old, 
and  as  their  terrific  aspect  may  be  thought  to 
announce,  seems  very  doubtful.  We  leara  from 
Olivier  that  the  Arabs  still  regard  their  Ute  as 
mortal,  and  that  the  same  opinicm  obtains  in 
Persia  and  Egypt ;  and  Pallas  relates  several 
facts,  which,  he  says,  he  witnessed  himself,  which 
appear  to  prove  that,  unless  timely  remedies  are 
applied,  they  instill  a  deadly  venom  into  those 

1  L.  Dufour.  AnnaL  Ginh,  des  Sc.  Nat.  iv.  t.  Ixiv.  f.  7,  a. 


HYRIAPOD  CON  DY  LOPES.  87 

they  bite.  Oil  is  stated  to  be  the  best  applica- 
turn.  On  the  other  hand,  Olivier,  who  found 
these  Arachnidans  common  in  Persia,  Mesopo- 
tamia, and  Arabia,  affirms  that  everf  night  they 
ran  over  him,  when  in  bed,  with  great  velocity, 
without  ever  stopping  to  annoy  him ;  no  one 
was  bitten  by  them,  nor  could  he  collect  a  single 
well^attested  fact  to  prove  that  their  bite  was 
so  dangerous:  to  judge  by  the  strong  pincers 
with  which  the  mouth  is  armed,  he  thought  it 
might  be  painful,  but  he  doubts  whether  it  is 
accompanied  by  any  infusion  of  venom.  The 
mandibles  have  clearly  no  fang  with  a  poison- 
poiie,  like  those  of  the  spiders. 

To  return  from  this  digression.  I  principally 
mentioned  this  tribe  of  animals,  because,  as  was 
long  ago  observed  by  Walckenaer,^  and  the  ob- 
servation was  repeated  by  L.  Dufour,'  the  head, 
in  them,^  is  distinct  from  the  trunk ;  and,  as  well 
as  Phrynus  and  ThelyphomiSy  it  has  only  six 
thoracic  l^s:  so  that,  as  the  latter  writer  re- 
marks,  though  its  physiognomy  and  manners 
arrange  it  naturally  with  the  Arachnidans,  these 
characters  exclude  it  from  them.'  Latreille, 
indeed,  seems  to  regard  the  head  and  trunk  of 
this  animal  as  not  distinct,  but  as  forming  toge- 
ther what  he  names  a  cephalothoraa;^  or  head- 
thorax  ;  yet  he  admits  that  the  three  last  pairs 

1   Tableau  des  Araneid,  1.  '  Ubi  supr,  18. 

3  Ibid.  20. 


88  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

of  legs  are  attached  to  as  many  segments  of  the 
trank,^  which  certainly  infers  the  separation 
above  alluded  to. 

Savigny  says,  with  respect  to  the  feelers  of 
SolpugUy  that  they,  and  the  two  anterior  legs, 
so  closely  resemble  each  other,  that  they  may 
either  be  called  feelers  or  legs ;  but  in  the  spe- 
cies described  by  L.  Dufour,^  and  another  in 
my  cabinet,^  this  is  not  altogether  the  case,  for 
the  feelers,  though  pediform,  are  not  terminated 
by  a  claw,  but  by  a  membranous  vesicle,  from 
which  issues,  when  the  animal  is  irritated,  an 
apparatus  probably  used  as  a  sucker,  and  which 
gives  them  a  prehensory  function;  while  the 
organs  that  represent  the  anterior  pair  of  legs  of 
the  other  Arachnidans,  at  the  base  of  their 
maxillary  or  sciatic  joint,  are  soldered,  as  it 
were,  to  the  corresponding  joint  of  the  feelers, 
with  which  they  agree  in  the  number  and  kind 
of  their  articulations,  except  that  they  do  not 
protrude  a  sucker ;  neither  are  they  armed  with 
a  claw  like  the  other  legs,  but  are  probably 
simply  tentacular^  or  exploratory.  There  seems 
no  slight  analogy  between  these  united  maxillae 
and  what  Savigny  denominates  the  first  and 
second  pair  of  maxillae  of  the  millepedes,  also 
united,  which  appear  to  me  to  represent  the 
lower-lip  and  maxillse  of  the  hexapods,  and  in 

'  Cours  D'Entomolog.  548.  «  Oaleodes  intrepidus. 

^  Solpuga  fataXis. 


.   MYRIAPOD  CONDYLOPES.  89 

this  case  the  two  pair  of  feelers  that  itasae  from 
the  coxo-msocillee,  as  they  are  sometimes  called, 
or  sciatic  joints  in  the  Solpuga^  may  be  regarded 
as  representing  the  labial  and  maxillary  feelers 
of  the  hexapods ;  the  second  pair  .are  also  ana- 
logous, both  in  their  place  and  their  function,  to 
the  first  pair,  or  tentacular  legs  of  Thelyphonus 
and  Phfynns.  In  the  Solpuga^  the  labium,  or 
under-lip,  of  the  spiders,  is  represented  by  a 
bilobed  organ,  which  Savigny  calls  a  sternal 
tongue. 

From  the  consideration  of  this  animal  we 
seem  to  have  obtained  the  elements,  or  type,  in 
reference  to  which  the  oral,  prehensory,  and 
locomotive  organs  of  the  Arachnidans  were 
formed;  that  their  mandibles,  maxillae,  and 
feelers ;  their  second  maxillae,  and  the,  so  called, 
anterior  legs  emerging  from  them,  are  analogous 
to  the  mandibles,  labium  and  labial  feelers,  and 
maxillae  and  maxillary  feelers  of  the  hexapods ; 
and  the  remaining  three  pairs  of  legs,  of  their 
six  l^s;  the  sternal  tongue,  so  called  by  Sa- 
yigny  because  it  is  a  process  of  the  stemuni,  will 
thus  be  an  organ  sui  generis^  unless  it  may  be 
regarded  as,  in  some  sort,  the  analogue  of  the 
prostemum  of  insects.  If  this  view  is  correct, 
we  have  here  various  conversions,  as  of  maxillre 
and  palpi  into  legs;  a  labium  into  muxilla;  and 
a  prostemum  into  a  labium.  In  the  Pedipalps — 
with  the  exception  of  the  scorpions, — e.  g.  in 


90  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Thelyphmms  and  Pkrynus,  especially  the  latter, 
the  Jirst  pair  of  l^s  of  Octopods  seem  to  wear 
the  form,  and  in  some  measure  to  discharge  the 
functions  of  antentuB. 

In  the  shepherd-spiders  ^  all  the  legs,  in  some 

degree,  imitate  antennae,  especially  in  their  tarsi^ 

which  sometimes  consist  of  more  than^i(y  joints, 

rendering  them  very  flexible,  so  as  to  assume 

any  curve,  and  fits  them,  as  their  long  legs  do 

the  crane-Jiy^  to  course  rapidly  over  and  among 

the  herbage  and  the  leaves  of  shrubs,  &c.    When 

reposing  upon  a  wall,  or  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  this 

animal  arranges  its  legs  so  as  to  form  a  circle  as 

it  were  of  rays  around  the  body,  the  thigh  forming 

a  very  obtuse  angle  with  the  rest  of  the  leg,  and 

so,  though  the  body  is  so  small,  they  occupy  a 

considerable  space;   but,  if  a  finger,   or  any 

insect,  &c.  touches  them,  it  elevates  these  angles 

into  very  acute  ones,  so  as  to  form  a  circle  of 

arcades  round  the  central  nucleus  or  body,  under 

which  any  small  creature  can  pass,  but  if  this 

does  not  succeed,  it  makes  its  escape  with  a 

velocity  wonderful  for  an  animal  furnished  with 

legs  more  than  ten  times  the  length  of  its  body. 

In  the  scorpion  and  the  hook-crah^  as  well  as 
the  shepherd-spider,  the  mandibles,  which  are 
short,  have  a  moveable  joint,  and  are  converted 
into  a  forceps,  like  the  anterior  legs  of  the  crab  or 

^  Pkalangium»       ^  Tipula,         ^  Chelifery  ObisiuiHf  &c. 


MYRIAPOD   CONDYLOPES.  91 

the  lobster;  their  feelers  also,  which  are  very 
loDg,  terminate  in  the  same  way,  and  form  an 
oiigan  by  which  they  can  catch  their  prey ;  the 
former  being  armed  besides  with  a  long  jointed 
tail,  furnished  at  the  end  with  a  sting,  which 
they  can  turn  oyer  their  back,  and  thus,  either 
annoy  their  assailants,  or  dispatch  any  captive 
whose  resistance  they  cannot  otherwise  easily 
overcome. 

To  what  a  variety  of  uses  are  analogous  organs 
applied  in  the  diversified  instances  here  adduced ; 
and  in  all  these  variations  from  a  common  type, 
how  apparent  are  the  footsteps  of  an  intelligent 
First  Cause,  taking  into  consideration  the  in- 
tended station  and  functions  of  every  animal, 
and  how  the  structure  may  be  best  adapted  to 
them,  not  only  in  general,  but  in  every  particular 
oigan. 

As  far  as  we  can  lift  up  the  mystic  veil  that 
covers  tbe  face  of  nature,  by  means  of  observa-' 
tion  and  experiment,  we  find  that  every  iota  and 
tittle  of  an  animal's  structure,  is  with  a  view  to 
some  end  important  to  it;  and  the  Almighty 
Fabricator  of  the  Universe  and  its  inhabitants, 
when  be  formed  and  moulded,  ex  pnejacente 
nuttteriay  the  creatures  of  his  hand,  decreed  that 
the  sphere  of  locomotive  and  sentient  beings 
should  be  drawn  together  by  mutual  attraction, 
and  concatenated  by  possessing  parts  in  common, 


92  LOCOMOTIVE   AND 

though  not  always  devoted  to  a  common  use; 
thus  leading  us  gradually  from  one  form  to  ano- 
ther, till  we  arrive  at  the  highest  and  most  distin- 
guished of  the  visible  creation ;  and  instructing 
us  by  his  works,  as  well  as  by  his  word,  to  cul- 
tivate peace  and  union,  and  to  seek  the  good  of 
the  community  to  which  we  belong ;  and,  as  far 
as  our  influence  goes,  of  the  whole  of  His 
creation. 


Chapter  XVII. 

MotivCy  locomotive^  and  prehensory  Organs  of 

Animals  considered. 

The  remarkable  circumstances  noticed  in  the 
last  chapter  with  r^ard  to  the  legs  of  Crusta- 
ceans and  Myriapods,  and  their  employment  in 
aid  of  manducation,  sheds  no  small  light  upon 
the  subject  of  locomotive  organs  in  general,  and 
their  primary  fimction ;  it  will  therefore  not  be 
out  of  place,  if,  in  the  present  chapter,  I  consider 
those  organs,  as  far  as  they  are  extern4il^  accord- 
ing to  their  several  types,  as  exhibited  in  the 
entire  sphere  of  animals ;  upon  which,  indeed, 
the  due  accomplishment  of  their  various  functions, 
and  the  exercise  of  their  several  instincts^-^which 
in  most  of  the  succeeding  classes  assume  a  new 


PREBENSORY  ORGANS.  93 

and  more  developed  character — mainly  depends 
This  is  a  wide  fields  but  one  full  of  interest,  and 
which,  studied  as  it  deserves,  conspicuously  illus- 
trates the  higher  attributes  of  the  Deity. 

We  are  placed  in  a  world  full  of  motion ;  of  all 
motions,  none  fall  more  immediately  under  our 
notice  than  those  of  the  various  members  of  the 
animal  kingdom ;  and  the  external  oi^ns  by 
which  they  are  effected,  attract  every  eye  both 
by  their  infinite  diversity,  and  the  ^adaptation  of 
their  individual  structure  to  the  occasions  and 
wants  of  the  animal  in  whom  they  are  found,  so 
that  they  may,  in  the  best  and  safest  manner, 
effect  such  changes  of  place  as  are  necessary  for 
their  purposes. 

Nutrition  may  be  stated  as  the  primary  object 
of  the  motions  and  locomotions  of  the  members 
of  the  animal  kingdom  in  general.  No  sooner  is 
the  foetus  or  embryo  so  separated  from  its  parent 
stock,  as  not  to  imbibe  its  food  from  it,  than  it 
begins  to  employ  instinctively  its  prehensory 
and  motiTe  organs  in  collecting  it.  And,  whether 
we  descend  to  the  foot  of  the  scale  of  animals, 
or  moimt  to  its  summit,  we  shall  find  that  their 
—Daily  Bread — ^is  the  principal  object  that  in 
every  Class  sets  the  members  in  motion. 

The  motive  organs  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes,  those  that  are  employed  by  an  animal 
in  locomotiofij  and  those  that  are  used  for  prehen- 
sion ;  but  as  many  of  the  locomotive  organs  are 


94  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

also  prohensiye,  and  pKhenaion  10  often  in  aid 
of  locomotioa — as  in  climbing  and  burrowing — 
it  will  not  be  easy  to  consider  the  motiye  oiganfl 
separately  with  regard  to  these  functions,  I  shall 
therefore  consider  them  generally,  according  to 
certain  types  or  kinds,  under  which  they  may 
be  arranged,  and  which  present  themselTea  r&y 
obviously,  when,  with  this  view,  we  survey  from 
base  to  summit,  or  rather  from  pole  to  pole, 
the  entire  sphere  which  constitutes  the  animal 
kingdom. 

Generally  speaking,  in  this  survey,  as  well  as 
in  the  peculiar  motions  of  the  various  groups  of 
animals,  we  have  no  trouble  in  ascertaining  what 
are  the  external  organs  by  which  the  Oreator  has 
enabled  and  instructed  each  animal  to  accomplish 
them;  but  there  is  one  anomalous  tribe,  or, 
perhaps,  it  might  be  denominated,  Stib^king^w^ 
in  one  Class  of  which,  at  least,  this  is  not  so 
obvious.    I  allude  to  Ehrenbarg's  Tribe  of  Plamt- 
animdsy^    particularly   his  first  or  polygastric 
Class,^  in  which  the  organs  of  their  various  loco- 
motions, enum^ated  in  a  fcnrmer  part  of  this 
work,'  remain  unknown,  and  some,  as  those,  that 
have  an  oscillatory  movanent,  one  might  almost 
suspect  were  moved  fay  ui  extemtd  eause.     The 
little  Monad,  parasitic  on  die  eye* worm  of  the 
perch,^  which  alteniiately  spins  round  like  a  top, 

1  Phytozoa.  «  See  Vol.  I.  p.  156. 

s  Ibid.  153.  *  Diplostamum  volvans. 


PRBHEN80BY  OBOASS.  95 

and  th^i  darts  forward  like  an  arrow/  seems  as 
if»  like  a  watch,  it  required  to  be  wound  up 
faeficMre  it  could  go. 

Before  I  confine  my  observations  to  those 
motiYe  organs  which  are  local  and  planted  in 
certain  parts  of  the  body  of  an  animal,  as  legs> 
wings,  fins,  &c«,  I  shall  first  mention  those  mo* 
tions  in  which  the  whole  body  is  concerned.    Of 
this  description  is  the  alternate  expansion  and 
contraction  of  some,  as  the  Salpes  and  Pyrosomes 
and  other  Tunicaries  ;^  the  annular  motion  pro- 
pagated from  one  extremity  of  the  body  to  the 
other,  as  in  the  earth-worms,'  geometric  cater^^ 
pillars,  and  many  other  larves ;  the  undulating 
moTements  of  the  flexile  bodies  of  many  aquatic 
animals,  as  fishes,  particularly  the  serpentiform 
ones ;  and  the  gliding  motion  of  serpents  them- 
selves over  the  surface  of  the  earth  as  well  as 
their  undulations.    Many  of  the  animals  here 
alloded  to  are  provided  with  subsidiary  organs — 
as  the  earth-worm  with  lateral  bristles;^    the 
geometric  larves,  with  legs  at  each  extremity  of 
th^  body;    the  leach  with  suckers;    which, 
however,  would  be  of  little  use  without  the  ex- 
pansion and  contraction  of  its  body  ;^  and  the 
fishes  with  fins :  but  if  we  consider  the  form  and 

*  Vol.  I.  Appendix,  p.  354.       «  See  Vol.  I.  p.  223,  227. 
3  Ihid,  p  340.  *  Ibid. 

^  Ibid.  p.  336. 


96  .    LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

circumstances  of  all  these  animals,  ve  shall  see, 
in  each  case,  the  design  and  contrivance  of 
Supreme  Wisdom.  Without  the  power  of  con- 
traction and  expansion,  by  which  the  Salpes, 
Pyrosomes,  &c.,  alternately  attract  and  repel 
the  waters  which  they  inhabit,  they  might  in- 
deed, from  their  absorbent  structure,  be  saturated, 
but  nutrition  could  not  take  place.  The  earth- 
worm again,  a  subterranean  animal,  but  which 
occasionally  emerges,  by  the  annular  motion  of 
its  body  can  much  more  easily  wind  its  sinuous 
way  without  obstruction  when  it  seeks  again  its 
dark  abode  under  the  earth.  The  denser  medium 
compared  with  air,  through  which  the  aquatic 
animals  pass,  renders  great  flexibility  a  very 
important  quality,  to  enable  them  to  overcome 
the  resistance  it  opposes  to  their  progress. 

Having  premised  these  observations  on  motions 
produced  by  the  action  of  the  whole  body,  or 
successively  propagated  from  one  extremity  to 
the  other,  I  shall  now  proceed  to  consider  those 
external  oigans,  which  are  its  obvious  instru- 
ments in  the  great  majority  of  animals,  beginning 
with  those  that  are  found  in  the  lowest  groups. 

1.  Rotatory  Organs.  In  some  species  of  In- 
fusories,  even  in  Ehrenberg's  first  Family  of  his 
polygastric  Class,  the  oral  aperture  is  fringed 
with  a  circlet  of  bristles,  but  whether  the  animal 
by  their  means  creates  a  vortex  in  the  water,  or 
whether  they  are  analogous  to  the  tentacles  of 


PRBHEMSORY  ORGANS.  97 

the  polypes,  and  are  employed  in  collecting  its 
food,  seems  not  to  have  been  clearly  ascertained. 
Lower  down  in  this  Class,  and  approaching  the 
Rotatories,  we  find  a  singular  animal,^  with 
bristles,  by  their  position,  simulating  legs,  which, 
as  was  before  observed,*  revolve  with  wonderful 
rapidity.  But  it  is  in  the  Class  of  Rotatories 
that  these  revolving  organs  are  most  conspicuous. 
They  are  described  as  shaped  like  a  tunnel, 
the  tube  of  which  terminates  in  a  deep-seated 
pharynx  armed  with  jaws,  and  the  external 
dilated  orifice  fringed  with  fine  hairs  or  bristles, 
to  which  the  animal  communicates  a  very  rapid 
rotation,  whence  they  are  called  wheeUanimals. 
Some,  as  the  vorticels,'  the  wheel-animals  by  way 
of  eminence,  appear  to  have  two  wheels,  others 
tkree^  or  eyenfimr :  Lamarck  is  of  opinion,  from 
the  observations  of  Du  Trochet,  that  what  are 
taken  for  two  or  more  wheels,  are  only  one,  bent 
so  as  to  form  partial  ones;^  but  in  some  they 
are  certainly  distinct  organs.*  The  object  of  the 
rapid  gyration  of  this  wheel  or  wheels  is  to 

1  Discocephalus  Rotator,  Platb  I.  A.  Fio.  6. 

*  Vol.  I.  Appendix,  p.  350. 

*  Vorticella,  Miill.  They  constitute  chiefly  the  Rotifera  of 
Lamarck,  and  are  divided  by  Ehrenberg  into  numerous  genera. 
His  genus  VorticiUa,  the  type  of  which  is  V.  convallaria,  Mull, 
is  placed  in  bis  Polygastric  Class,  in  a  section  of  his  fourth 
Family  (Anopisthia)^  which  section  he  names  Vorticellina. 

*  See  Baker  On  the  Microscope,  i.  91.  f.  viii./.  5. 

*  Jind.f.6, 

VOL.  II.  H 


98  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

create  a  Tortex  in  the'  water,  whose  centre  is  the 
mouth  of  the  animal,  a  little  charybdis  beariDg 
with  it  all  the  animalcules  or  molecules  that  come 
within  its  sphere  of  action,  and  by  this  remark- 
able mechanism  it  is  enabled  by  its  Creator,  as 
long  as  it  is  encircled  by  a  fluid  medium,  to  get 
a  due  supply  of  food.  These  wheels  are  merely 
foraging  organs,  for  on  a  surface  the  locomotions 
of  these  singular  animals  resemble  those  of  the 
leech  described  in  another  place*' 

In  surveying  the  organs  by  which  animals 
procure  their,  food,  we  are  struck  by  the  wonder- 
ful diversity  and  multiplicity  of  means  by  which 
the  same  end  is  attained,  and  yet,  through  all 
this  diversity,  a  series  of  approximations  may  be 
traced,  proving  that  the  same  hand  directed  by 
the  Wisdom,  Power,  and  Love  of  one  and  the 
same  Infinite  Being  fabricated  the  whole  host  of 
creatures  endowed  with  powers  of  voluntary 
motion.  What  care  does  it  manifest,  and  atten^ 
tion  to  the  welfare  of  these  invisibles,  and  what 
contrivance,  that  they  should  be  fitted  with  an 
organ,  by  means  of  which,  when  they  are 
awakened  from  a  state  of  suspended  animation, 
and  from  a  long  fast  perhaps  of  months,  or  even 
years,  by  water  coming  in  sufficient  contact 
with  them,  they  can  start  up  into  life,  and  by 
the  gyrations  of  their  wheels  immediately  b^n 
to  breathe,  and  to  procure  a  sufficient  supply  of 

•  See  Vol.  I.  p.  336. 


. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  99 

food  for  their  suBtenauce,  while  they  continue 
animated. 

2.  Tentacles.     Nearly  related  to  these  bristle- 
crowned  rotatory  appendages  of  the  mouth  of 
some  animalcules  are  what  are  named  Tentacles. 
80  called  probably  from  their  being  usually  ex- 
ploring organs.     In  its  most  restricted  sense, 
this  term  is  understood  to  signify  organs,  ap- 
pendages of  the   mouth,  which  have  no  arti- 
cuhtionsy^  but,  in  a  larger  sense,  the  term  has 
been  applied  also  to  all  jointed  organs  in  its 
vicinity,  and  used  for  a  similar  purpose,  which 
indeed  are  the  precursors  of  feelers  and  an- 
tennae.    The  structure,  of  the  first-mentioned, 
or  proper  tentacles,  and  the  means  by  which 
they  perform    their    motions,    and  fulfil   thdr 
functions,  have  been  before  explained.*    It  is  to 
these  organs,  as  well  as  for  their  food,  that  the 
polypes  are  indebted  for  what  constitutes  their 
principal    ornament,    that  resemblance  which, 
though  bom  to  blush  unseen,  even  in  the  depths 
of  the  ocean,  their  Creator  has  enabled  them  to 
assume,   of  a  plant  or  shrub  in  full  blossom 
adorned  with  crimson  or  orange-coloured  flowers. 
In  the  Jixed  polypes,  the  tentacles  are  the 
only  motive  organs,  but  in  those  that  can  shift 
their  quarters^   as  the   Hydra^  they  move  by 
fixing  each  extremity  like  the  leech,  probably 

1  See  Savigny  Syst.  des  Annelides,  iii.  4. 

2  See  Vol.  I.  p.  164.  '  Ibid.  173. 


100  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

by  means  of  something  analogous  to  suckers. 
As  the  former,  like  their  analogues  in  the  vege- 
table kingdom,   are  fixed  by  their  base,  and 
consequently  cannot  move  from  place  to  place 
in  search  of  food,  Divine  Goodness  has  com- 
pensated this  to  them,  and  they  obtain  all  the 
advantages    of  locomotion  by  the  progressive 
multiplication  of  their  oscula  or  mouths,  each 
surrounded  by  a  coronet  of  tentacles,  so  that 
they  have,  on  all  sides,  and  at  all  heights,  num- 
berless sets  of  organs  constantly  employed  in 
collecting  food  from  the  fluid  they  inhabit ;  some, 
it  is  stated,  by  creating  a  vortex,  like  the  wheel 
animals,  and  the  majority,  probably,  by  means 
of  minute  suckers,   or  some    viscid    tenacious 
secretion.     What  each  individual  collects  does 
not  merely  serve  for  its  own  nutriment,  but  also 
contributes  something  to  that  of  the  whole  com- 
munity,^ so  that  though  some  may  contribute 
more  to  the  common  stock  and  others  less,  yet 
the  deficiency  of  one  is  made  up  by  the  redun- 
dancy of  another. 

The  tentacles  of  the  fresh-water  polypes 
forming  the  locomotive  genus  Hydra^  are  not,  as 
those  of  the  fixed  marine  ones,  shaped  like  the 
petals  of  a  blossom,  but  are  long  hair-like  flexile 
arms,  somewhat  resembling  the  branches  of  a 
chandelier,*  which   explore  the  waters  around 

>  See  Vol.  I.  171. 

8  Lasser.  L.  Theologie  des  Ins.  i.  t.  ii. /r.  28 — 32. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  101 

them,  and  lay  strong  hold  of  any  small  animals 
or  substances  they  come  in  contact  with,^  so  that 
they  seem  to  throw  out  lines,  fitted  with  hooks, 
to  catch  their  prey. 

Amongst  the  Radiaries,  in  the  Order  of  6?^/^- 
tineSj^  tentacles  exist  in  some  genera  and  not  in 
others,  and,  where  they  do  exist,  their  functions 
and  situation  are  not  clearly  ascertained.  In 
the  Pelasgic  Medusa  there  are  four  broad  flexible 
arms,  and  round  the  margin  eight  narrow  ten- 
tacles, as  they  are  called,  both  of  which  the 
animal  is  stated  to  employ  in  seizing  its  prey,  so 
that  both  may  be  entitled  in  this  view  to  the  de- 
nomination of  tentacles^  yet  one  may  be  respira- 
tory organs  and  the  others  merely  prehensory.^ 
But  the  Medusidans  vary  greatly  with  regard  to 
these  organs,  some  having  neither  arms  nor  ten- 
tacles;^ others  having  tentacles  but  no  arms;^ 
others  again  arms  but  no  tentacles  ;^  and  lastly, 
others  both  these  organs.^ 

In  the  two  first  sections  of  the  Order  of  Eclii- 
moderms,  consisting  of  the  Stelleridans  and 
EchiuidanSy  the  mouth  has  no  coronet  of  ten- 
tacles, but,  instead,  is  armed  with  five  pieces, 
which,  in  the  latter  particularly,  assume  the  form 
and  function  oi  mandibles  ;^  but  the  Fistulidans 

»  See  Vol.  I.  165—170.  «  p.  195. 

^  Cams.  Comp.  Anat,  i.  47.  ^  Eudora,  Lam. 

*  Equorea.  Lam.  ^  Cassiopea.  Lam. 

^  Aurelia.  Lam.  *  Plate  III.  Fig.  9 — IJ. 


102  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

present  again  a  floriform  coronet  of  tentacles, 
not  simple  but  expanded,  and  branching  at  their 
extremity,  with  which  they  seize  their  prey.  In 
the  Holothuria,  besides  these,  the  mouth  is 
armed  with  five  teeth  or  mandibles. 

Tentacles,  but  not  conspicuously,  surround  the 
mouth  of  only  some  of  the  Tunicaries^  it  will 
therefore  be  sufficient  merely  to  mention  them, 
and  proceed  to  certain  oceanic  animals  amongst 
the  Annelidans  whom  their  Creator  has  adorned, 
if  I  may  so  speak,  with  rays  of  glory,  which, 
when  expanded,  surround  their  head,  or  rather 
mouth,  with  a  most  magnificent  coronet.  The 
animals  I  allude  to  constitute  the  genus  Amphi- 
trite  of  Lamarck,  and  the  Sahella  of  Savigny ; 
this  coronet,  in  some  species,  is  formed  by  nu- 
merous tentacles,  called,  by  the  authors  just 
named,  BranchiiPj  or  gills ;  but  as  they  are  stated 
to  be  employed  in  collecting  their  food,  as  well 
as  in  respiration,^  they  seem  in  this  respect  per- 
fectly analogous  to  the  tentacles  of  the  polypes, 
and  wheels  of  the  rotatories,  which  are  also 
respiratory  organs.  The  great  diflFerence  seems 
to  consist  in  their  being  divided  into  two  fan- 
like organs  in  the  Amphitrites,  in  which  the 
digitations  or  tentacles  proceed  from  a  common 
base,  and  which  together  form  the  coronet.  In 
some  the  digitations,  like  the  sticks  of  a  fan,  are 

^  Lamarck,  Anim,  sans  Vertebr.  v.  355. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  103 

connected  by  an  intervening  membrane,  thus 
resembling  two  expanded  fans;^  in  others,  this 
pair  of  organs  forms  two  bunches,  set,  as  it  were, 
with  numerous  spirally  convoluted  plumes  ;^  in  a 
third  each  bunch  of  plumy  tentacles  is  convo- 
luted, but  not  spirally ;'  but  the  most  magnifi- 
cent species  of  the  genus,  if  indeed  it  belongs  to 
it,  is  that  figured  in  the  fifth  volume  of  the 
Trangactians  of  the  Linnean  Society  ^^^  under  the 
name  of  Tvhularia  magnijica.  I  say,  if  indeed  it 
belongs  to  it,  because,  if  the  figure  Kjuoted  is  cor- 
rect, which  I  am  not  aware  there  is  any  reason 
to  doubt,  the  gills  or  tentacles,  call  them  which 
we  will,  are  not,  as  in  the  other  species,  divided 
into  two  fasciculi  or  bundles,  the  rays  of  which 
sit  upon  a  common  base ;  but  form  one  glorious 
and  radiant  coronet,  whose  rays  are  beautifully 
annulated  with  red  and  white;  there  appears 
indeed  to  be  a  double  circle  or  series  of  these 
rays,  the  interior  ones  shorter  than  the  exterior ; 
but  there  is  not  the  least  appearance  of  their 
division  into  two  bunches,  each  forming  a  semi- 
circle. The  rays  difier  little  from  those  of  many 
of  the  polypes,  except  in  being  more  numerous 
and  longer,  for  the  diameter  of  the  circle,  when 
the  rays  are  all  expanded,  is  nearly  six  inches, 
and  it  is  not  stated  that  the  figure  is  ms^ified. 

^  Amphitrite  Infundibulum.  Liniu  Trans,  ix.  t.  viii. 

•  A.  volutacomis.     Ibid.  vii.  t,  vii./.  10. 

•  A.  vesiculosa.    Ibid,  xi.  t.  y.f.  I.       ♦  Ibid.  t.  ix./.  1 — 5. 


104  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

Whenever  the  animal  is  alarmed  it  withdraws 
this  gorgeous  apparatus  of  respirato-prehensory 
organs  within  its  tube,  and  the  tube  itself  into  its 
burrow  in  the  living  rock,  as  a  safe  refuge  from 
its  enemies.  Whoever  compares  the  above  figure 
of  this  expanded  animal-blossom  with  the  nec- 
taries of  some  species  of  passion-flower,  will  be 
struck  by  the  resemblance  they  exhibit  to  each 
other/  and  by  the  analogy  that  evidently  exists 
between  them.  As  prehensory  organs,  the  prin- 
cipal object  of  their  unusual  length  and  num- 
bers may  probably  be  their  capturing,  as  in  a 
net,  a  quantity  of  rock  animals,  or  animalcules, 
sufficient  for  their  support,  and  perhaps  their 
very  beauty  may  be  a  means  of  attraction  and 
bring  them  within  their  vortex. 

With  these  splendid  animals  we  bid  farewell 
to  those  whose  oral  organs  seem  analogous  to 
the  blossoms  of  vegetables,  and  also  to  those  in 
whom  the  organs  of  prehension  and  respiration 
are  united ;  or  in  which  the  same  organs  collect 
food  and  also  act  the  part  of  gills. 

Though  tentacles  are  not  henceforth  employed 
in  respiration^  yet  they  still  exist  in  several  other 
classes  of  animals  as  exploratory,  prehensory, 
and  locomotive  organs.  But  in  none  are  they 
more  remarkable,  both  for  their  structure  and 
uses,  than  in  the  Cephalopods  or  cuttle-fish.    In 

'  See  Linn.  Trans,  ii.  t,  iii./.  a.  b. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  105 

these  animals  they  are  used,  as  we  have  seen,  as 
anas  for  prehension,  as  legs  for  locomotion,  as 
sails  for  skimming  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  as 
oars  for  passing  through  its  waves,  as  a  rudder 
for  steering,  and  as  an  anchor  to  fix  themselves. 

These  organs,  like  the  tentacles  of  the  po* 
13^8,  surround  the  mouth;  in  some  genera,  as 
the  poulpe,^  and  sepiole,^  hesides  eight  shorter 
arms/  there  is  a  pair  of  very  long  ones,  which 
are  usually .  denominated  tentacles,  hy  way  of 
eminence,  which  the  animal  probably  uses,  and 
for  which  purpose  a  claw  arms  their  extremity,* 
to  lay  hold  of  prey  at  a  distance.  The  means 
by  which  the  tentacles  perform  the  locomotions 
of  these  animals,  and  enable  them  to  seize  their 
prey,  I  shall  advert  to  under  another  head. 

But  though,  in  the  great  body  of  the  Cepha- 
lopods,  the  tentacular  organs  do  not  exceed  teuj 
we  find,  fix)m  Mr.  Owen's  admirable  memoir  on 
the  Pearly  Nautilus,^  that,  in  that  animal,  they 
are  extremely  numerous,  and  strikingly  difierent 
in  their  structure.  The  mouth  and  its  appen- 
dages are  retractile  within  the  head,  which 
forms  a  sheath  for  them,  the  orifice  of  which  is 
anterior.  The  proper  tentacles  are  of  two  kinds : 
1.  Brachial  ones,  finely  annulated,  emerging 
from  thirty-eight  three-sided  arms,  disposed  ir- 

*  Octopus,  «  Sepiola. 
»  Plate  VII.  Fig.  3.  a.                *  Ibid,  b. 

*  Nautilus  Pampilius, 


106  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

regularly,  nineteen  on  each  side,  all  directed 
forwards,  and  converging  towards  the  orifice  of 
the  oral  sheath.  2.  Labial  ones,  similar  to  the 
others  in  their  structure,  and  emerging  from  four 
broad  flattened  processes,  arising  from  the  inner 
surface  of  the  sheath,  and  more  immediately 
embracing  the  mouth  and  lip:  from  each  of 
these  processes  emerge  twelve  tentacles,  ra- 
ther smaller  than  the  brachial  ones.  Besides 
these  two  descriptions  of  tentacles,  there  is  a 
pair,  one  on  each  side,  emerging  from  two  ori- 
fices in  the  inner  part  of  the  hood  or  foot,  ar- 
ranging with  the  arms,  and  perhaps  to  be  reck* 
oned  with  the  brachial  tentacles,  thus  making 
up  the  whole  number  of  tentacles  of  a  similar 
structure  eighty-eight.  It  is  to  be  observed  that 
neither  the  parts  that  sheath  them,  nor  the  ten- 
tacles themselves,  are  furnished  with  any  aceta* 
bula  or  suckers.^ 

Besides  the  tentacles,  this  animal  has  four 
analogous  organs  of  a  different  structure,  one 
before  and  one  behind  each  eye,  which  Mr. 
Owen  likens  to  antennae,  and  which  are  lamel* 
lated,  or  composed  of  a  number  of  flattened  cir* 
cular  disks,  appended  to  a  lateral  stem  ;*  a  cir* 
cumstance  indicating  a  variation  in  their  func- 
tions. 

From  their  being  retractile,  it  should  seem 

1  Owen's  Memoir,  &c.  13,  t.  i.  n.  *  Ilnd.  14. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  107 

that  in  this  animal  the  tentacles  are  not  in  con- 
stant use,  as  they  are  in  the  naked  Cepha- 
lopods,  and  that  they  require  protection ;  from 
their  finely  annulated  structure  they  appear  to 
be  flexible  and  easily  applicable  to  any  surface, 
but  whether  they  are  tentacular  or  prehensory 
organs,  or  both,  is  unknown.  In  the  account  of 
the  Loligapsisj  a  species  of  cuttle-fish,  by  the 
able  pen  of  that  eminent  zoologist  Dr.  Grant, 
the  part  apparently  analogous  to  the  labial  ten* 
tacaliferous  processes  of  the  Nautilus,  is  called 
the  outer-lip^  and  is  stated  to  send  out  a  mus- 
cular band  to  the  base  of  each  arm,^  which 
seems  to  indicate  that  the  arms  of  the  naked 
Cephalopods  are  analogous  to  the  labial  tenta- 
cles of  the  animal  we  are  considering.  The 
labial  processes,  with  their  tentacles,  present 
some  resemblance  to  a  many-fingered  hand,^ 
and  from  their  situation  immediately  next  the 
mouth  may  be  conjectured  to  be  most  concerned 
either  in  the  capture  or  transmission  of  its  food : 
but  whether  either  set  of  tentacles  is  used  in  its 
locomotions,  as  they  are  in  the  naked  Cephalo- 
pods and  the  Argonaut,  seems  very  problema- 
tical. 

As  far  as  its  locomotion  on  a  surface  is  con- 
cerned, in  its  hood,  it  appears  to  be  furnished 
with  an  expansile  foot,  approaching  that  of  the 

*   Trans,  of  ZooL  Soc,  I.  i.  23. 
»  Owen,  ubi  supr,  t,  iv./,  i »,  g  g. 


108  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

Gastropods^^  so  that  its  tentacles  seem  not  ne* 
cessary  to  transport  it  from  place  to  place  on  the 
bed  of  the  ocean;  by  what  means  it  elevates 
itself,  as  it  is  known  to  do,  to  the  surface,  and 
floats  upon  the  waves,  has  not  been  ascertained. 

In  comparing  the  organs  that  surround  the 
mouth  of  the  Nautilus  with  those  of  other  Cepha- 
lopods,  we  see  that  a  vast  change  has  taken 
place.  They  are  no  longer  the  principal  organs 
of  locomotion,  that  function  being  transferred  to 
an  expansile  foot ;  their  number  is  increased  in 
nearly  a  tenfold  ratio :  being  deprived  of  suckers, 
they  seem  destitute  of  any  powerful  means  of 
prehension  and  retention,  and  so  are- scarcely 
able  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  the  larger 
Crustaceans.  As  their  principal  organ  of  loco- 
motion is  one  that  seems  to  preclude  all  idea  of 
rapid  motion  in  pursuit  of  their  prey,  it  is  most 
probable,  as  their  mandibles  are  fitted  for  crush- 
ing crust  or  shell,  that  certain  MoUuscans,  ani- 
mals which  must  be  equally  slow  in  their  mo- 
tions, and  can  scarcely  resist  them,  are  their 
destined  food. 

We  may  further  observe,  that,  regard  being 
had  to  the  organs  which  surround  the  mouth,  a 
very  wide  interval  separates  the  great  body  of 
the  Cephalopods,  known  in  a  recent  state,  from 
the  animal  now  before  us;  even  the  Spiinda^ 
which  Mr.  Owen  conjectures  may  belong  to  the 

'  Owen*8  Memoir y  &c.  12,  ^  i.  n. 


PREUENSORY  ORGANS.  109 

same  Order,  in  this  respect  is  formed  upon  a 
very  different  type,  precisely  that  of  those  Ce- 
phalopods/ 

This  animal,  in  the  above  respect,  being  so 
completely  insulated,  it  seems,  as  if  in  its  means 
of  entrapping  its  prey  it  was  formed  upon  a  plan 
not  connected  with  that  of  any  other  MoUuscan, 
but  quite  mi  generis:  probably,  were  we  ac- 
quainted with  the  animals  belonging  to  what  are 
deemed  fossil  Cephalopods,  we  should  find  the 
hiatus  vastly  narrowed. 

In  this  instance  we  see  clearly  that  adaptation 
of  means  to  an  end  which  distinguishes  all  the 
works  of  the  Creator;  the  striking  variation 
which  this  creature  exhibits  from  the  oral  appa- 
ratus of  its  Class,  is  evidently  connected  with  the 
kind  and  circumstances  of  the  animals  which  it 
is  commissioned  to  keep  within  their  proper 
limits ;  its  mandibles,  or  beak,  indeed,  resemble 
those  of  the  other  Cephalopods,  indicating  that 
its  prey  are  covered  with  solid  integuments,  re- 
quiring great  force  to  crush  them ;  but  the  other 
oral  organs,  and  its  snail-like  foot,  as  we  see, 
indicate  that  they  are  not  of  a  kind  that  can 
easily  escape  from  their  assailants. 

Two  objects  seem  to  have  been  principally  in 
the  mind  of  the  Almighty  planner  of  the  uni- 
verse of  beings :  one  seems  to  have  been  the 
concatenation  of  all  subsistences,  seriatim  and 

1  Plate  IV.  Fig.  2. 


112  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

surrounded  by  an  iris,*  which  seems  to  indicate 
that  the  tentacles  perform,  in  some  sort,  the 
functions  of  that  part  of  the  eye.     The  upper 
pair  of  tentacles  in  the  MoUuscans  seem  ana- 
logues of  the  antennae  of  Condylopes,  and  the 
lower  pair  of  their  feelers ;  and  the  functions  for* 
which  the  Creator  has  formed  and  fitted  both 
are  probably  not  very  dissimilar.     The  extreme 
irritability  of  the  tentacles  of  snails  and  slugs  is 
evident  to  every  one  who  observes  their  motion : 
at  the  approach  of  a  finger  they  are  immediately 
retracted ;  they  therefore  give  notice  to  the  ani- 
mal of  the  approach  of  danger,  so  as  to  provide 
against    it,   and  when   necessary  to   withdraw 
itself  into  its  shell :  the  eyes,  from  their  situation 
in  many  of  them,  supposing  them  to  have  a  greater 
range  and  power  of  vision  than  they  appear  to 
have,  cannot  direct  them  in  the  choice  of  their 
food,  in  these  their  lower  tentacles  may  have  this 
office.     Snails   and  slugs,  we  also  know,  issue 
forth  from  their  places  of  concealment  when  the 
earth   is  rendered  moist  enough,  by  showers, 
for  them  to  travel  easily  over  its  surface;  so 
that  they  must  be  endued  with  some  degree  of 
aeroscepsy^    of   which    probably   these  delicate 
organs  are  the  instruments. 

Whether  the  barbs  appended  to  the  mouths  of 
many  fishes,  as  the  barbel,  the  Siluridans,^  and 

*  Plate  VI.  Fig.  1,  a.  '  Plate  XII.  Fig.  1. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  1 13 

the  Fishing-frog/  may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of 
tentacle  cannot  be  certainly  affirmed,  but  from 
their  proximity  to  the  mouth,  it  seems  most  pro- 
bable that  they  exercise  some  function  connected 
with  the  procuring  of  its  food.  Cuvier  regards 
them  as  a  kind  of  tactors,  and  they  also  present 
some  analogy  to  antennae  and  palpi. 

In  many  of  the  Annelidans,  tentacles  of  the 
present  description  are  found  not  only  in  the 
yicinity  of  the  mouth,  but  also  upon  the  pedi- 
gerous  segments  of  the  body,  and  appear  to  be 
equally  used  in  exploring  objects.* 

I  shall  next  consider  some  tentacular  organs, 
which  differ  from  those  we  have  been  considering 
in  being  more  or  less  jointed.  These,  on  that 
account,  have  been  considered  as  a  different 
class  of  organs,  and  by  many  have  been  deno- 
minated cirri  or  tendrils,  or  more  properly,  by 
Savigny,  tentacular  cirri.  I  have  before  des- 
cribed organs  of  this  kind  in  my  account  of  the 
Cirripedes^^  by  which  it  appears  that  they  are 
employed  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  tentacles 
of  the  polypes.  Under  this  head  also  the  an- 
tennae of  Crustaceans  and  insects  may  be  noticed, 
which  seem,  as  I  have  lately  observed,  analogous 
to  the  tentacles  of  the  MoUuscans,  and  the  barbs 
of  fishes ;  in  some  instances,  indeed,  they  are 


*  Lophius.  Plate  XIII.  Fig.  2. 

*  Fn.  Groenland,  294.  '  See  above,  p.  2. 

VOL.  II.  1 


114  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

used  instead  of  the  fore  legs.*  The  reason  why 
their  structure  differs  from  the  soft,  inarticulate 
tentacles  above  described,  at  least  in  most  cases, 
appears  to  be  the  different  nature  of  the  integu- 
ments of  the  animal,  which  being  incased  in  a 
kind  of  coat  of  mail,  it  seems  requisite  that  both 
its  locomotive  and  oral  organs  should  be  similarly 
defended,  and  in  this  case,  unless  they  had  been 
jointed,  they  would  have  lost  their  flexibility, 
and  so  could  not  have  exercised  the  functions 
assigned  to  them  by  their  Creator.  It  may, 
perhaps,  be  objected  that  the  shell  of  the  snail  is 
nearly  as  hard  as  the  crust  of  the  lobster;  but 
when  we  consider  that  the  former,  when  moving, 
can  thrust  forth  the  greatest  part  of  its  soft  body, 
as  it  were  from  a  house,  while  the  crust  of  the 
other  is  really  its  skin,  this  objection  seems  to 
vanish. 

Suckers. — The  organs  I  am  next  to  consider, 
acetabulaj  or  suckers,  are,  in  many  cases,  so  inti- 
mately connected  with  tentacles,  as  to  form  the 
most  essential  feature  of  them,  without  which 
they  can  be  of  no  use.  In  fact,  in  the  Cepha- 
lopods,  they  bear  the  same  relation  to  the  organ 
just  named  that  the  hand  or  foot  do  to  the  arm 
or  leg,  or  the  fingers  and  toes  to  the  hand,  in 
higher  animals  :  they  are  the  part  by  which  the 

*  Litrod.  io  Ent,  ii.  308. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  115 

animal  takes  hold  of  what  it  wants  to  seize ;  and 
by  the  alternate  fixing  and  unfixing  of  which, 
upoii  a  sdiid  substance,  it  moves  from  place  to 
place.  A  sucker  *  may  be  defined — An  organ  by 
wfaieh  an  animal  is  enabled  to  create  a  vacuum 
between  it,  (the  organ,)  and  any  surface  on 
which  it  rests,  so  as  to  produce  a  pressure  of  the 
atmosphere  upon  its  upper  part,  and  thus  causing 
it  to  adhere  firmly. 

Cuvier,  speaking  of  the  suckers  of  the  Cepha- 
lopods,  liius  describes  their  action.  When  the 
animal  approaches  one  or  more  of  its  suckers  to 
a  snr&ce,  in  order  to  apply  it  mwe  intimately, 
it  presents  it  flattened ;  when  it  is  fixed  to  it  by 
the  perfect  union  of  the  surfaces,  it  contracts  its 
spbincter,  which  produces  a  cavity,  in  the  centre 
of  which  a  vacuum  is  formed.  By  this  mechan- 
ism, the  sucker  attaches  itself  to  the  surface  with 
a  force  proportioned  to  its  diameter,  and  to  the 
weight  of  the  column  of  water  or  of  air  of  which 
it  18  the  base.  This  force,  multiplied  by  the 
number  of  suckers,  gives  that  with  which  the 
whole  or  part  of  the  legs  attaches  itself  to  the 
body,  so  that  it  is  more  easy  to  tear  the  legs, 
than  to  separate  diem  firom  the  object  which  the 
animal  wishes  to  retain.^ 

In  some  cases,  the  action  of  the  suckers,  as 

'  Suckere  are   denominated    scientifically   Acetabular    and 
CotyhEy  or  Cotyloid  processes. 

'  Anat.  Comp.  i.  410.     Roget,  B,  T.  i.  260. 


1  16  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

suckers,  seems  not  sufficient  for  the  animal's 
purposes,  and  claws  are  superadded.  This  struc- 
ture is  to  be  found  in  the  suckers  of  the  animal 
that  fixes  itself  to  the  gills  of  the  bream,  the 
Diplozoan^  before  described/  and  to  those  of 
some  Cephalopods  a  stout  claw  is  added. 

When  we  consider  the  nature  and  predatory 
habits  of  those  Cephalopods  whose  tentacles  are 
furnished  with  suckers,  often  pedunculated,  on 
that  side  which  is  prone  when  the  animal 
moves,  we  shall  at  once  see  the  reason  that  this 
change  from  the  more  common  MoUuscan  struc- 
ture of  an  expansile  foot,  took  place,  for  had 
their  principal  locomotive  and  prehensory  organ 
been  of  this  description,  or  different  from  what 
it  is,  their  motions  must  necessarily  have  been 
so  slow,  and  their  powers  of  prehension  so  weak, 
that  they  could  never  have  overtaken  and  cap- 
tured, and  maintained  their  hold  of  the  well 
defended  and  formidably  armed  Crustaceans, 
which  are  their  destined  prey.  Uncouth, 
therefore,  and  misshapen,  and  monstrous,  as 
these  animals,  at  the  first  glance,  appear,  we  see 
that  in  these  organs,  and  doubtless  in  all  others, 
they  are  exactly  fitted  to  answer  the  end,  and 
fulfil  the  purposes  of  Divine  Providence  in  their 
creation. 

The  suckers  of  the  Diplozomi  exhibit  a  com- 

'  Vol.  I.  Appendix,  p.  358. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  117 

plex  structure  in  aid  of  its  powers  of  suction,  not 
easily  developed  and  understood.  Dr.  Nord- 
mann  supposes,  that  though  the  animal  could 
attach  itself  strongly  by  these  organs,  additional 
means  were  necessary  to  render  its  attachment 
sufficiently  firm ;  and  that,  therefore,  while  it  is 
fixing  itself  by  the  suckers,  it  requires  the  aid  of 
the  apparatus  of  hooks,  or  claws  and  arches, 
to  keep  itself  from  being  misplaced.* 

The  Class  of  Annelidans  exhibits  a  great  va- 
riety of  locomotive  organs,  amongst  the  rest,  in 
the  last  Order,  we  find  suckers^  these  being  the 
principal  organs  for  motion  of  the  Hiruditieans 
or  leeches,  the  animals  of  which  Order,  however, 
M.  Savigny  is  disposed  to  think  are  essentially 
distinct  from  the  rest  of  the  Annelidans,  on 
account  of  their  want  of  set€e  or  lateral  bristles. 
The  oral  sucker  of  that  division  of  the  animals  I 
am  considering,  to  which  the  common  leech' 
belongs,  is  distinguished  from  the  anal  one  by 
being  formed  of  many  segments,  whereas  the 
latter  consists  of  only  one.  Their  motions,  by 
means  of  these  suckers,  and  the  annular  struc- 
ture of  their  bodies  1  have  before  sufficiently 
described.*'*  Their  suckers  also  enable  them  to 
lay  hold  of  any  aquatic  animals  that  come  in 

>  See  Nordmann^  i.  61.  t,  v./.  3,4,5. 
^  Sanguisuga  medicinalis.     Sav. 
3  Vol.  I.  p.  336. 


1  18  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

their  way,  especially  the  oral  one,  which  once 
.fixed  they  soon  make  an  entry  and  begin  to 
imbibe  its  blood. 

We  see,  in  this,  the  reason  why  their  Maker, 
instead  of  bristles  for  locomotion,  has  given  them 
organs  by  which  they  can  not  only  move  firom 
one  place  to  another,  but  also  fix  themselves 
firmly  to  their  prey. 

I  shall  next  advert  to  a  kind  of  sucker  which 
really  becomes  both  the  hand  and  foot  of  the 
animals  that  bear  tliem.  I  allude  to  those  of  the 
Echifioderms^  described  on  a  former  occasion,'  in 
which  the  ampuUaceous  part  within  the  shell 
presents  the  first  outline  of  a  shoulder  or  thigh, 
the  exerted  extensile  part  that  of  an  arm  or 
leg,  and  the  dilated  part  with  which  the  animal 
seizes  its  prey  or  walks,  the  hand  or  foot ;  the 
two  first  constituting  the  tentacle,  and  the  last 
the  sucker. 

I  have,  on  a  former  occasion,  given  some 
account,  under  the  name  of  the  Perch-pest^^  of  a 
singular  animal,  belonging  to  the  Lemeans, 
whose  history  has  been  given  by  Dr.  Nordmann, 
and  which  is  distinguished  by  a  sucker  common 
to  two  legs.  Several  other  Lerneans  have  similar 
suckers.^ 

1  See  Vol.  I.  p,  202,  208.  Plate  III.  Fig.  5. 
«  See  above,  p.  22,  31. 
'  See  Nordmann,  t,  vii.  viii. 


PREUEN80RY  ORGANS.  119 

Amongst  insects  are  a  variety  of  animals 
which  are  known  to  walk  against  gravity,  we  see 
the  common  flies,  and  other  two- winged  and  four- 
winged  insects,  walk  with  ease  upon  the  glass 
of  our  windows,  and  course  each  other  over  the 
ceilings  of  our  apartments,  without,  in  either 
case,  falling  from  their  lubricous,  or  seemingly 
perilous  station.  Writers  on  the  subject  are  not 
agreed  as  to  the  means  by  which  this  is  effected, 
some  supposing  that  it  is  by  atmospheric  pres- 
sure, produced  by  suckers  ;^  while  others  main- 
tain that  it  is  by  a  thick-set  brush,  composed  of 
short  bristles,  on  the  underside  of  the  foot,  or  by 
certain  appendages  at  the  apex  of  the  claw  joint 
of  that  organ.^  Probably  both  these  causes  are 
in  action,  for  though  the  pulvilli  or  foot-cushions 
of  flies  may  adhere  by  mechanical  means,  those 
of  some  Hymenoptera  and  Orthoptera  seem  evi- 
dently furnished  with  suckers.'  In  both  cases 
the  design  of  an  Intelligent  Cause  is  apparent ; 
His  wisdom,  which,  under  different  circum- 
stances, contrives  different  means  to  attain  the 
same  end ;  His  power,  which  gives  effect  to  that 
purpose  and  contrivance ;  and  His  goodness, 
which  causes  every  varied  mean  to  subserve  to 

1  Philoi.  Trans.  1816.  322.  t,  xviii.     Introd.  to  Ent.  ii.  322. 
White's  Selbome,  ii.  274.     Ed.  Markw. 

*  Blackwall  in  Linn,  Trans,  xvi.  487. 

*  Pkilos.  Trans,  ubi  sup.  /.  xix.  xxi. 


1 20  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

the  more  convenience  and  comfort  of  the  ani- 
mals in  which  each  obtains.  Could  we  trace 
exactly  the  history  and  habits  of  every  group  of 
animals,  nay,  of  each  individual  species,  we 
should  discover  that  the  slightest  variation  was 
to  answer  a  particular  end ;  and  that  even  its 
very  hairs  and  pores  were  all  numbered  with 
reference  to  special  uses,  foreseen  by  Divine 
Wisdom. 

Amongst  other  purposes  for  which  suckers 
were  given  to  the  Class  of  Insects,  one  bears  re- 
lation to  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes.  This  is 
particularly  observable  in  the  males  of  the  pre- 
daceous  beetles,^  especially  the  aquatic  ones. 
In  the  terrestrial  ones*  indeed  something  of  the 
kind  takes  place,  for  the  males  may  be  known 
by  having  the  three  or  four  first  joints  sometimes 
only  of  the  anterior  tarsi,  and  sometimes  of  the 
intermediate,  more  or  less  dilated  and  furnished 
underneath  with  short  bristles,  intermixed,  it 
should  seem,  with  very  minute  suckers,  and  in 
some  with  transverse  ones.'  But  these  organs 
are  most  conspicuous  in  the  male  of  our  most 
common  water-beetles,*  in  which  the  three  first 
joints  of  the  anterior  tarsus  form  a  dilated  orbi- 

'  Camivora.     Lat. 

^  Cicindelid{Bf  Harpalida,  CarabtdcB^  &c. 

^  E.  G.  Harpalus  caliginosus.     F. 

^  Dyticus  marginalise  &c.     Pkilos.  Trans,  ubi  supr.  L  xx. 


PREH  ENSOR Y  ORGANS.  121 

cular  shield,  covered  with  minute  suckers,  sitting 
on  a  tubular  foot-stalk,  with  two  exceeding  the 
rest  greatly  in  size.  The  intermediate  legs  also 
haye  the  three  first  joints  thickly  set  with  minute 
suckers. 

Leaving  the  invertebrated  animals  the  oc- 
currence of  suckers  becomes  very  rare;  very 
few  instances  are  upon  record,  in  the  whole  Sub- 
kingdom  of  vertebrated  animals,  of  this  kind  of 
formation,  two  in  the  Class  of  fishes  and  the 
other  in  that  of  reptiles,  namely  the  lump-fishes,^ 
the  sucking-fishes,'  and  the  Gecko  lizards.' 
Under  the  name  of  lump-Jishes  I  include  all  those 
whose  ventral  fins  unite  to  form  a  disk  or  sucker 
by  which  they  are  enabled  to  adhere  to  the 
rocks,  constituting  Cuvier's  family  of  DiscoboUs. 
But  the  most  celebrated  of  this  tribe,  in  ancient 
as  well  as  modem  times,  are  the  sucking-fishes 
or  JScheneis,  which  Pliny  says  were  so  called 
from  their  impeding  the  course  of  the  vessels  to 
which  they  adhered.  On  the  back  of  their  head 
they  have  an  oval  cotyloid  disk  fitted  with 
numerous  transverse  laminse  denticulated  at  their 
posterior  edge,  forming  a  double  series ;  by  the 
aid  of  this  apparatus,  which  appears  to  ad- 
here by  means  of  the  teeth  of  its  laminae  as 

'   Cycloptertu  LumpuSy  &c. 

*  EchenHs. 

^  Gecko.  Daud.     Slellio.  Schn.     Ascalabotes.  Cuv. 


122  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

well  as  by  suctioD,  this  animal  attaches  itself 
to  the  whale,  the  dolphin,  the  shark,  the  turtle, 
and  other  inhabitants  of  the  waters,  and  eyen 
to  vessels  that  are  sailing,  and  thus  organs, 
which  at  first  sight  appear  to  stop  all  locomotion 
in  the  animal,  are  the  means  which  enable  it, 
like  certain  barnacles,^  to  traverse  half  the  globe. 
The  fins  of  this  animal  do  not  permit  it  to  swim 
with  ease  and  velocity  ;  and  therefore  this  must 
be  regarded  as  a  compensating  contrivance,  by 
which  it  can  the  more  readily  fulfil  its  functions 
and  instincts.  Though  they  are  disengaged  with 
difficulty  by  human  force  from  the  vessel  to 
which  they  are  fixed,  they  very  easily  detach 
themselves,  and  swimming  on  their  back,  pursue 
any  object  that  attracts  their  attention  or  excites 
their  cupidity. 

It  is  singular  to  remark  that  in  the  case  of 
two  such  animals,  as  the  barnacle  amongst  the 
Cirripedesj  which  has  naturally  no  locomotive 
powers  and  organs ;  and  the  Echeneis  amongst 
the  fishes,  in  which  they  are  insufficient  to  trans- 
port it  far  from  its  native  rocks  and  haunts,  such 
means  shmild  be  affi>rded  by  a  kind  Providence 
of  visiting  in  safety  the  most  distant  oceans. 
These  animals,  though  they  may  be  called  para- 
sitic, from  their  adhering  to  other  animals,  yet, 

*  See  above,  p.  5. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  123 

as  they  do  not  appear  to  imbibe  any  nutriment 
from  them,  the  design  of  this  singular  instinct 
seems  to  be  merely  their  transport,  for  purposes 
not  yet  fiilly  ascertained. 

Bat  there  are  other  fishes  whose  mouth  is  a 
suctorious  organ,  analogous  to  that  of  the  leech, 
by  which  they  suck  the  blood  of  the  aquatic 
animals  they  adhere  to ;  of  this  description  are 
the  Lamprey^  and  the  Rag^  but  upon  these  I 
shall  not  further  enlarge. 

The  other  sucker-bearing  yertebrated  animals, 
which  I  mentioned,  were  those  Saurians  which 
form  the  genus  Gecko^  and  the  object  of  this 
structure,  in  them,  is  to  enable  th^n  to  walk 
against  gravity,  that  thus  they  may  be  em- 
powered to  pursue  the  insects,  possessing  the 
same  faculty,  up  perpendicular  or  along  prone 
surfaces.  These  suckers,^  consisting  of  trans- 
rerse  laminee,  occupy  the  terminal  part  of  the 
underside  of  the  toes.  By  aid  of  these  organs 
they  can  mount  the  smooth  chunam  walls  of 
houses  in  India.  Another  Saurian  genus,^  the 
Gecko,  of  the  West  Indies,  has  a  similar  organ, 
by  means  of  which  it  climbs  up  trees,  as  well  as 
the  walls  of  houses,  in  the  pursuit  of  insects. 

The  adhesion  of  suckers  and  their  relaxation, 

1  Petromyzon.  ^  Myxine. 

3  P kilos.  Trans.  1816.  /.  xvii./.  2.  *  Anolius. 


124  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

especially  in  locomotion,  in  order  to  answer  the 
end  for  which  they  were  given,  must  be  as  per- 
fectly  dependent  upon  the  will  of  the  animal,  as 
our  steps  on  the  plane  we  are  moving  on  are 
upon  ours ;  and  yet  in  some  instances,  as  in  the 
perch-pest,^  the  animal,  when  once  fixed,  can 
scarcely  disengage  itself;  but  in  this  case, 
having  attained  its  ultimate  station,  this  is  of 
no  importance. 

If  we  study  the  individual  cases  of  all  the 
sucker-bearing  animals,  we  shall  find  tliat  this 
kind  of  organ  was  necessary,  and  all  its  modifi- 
cations, to  enable  them  to  fulfil  effectually  their 
several  instincts,  and  to  do  the  work  appointed 
them  by  their  allwise  Creator.  For  instance,  in 
vain  would  the  Cephalopods  pursue  and  en- 
deavour to  seize  and  devour  the  crab  or  the 
lobster,  if,  instead  of  tentacles  set  with  numerous 
suckers,  they  had  the  paws  and  retractile  claws 
of  the  Feline  race :  or  how  would  the  Gecko  he 
enabled  to  overtake  its  insect  provender,  if  its 
feet  were  like  those  of  the  rest  of  its  class  ? 

As  supplementary  to  this  account  of  suckers, 
I  may  mention  a  locomotive  organ,  given  to  a 
very  numerous  tribe  of  invertebrated  animals, 
which,  as  I  observed  on  a  former  occasion,  ap- 
pears in  some  degree  to  partake  of  the  nature 

*  Achtheres  Percarum.     See  above,  p.  118. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  1 25 

of  a  sucker,  and  which  is  eminently  adapted  to 
the  structure,  circumstances,  and  wants  of  the 
animals  that  are  provided  with  it.  I  mean  the 
expansfle  foot  of  the  great  majority  of  MoUus- 
cans :  these  animals  are  the  only  instance  of  a 
unipede  structure  in  creation,  but  this  one  foot 
answers  every  purpose  of  a  hand  or  leg;  it 
spins  for  the  bivalves  their  byssus,^  is  used  by 
others  as  an  auger ,^  by  others  as  a  trowel,^  and 
by  others  for  other  manipulations,  and  is  gene- 
rally their  sole  organ  of  locomotion :  from  its  soft 
and  flexible  substance  it  can  adapt  itself  to  the 
surfaces  upon  which  it  moves,  and  by  the  slime 
that  it  copiously  secretes  lubricates  them  to 
&cilitate  its  progress.  In  very  dry  weather, 
however,  it  cannot  move  with  ease  over  the  arid 
soil,  but  when  humid  from  rain,  the  whole  ter- 
restrial MoUuscan  army  issues  forth,  naked,  or 
in  various  panoply,  each  according  to  its  kind, 
covering  the  face  of  the  earth,  so  that  it  is  not 
easy  to  avoid  crushing  them. 

The  most  careless  observer  of  God's  creatures 
must  be  struck  by  the  correspondence  between 
this  foot,  and  the  animal  to  which  it  is  given ; 
had  its  locomotions  been  by  means  of  an  organ 
of  a  solid  substance,  or  by  means  of  several  such 
organs,  the  harmony  of  structure  which  now 

»  Vol.  I.  p.  251.  «  Ibid.  p.  246.  »  Ibid.  p.  289. 


126  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

Btrikes  us,  and  relationship  between  its  diffei^^it 
parts  would  be  done  away,  and  we  should  think 
we  beheld  a  mongrel  monster  engendared  by 
strange  mixtures  of  animals,  rather  than  a 
creature  harmoniously  moulded  by  the  hands  of 
an  allwise  Creator. 

I  may  also  mention  here  a  few  other  organs 
which  seem  to  present  some  analogy  to  suckers, 
and  which,  though  aiding  in  locomoticm,  are  not, 
strictly  speaking,  locomotive  organs,  or  those  by 
which  locomotion  is  elBfected.  I  allude  to  the 
spurious  legs,  or  prologs  of  the  larves  of  insects. 
These  are  usually  retractile  fleshy  organs, 
analogous  to  the  bristie-armed  protuberances 
of  the  Annelidans,  rendered  necessary  by  the 
length  of  these  animals,  and  supporting  them  as 
props,  and  which  usually,  by  means  g£  a  coronet 
or  semicoronet  of  hooked  spines  or  claws,  and  by 
applying  their  prone  surface  to  the  plane  of 
position,  take  strong  hold  of  it :  these  legs  do 
not  step;  the  six  anterior  jointed  l^s,  where 
they  exist,  are  the  walking  legs;  but  these 
organs  having  been  fully  described  in  another 
joint  work  of  Mr.  Spence  and  mysdf,'  I  must 
therefore  refer  the  reader  for  Airther  information 
on  the  subject  to  that  work. 

What  are  called  the  pecHnes  or  oomb-lifce 

1  Intro,  to  Ent.  iii.  134. 


PREHENSORY  GROANS.  127 

organs  of  scorpions,  and  those  pedunculated 
ones  which  are  attached  to  the  hind  legs  of  the 
Solpuga  or  Gateodesj  are  conjectured  by  M» 
LatreiUe  to  be  connected  with  the  respiration  of 
these  animals.  Amouroux  seems  to  regard  the 
former  as  a  kind  of  sucker,  but  no  actual  obser* 
yations  have  as  yet  ascertained  their  real  nature, 
except  that  the  author  last  named,  states  that  he 
has  seen  the  animals  use  them  as  feet. 

SettB  or  Bristles.  Having  fully  conridered 
suckers  and  their  analogues,  I  shall  next  advert 
to  a  species  of  locomotive  organ,  principally 
confined  to  the  Annelidans^  animals  whose  loco- 
motions are  chiefly  produced  by  the  contraction 
and  expansion  of  the  rings  of  which  their  body 
is  composed,  but  which  are  also  furnished  with 
lateral  setiform  organs,  which  assist  them  in 
thdr  motion,  by  pushing  against  the  plane  of 
position. 

The  majority  of  these  animals  are  aquatic, 
and  some  of  them  grow  to  a  great  size ;  I  have  a 
specimen,  which  I  purchased  from  the  collection 
of  the  late  lamented  Mr.  Guilding,  which  is  more 
than  a  foot  long,  and  as  thick  as  the  little  finger : 
it  has  a  double  series  of  what  may  be  d^iomi- 
nated  its  legs,  each  furnished  at  its  extremity 
with  a  bunch  of  very  fine  retractile  bristles, 
and  those  of  the  dorsal  series  having  besides  a 
branchial  organ  or  gill  on  each  side,  consisting 


128  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

of  numerous  threads.  This  remarkable  animal 
appears  to  belong  to  Savigny's  genus  Pleione^ 
and  is  probably  his  P.  pedunculatUf  and  the 
Nereis  gigantea  of  Linn6.  The  bristles  in  these 
legs  seem  not  calculated  for  pushing  on  a  solid 
surface,  but  are  rather  organs  of  natation,  ana- 
logous, in  some  degree,  to  the  branching  legs  of 
the  Branchiopod  Entomostracans.  In  the  earth- 
worms^ the  lateral  bristles  are  simple,  and  used 
to  assist  their  motions,  either  on  the  surface,  or 
when  they  emerge  from  the  earth,  or  make  their 
way  into  it. 

At  first  sight,  one  would  not  suppose  the 
bristles  of  the  Annelidans  to  be  analogues  of 
jointed  legs,  or  preparatory  to  their  appearance 
in  the  great  plan  of  creation;  but  when  we 
reflect  upon  the  approach  which  many  of  the 
Nereideans  of  Savigny  make  to  the  Myriupod 
Co7idylopeSf*  and  that  these  bristle-bearing  legs, 
in  Mr.  Guilding's  genus  Peinpatus^^  begin  to 
assume  the  appearance  of  articulations,  and  are 
armed  at  their  apex  with  claws  ;^  it  seems  clear 
that  the  bristles  of  the  Annelidans,  and  the  base 
within  which  they  are  retractile,  are  really  legs, 
and  lead  the  way  to  the  jointed  ones  of  the  Con- 
dylopes. 

I  have  before  noticed  the  conversion  of  legs 

^  Lumhricus. 

«  See  Vol.  I.  p.  346.  Plate  VIIL  Fig.  1,  4. 

3  Ibid.  Fig.  1.  *  Ibid.  Fig.  2.  c.  c. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  129 

into  oral  organs,  or  their  use  as  auxiliaries 
to  them  in  the  case  of  the  Myriapods.*  Mr. 
Savigny,  in  his  description  of  an  animal,^  which 
seems  the  analogue  of  the  electric  centipede/ 
observes  that  its  four  anterior  legs  are  converted 
into  tentacular  cirri,  affording  an  additional 
argument  for  the  ancient  opinion  that  the  marifte 
Myriapods,  as  they  might  be  denominated,  have 
some  affinity  with  the  terrestrial^  since,  at  least 
in  this  instance,  the  same  number  of  legs  are 
used  as  auxiliaries  to  the  mouth. 

The  great  majority  of  the  Annelidans  inhabit 
the  water,  and  the  tufts  of  bristles,  sometimes 
forming  fans,  issuing  in  many  cases  from  a 
dorsal  and  ventral  conical  protuberance,  deno- 
minated by  Savigny  oars,  and  occasionally  ex- 
panding so  as  somewhat  to  resemble  them,  seem 
in  some  degree  analogous  to  the  branching  legs 
of  the  Branchiopod  and  Lernean  Entomostra- 
cans/  and  are  probably  natatory  as  well  as 
ambulatory  organs,  and  meand  by  which  their 
Creator  has  fitted  the  locomotive  ones  to  make 
their  way  through  the  matted  sea- weeds  and  the 
mud,  when  creeping  after  their  prey,  as  well  as 
to  row  through  the  water  like  a  stately  bireme. 
These  oary  feet,  emulating  in  number  those  of 
the  terrestrial  Myriapods,  and  forming  moreover, 

'  See  above,  p.  76. 

*  Lycoris  (Bgyptia,     Pl.  VIII.  Fio.  4. 

'  Geopkilus  electricus.  ♦  Plate  IX.  Fic  3. 

VOL.  II.  K 


130  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

as  was  before  stated,  both  a  dorsal  and  ventral 
series,  must  enable  them  to  move  with  con- 
siderable rapidity:  those  indeed  that  have  ob- 
served their  proceedings,  describe  them  as  both 
swimming  and  running  with  admirable  ease  and 
speed,* 

There  is  a  Class  of  vertebrated  animals,  the 
Ophidians  or  serpents,  which  exhibit  consider- 
able analogy  to  many  of  the  Annelidans,  not 
only  by  their  form  and  undulating  movements, 
but  also  by  the  organs  which  effect  their  pro- 
gressive motions,  not  indeed  by  means  of  bristles, 
but  of  parts  that,  pushing  against  the  {dane  of 
position,  propel  the  animal  in  any  direction  ac- 
cording to  its  will. 

But  the  way  in  which  this  is  effected  having 
been  clearly  and  most  ably  explained  by  an 
eminent  and  learned  physiologist,^  I  need  not 
here  enlarge  upon  it,  but  only  observe  that  the 
motion  of  one  tribe  of  the  Myriapods,  though 
produced  by  legSy  exactly  imitates  that  of  the 
Ophidians,  though  produced  by  ribs;  and  very 
amusing  it  is  to  see  the  propagation  of  it  from 
one  extremity  to  the  other  in  the  Millipedes, 
like  wave  succeeding  wave  in  the  water :  a  still 
more  striking  analogy,  as  has  been  already  re- 
marked,^ is  exhibited  by  the  larger  centipedes, 

1  See  Otho  Fabricius  Faun.  Groendland,  289,  298,  &c. 

2  Dr.  Roget. 

*  See  above,  p.  6S. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  131 

which  seem  almost  models  of  the  skeleton  of 
a  serpent. 

Serpents  thus  can  move  not  only  horizontally, 
bat  also  up  the  trunks  of  treios,  probably  in  a 
spirsl  direction,  and  some  are  said  to  have  the 
power  of  darting  from  one  tree  to  another.  As 
these  animals  are  not  annulated,  like  the  An- 
ndidans,  and  cannot  originate  and  continue  mo- 
tion by  the  alternate  contraction  and  extension 
of  the  rings  or  segments  of  their  body,  which 
the  nature  of  their  integuments,  their  vertebral 
column,  and  muscular  fibre  probably  preclude, 
the  wisdom  of  their  Creator  has  subjected  their 
riba  to  their  will,  so  that  they  can  use  them  as 
motive  organs. 

Natatory  Organs. — The  spurious  bristle*armed 
1^8  of  the  Annelidans,  especially  those  of  Peri- 
paiuSf^  have  as  it  were  led  us  to  the  mighty 
host  of  animals  furnished  with  articulated  loco- 
motive or  prehensory  organs,  or  real  legs  and 
arms,  varying  in  number— but  as  these  will  best 
finish  the  subject,  I  shall  first  consider  those 
external  instruments  of  motion  which  are  pecu- 
liar to  animals  inhabiting  the  water,  or  moving 
through  the  air,  beginning  with  the  first,  or 
those  distinguished  by  natatary  organs.  I  have 
already  mentioned  some  of  this  description,  as 

1  Plate  VIII.  Fig.  1,  2. 


132  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

the  oars  of  the  paper  nautilus^  and  Annelidans^^ 
and  also  the  sails  expanded  by  the  former 
animal  and  several  MoUuscans.^  Before  I  con- 
sider the  organs  in  question,  where  they  are 
most  conspicuous,  in  the  fishes,  I  must  give 
some  account  of  those  to  be  met  with  amongst 
the  invertebrated  animals,  particularly  the  Con- 
dylopes.  Several  of  the  Cephalopods  and  Ptero- 
pods,  and  other  MoUuscans,  have  natatory  ap- 
pendages ;  in  the  former,  as  to  many  species, 
looking  like  little  wings,  often  nearly  round, 
attached  to  the  lower  part  of  the  mantle  that 
envelopes  them  ;^  and  in  the  latter  assuming  the 
shape  and  station  of  the  dorsal  and  other  fins  of 
fishes,^  though  totally  different  in  their  structure, 
not  being  divided  into  jointed  rays  as  in  the 
animals  just  named. 

Having  mentioned  these,  I  shall  next  advert 
more  fully  to  the  organs  by  which  the  great 
Sub-kingdom  of  animals  with  articulated  legs 
move  in  the  waters,  whether  they  always  inhabit 
them,  or  occasionally  visit  them.  They  may  be 
divided  into  three  distinct  kinds.  1.  Jointed 
legs  dilated  towards  their  extremities,  as  in  the 
common  whirl-wig,*  the  little  beetle  that  forms 

'  See  Vol.  I.  p.  312.  «  See  above,  p.  129, 

«  See  Vol.  I.  p.  264.  ♦  Plate  VII.  Fig.  1. 

^  Plate  V.  Fig.  6,  7,  8.  «  Gyrinus. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  133 

circles  in  the  water,  and  in  the  tribe  of  crabs 
termed  swimmers,^  these  I  would  call  Pedireines. 
2.  Jointed  legs,  that  terminate  in  a  fasciculus  of 
setiform  branches,  and  are  also  connected  with 
the  respiration  of  the  animal,  these  might  be 
denominated  Branchiremesy  and  are  found  in 
the  Branchiopod  Entomostracans.^  3.  Those  in 
which  the  inner  side  of  the  jointed  leg  has  a 
dense  fringe  of  hairs,  called  by  Linn6,  by  way  of 
eminence,  pedes  natatoriiy  such  as  are  found  in 
many  diving*  and  other  aquatic  beetles,  these 
might  be  named  Setiremes.  As  the  spurious 
legs  to  which  the  eggs  are  attached,  observable 
on  the  underside  of  the  abdomen  of  the  female 
lobster,  cray-fish,  and  other  long-tailed  Crus- 
taceans, are  used  also  as  natatory  organs,  they 
are  ciliated  for  that  purpose,  and  belong  to  this 
tribe.  The  same  observation  will  also  apply 
both  to  maxillary  legs,  and  other  legs  of  several 
animals  of  that  Class.  The  velocity  with  which 
the  diving-beetles  move  in  the  water  by  the 
action  of  these  legs,  and  their  suspension  of 
themselves  at  the  surface,  by  extending  them  so 
38  to  form  a  right  angle  with  the  body,  when 
th^  come  up  for  air,  and  the  weather  is  fine 
and  the  water  clear,  affords  a  very  interesting 
spectacle. 

*  Nageurs,  Lam.       «  Plate  IX.  Fio.  4.  c.       ^  Dyticus, 


134  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

Amongst  natatory  organs  I  muflt  not  overlook 
the  tails  of  the  long-tailed  Decapod  and  several 
other  Crustaceans,  which  terminate  in  a  power- 
ful natatory  organ,  consisting  usually  of  five 
plates,  densely  ciliated  at  their  apex,  the  inter- 
mediate one  formed  of  the  last  segment  of  the 
abdomen,  and  the  lateral  ones  articulating  with 
a  common  footstalk  giving  them  separate  mo- 
tion, the  outer  consisting  sometimes  of  two  arti- 
culations, as  in  the  common  lobster,  and  some- 
times of  only  one,  as  in  the  thorny  lobster ;  the 
intermediate  plate,  as  in  Galathea^  sometimes 
consists  of  two  lobes ;  these  laminae  when  ex- 
panded form  a  most  powerful  natatory  oi^an, 
which,  if  we  consider  the  weight  of  their  body, 
must  be  necessary  to  keep  them  from  sinking, 
and  by  its  vertical  motion  to  enable  them  to  rise 
or  sink  in  the  water.  But  natatory  organs  are 
not  confined  to  those  of  the  trunk  and  abdomen, 
even  those  of  the  head  sometimes  assist  in  this 
kind  of  motion.  Thus  in  Cypris^  an  Entomos- 
tracan  genus,  resembling  a  muscle,  the  man- 
dibles and  first  pair  of  maxillae  have  branchial 
appendages  used  also  in  swimming,  and  their  an- 
tennae are  likewise  terminated  by  a  fesciculus  of 
threads,  which,  according  to  Jurine,  the  animal 
developes,  more  or  less,  as  it  wants  to  move  faster 
or  slower.* 

»  Liitr.  Co\Ar$  D'Ent.  i.  430. 


PRfiUENSORY  ORGANS.  135 

But  the  most  important  natatory  organs  are 
those  which  enable  the  vertebrated  inhabitants 
oi  the  waters,  from  the  giant  whale  to  the  pigmy 
minnow,  to  make  their  way  through  the  waves ; 
it  will  be  interesting  to  trace  the  analogies  of  the 
fins  of  these  animals  to  the  locomotive  organs, 
whether  wings  or  legs  of  other  animals,  es- 
pecHally  Mammalians.  Some  we  shall  find  mi 
generis^  and  calculated  particularly  for  the  cir- 
cumstances in  which  the  Creator  has  placed 
the  great  Class  of  fishes  and  the  rest  of  the  ma- 
rine animals ;  and  others,  in  the  course  of  our 
analysis,  we  shall  observe  gradually  assuming 
the  character  and  uses  of  an  arm  or  leg. 

The  fins  of  fishes  are  membranes,  usually  sup- 
ported by  osseous  or  cartilaginous  rays,  which 
can  Cfpea  or  shut,  more  or  less,  like  a  fan,  but  in 
some  instances  they  consist  of  membrane  with- 
out reysy  and  in  others  of  rays  without  mem- 
brane. The  rays  are  usually  divided  into  two 
kkids;  those  which  consist  of  a  single  joint, 
usaally  less  flexible  and  pointed,  whence  they  are 
called  spiny  raysy  and  those  which  consist  of  nu- 
niMtyus  small  articulations,  generally  branching 
at  their  extremity,  which  are  called  jointed  rays^ 
these  jointed  rays  may  be  regarded  as  precursors 
of  the  phalanxes  of  fingers  and  toes  in  the  hands 
and  feet  of  the  terrestrial  vertebrated  animals ; 
The  first  pair  of  fins,  which  are  seldom  wanting, 


13G  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

and  answer  to  the  fore-legs  or  arms  of  those 
animals,  are  called  pectoral^  and  are  usually 
placed  on  the  side  behind  the  gill-covers.  The 
second  pair,  supposed  to  be  analogous  to  the 
hind-leg,  are  called  ventral^  and  are  placed  under 
the  abdomen.  Besides  these,  there  is  often  a 
fin  along  the  back,  sometimes  subdivided,  named 
the  dorsal  fin ;  another  under  the  tail,  called  the 
anal,  and  the  tail  itself  terminates  in  a  fin,  one  of 
the  most  powerful  of  all,  which  is  named  the 
caudal,  and  in  some  respects  may  also  claim  to 
be  regarded  as  the  analogue  of  the  legs. 

The,  so  called,  fins  of  Cetaceans,  are  not  pro- 
perly fins^  but  legs  adapted  to  their  element  as 
marine  animals,  the  anterior  pair  having  all  the 
bones  proper  to  those  of  mammiferous  animals, 
covered  with  a  thick  skin,  and  wearing  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  fin.  In  the  sea-cow  there  are 
rudiments  of  nails  in  their  pectoral  fins,  and  they 
use  them,  both  for  crawling  on  shore,  and  for 
carrying  their  young,  on  which  account  they  are 
called  Manatins,^  of  which  Lafnantins,  their 
French  name,  is  probably  a  corruption.  The 
tail  also  of  the  Cetaceans,  which  is  in  the  shape 
of  the  caudal  fin  of  fishes,  and  somewhat  forked, 
but  placed  horizontally,  contains  some  bones, 
which  appear  like  rudiments  of  those  of  legs, 
thus,  for  their  better  motion  in  an  element  they 

1  Manatus  Americanus, 


PREU£K.SORY  ORGANS.  137 

never  leave,  covered  by  their  Creator  with  a  ten- 
dinous skin,  and  enabling  them  by  an  up  and 
down  motion  to  sink  to  a  prodigious  depth,  or  to 
rise  from  the  bottom  to  the  surface  of  the  ocean. 

If  we  go  from  the  Cetaceans  to  the  AmphibianSy 
we  see  a  further  metamorphosis  of  the  organs  of 
motion.  The  pectoral  fins  of  the  fonner  are  now 
become  arms,  with  phalanxes  of  fingers,  claw- 
armed,  but  still  connected  by  skin  for  natatory 
purposes,  and  their  caudal  fin  is  converted  into 
radimental  l^s,  with  a  very  short  intervening 
tail,  and  these  legs  are  still  of  most  use  in  the 
water.  These  circumstances  induce  some  suspi- 
cion, especially  when  we  consider  that  the  caudal 
fin  of  fishes  is  their  most  powerful  locomotive 
organ,  that  it  is  the  real  analogue  of  the  hind^ 
legs  of  the  terrestrial  mammalians. 

The  ventral  fins  sometimes  seem  to  change 
place  with  the  pectoral  ones.  This  is  the  case 
with  the  fishing-frog  tribe,  in  which  the  former 
are  nearest  to  the  head,  and  seem  analogous  to  a 
pentadactyle  hand,  while  the  pectoral  ones  re- 
semble a  leg  and  foot,  and  the  creature  looks 
like  a  four-footed  reptile.^  The  Rays,'  in  a 
system,  are  placed  at  a  wide  distance  from  these, 
and  yet  they  possess  several  characters  in  com- 
mon, particularly  in  having  the  hinder  part  of  the 


1  See  Plate  XIII.  Fig.  1,  3.     Lophiad^ie,     Laphius.  L. 
*  Raiad(B,  Raia.  L. 


138  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

body  attenuated  into  a  tail  mcnre  or  less  Blender^ 
and  the  enormous  mouth  and  gullet  of  others^ 
are  armed,  as  in  the  sharks,  with  a  tremendous 
apparatus  of  teeth.  Curier  observes  of  one  of 
them,^  that  it  can  creep  on  the  earth  by  means 
of  its  fins,  like  small  quadrupeds,  and  that  their 
pectorals  discharge  the  function  of  hind*legs;' 
so  that  there  seems  some  ground  for  thinking 
that  they  are  a  branch  diverging  from  the  Selar 
cians  towards  the  Reptiles. 

Fins,  and  their  analogues,  were  given  to  aquatic 
animals,  it  should  seem,  solely  for  locomotion ; 
and  could  we  witness  the  motions  of  their  differ^it 
tribes,  each  in  its  place,  and  observe  the  play  of 
these  appendages,  we  should  find  them  all  so 
located  in  the  body  of  the  fish,  and  so  nicely  mea- 
sured with  regard  to  volume  and  weight,  as  to 
suit  exactly  the  wants  of  the  animal  in  its  sta- 
tion, and  to  act  as  a  mutual  counterpoise,  so  that 
it  should  not  be  overswayed  by  the  preponder- 
ance of  one  organ  over  another;  every  thing 
proving  that  the  momentum  and  action  of  each, 
both  independently,  and  in  concert  with  the  rest, 
had  been  nicely  calculated  before  its  creation, 
by  one  whose  Wisdom  knew  no  bounds,  whose 
Will  was  the  well  being  and  well  doing  of  his 
creatures,  each  in  its  place,  and  whose  Power 

1  Plate  VIII.  Fig.  3. 

2  Chironecfes. 

^  Regne  Anim.  ii.  251.  Last  Ed. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  139 

enaUed  him  to  give  being  to  what  his  Wisdom 
plamied,  and  his  Will  decreed. 

Nothing  is  more  graceful  and  elegant  than 
the  motions  of  fishes  in  their  own  pure  element. 
Not  to  mention  the  shifting  radiance  of  their 
forms,  as  they  glance  in  the  sunbeam;  their 
extreme  flexibility,  and  the  ease  with  which 
they  gUde  through  the  waters,  gives  to  their 
motions  a  character  of  facile  progress  which  has 
no  parallel,  unless,  perhaps,  in  the  varied  flight 
of  the  wii^-swift  swallow,  amongst  their  ana- 
logues, the  birds.  How  rapidly  do  they  glide, 
and  are  lost  to  our  sight  by  a  mere  stroke  of 
their  tail !  at  another  time,  less  alarmed,  how 
quietly  do  they  suspend  themselves,  and  cease 
all  progressive  motion,  so  that  we  can  discover 
them  to  be  alive  only  by  the  fan-like  movement 
of  their  pectoral  fins,  an  action  which  seems,  in 
some  sort,  connected  with  their  respiration ;  for 
they  move  them,  as  I  have  observed,  more  rapidly, 
when,  in  sultry  weather  they  seek  the  surface^ 
and  their  muzzle  emerges.  These  fins,  the 
analogue,  as  has  been  before  observed,  of  the 
hand  or  fore  foot,  except  in  a  few  instances,  may 
be  regarded  as  usually  the  first  pair  of  oars  that 
propel  the  vessel.  Some  fishes,  in  finont  of  these, 
have  another  locomotive  organ  and  weapon,^  not 
intended,  however,  for  motion  so  much  in  the 
tvater  as  on  the  earth ;  this  is  a  powerful,  and^ 

'  Plate  XII.  Fig.  1.  a.  2. 


140  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

usually,  serrated  bone,*  articulating  Mrith  the 
shoulder  bones,  and  is  to  be  found  in  the  Silu- 
ridans,  with  the  exception  of  the  electric  species, 
which  its  Creator  has  fitted  with  other  arms. 

The  second  pair  of  fins,  as  they  most  commonly 
occur,  are  the  ventral^  but  sometimes,  where 
fishes  have  a  large  head,  they  are  placed  for- 
warder, and  in  general  they  are  under  the  most 
bulky  part  of  the  body ;  by  this  arrangement,  we 
may  gather  that  they  are  intended  to  counteract 
the  force  of  gravity,  as  well  as  to  act  as  oars. 
These  fins  are  wanting  in  all  the  fishes  called, 
on  that  account,  apodes^  or  footless,  to  which  the 
eels,  and  other  serpentine  fishes  belong,  some  of 
which  also  have  no  pectorals. 

The  caudal  or  tail  fin,  which  directs  the  loco- 
motions of  fishes  as  a  rudder,  and  gives  to  them 
the  chief  part  of  their  force  and  velocity,  in  the 
majority  of  real  fishes  is  vertical,  but  in  flat-fish, 
which  have  no  natatory  vesicle,  it  is  horizontal, 
as  it  is  likewise  in  the  Cetaceans  and  Amphi- 
bians ;  in  all  these,  its  motion  is  vertical. 

The  dorsal  is  also  a  powerful  fin,  consisting  of 
spiny  rays ;  in  some  tribes,  as  the  perch,  though 
wanting  in  others,  it  is  sometimes  divided  into 
two  or  three  fins.  By  its  various  undulations, 
and  by  the  difierently  inclined  planes  which  it 

*  N.  B.  The  figure  of  the  bone  (2)  in  the  Plate  was  taken 
from  one  dug  up  in  this  neighbourhood  in  forming  a  manure 
heap,  which  Mr.  Owen  informed  me  belonged  to  a  Silurus, 


PREH£NSORY  ORGANS.  141 

pTOBents  to  the  water,  this  fin  augments  the 
means  of  fishes  to  move  in  any  direction,  and 
adds  much  to  the  speed  with  which  those  last 
named  pursue  their  prey :  it  counterbalances  the 
effect  of  the  caudal  fin  in  cross-currents ;  but,  if 
the  animals  could  not  depress  it,  it  might  occa^ 
siooally  destroy  the  equilibrium,  and  overset 
them* 

The  anal  fin  seems,  in  many  fishes,  intended 
as  an  antagonist  to  the  dorsal,  to  prevent  the 
above  efiect  and  maintain  the  fish  in  its  due 
position. 

But  fins  were  given  to  fishes  not  only  to  be 
the  instruments  of  motion  in  their  own  element, 
butUkewise  in  that  of  terrestrial  animals ;  to  some 
they  were  given  to  enable  them,  under  particular 
circumstances,  to  vie  with  the  birds  in  their 
aerial  flights;  to  others,  that  like  quadrupeds, 
they  may  undertake  excursions  upon  Terra 
firma ;  and  to  a  third  description,  amongst  other 
means,  to  assist  them  in  climbing  the  trees  in 
quest  of  their  food.  Every  body  knows  that  the 
pectoral  fins  of  the  difierent  species  of  flying 
fishes  are  very  long ;  that  by  them,  when  leaping 
out  of  the  water  to  avoid  the  pursuit  of  their 
eaemies,  the  bonito,^  and  other  rapacious  fishes, 
they  are  supported  in  the  air  for  a  short  time ; 
but  the  action  is  really  not  flyings  since  they  use 
these  fins  merely  as  an  aeronaut,  in  descending, 

*  Scomber  Pelami, 


142  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

uses  a  parachute,  for  a  support  in  the  air;  in 
fact,  flying  from  aquatic  enemies,  they  are  soon 
attacked  by  aerial  ones,  and  the  frigate,^  and 
other  marine  birds,  make  them  their  prey — so 
that  they  take  short  flights,  as  well  as  short  voy- 
ages— ^and  though  they  swim  rapidly,  they  are 
soon  tired,  which  is  the  means  of  saring  those 
that  escape  from  their  numerous  enemies,  and 
preventing  the  extinction  of  the  race.  Besides 
the  common  flying-fish,'  the  Pegasus^^  a  small 
fish,  inhabiting  the  Indian  ocean,  when  pursued, 
leaps  out  of  the  water,  and  takes  a  short  flight. 

I  mentioned  on  a  former  occasion,^  the  terres- 
trial excursions  of  the  Ha8sa$%  and  from  the 
statement  of  Piso,  in  his  Natural  History  of  the 
Indies,  published  in  1658,  and  from  that  of 
Marcgrave,  of  Brazil,  quoted  by  Linn6  in  the 
Amcenitates  AcademioBj^  it  appears  that  the 
CaUicthys^  migrates  in  the  same  way.  Dr. 
Hancock  mentions  a  fish,  perhaps  a  Loricaria^ 
which  has  a  bony  ray  before  the  ventral  as  wdl 
as  the  pectoral  fins,  and  which  creeps  on  all 
fours  upon  the  bed  of  the  rivers,  perhaps  even 
when  they  are  dry.  These  little  quadruped 
fishes  must  cut  a  singular  figure  upon  their  four 
stilts. 

'   Tachy petes  Aquila, 

^  Exocatus  exiliens  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  E.  voHttms  in 
the  ocean,  but  doubts  are  said  to  rest  upon  this  species. 
5  P.  DracOy  volans,  &c.  *  Vol.  I.  p.  120. 

*  I.  500.  t.  xi./.  1.  •  Plate  XII.  Fig.  1. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  143 

I  have  giyen  a  full  account  of  a  climbing  fish 
amongBt  the  migratory  animals/  and  shall  there- 
fore now  take  my  leave  of  the  finny  tribes. 

Perhaps  the  fins  of  the  Cetaceans  and  Am- 
phibiansy  above  described,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
enveloped  not  in  a  membrane,  like  the  fins  of 
fishes^  but  are  real  feet  adapted  to  their  element, 
may  be  regarded  as  more  analogous  to  what  are 
called  paddles^  by  which  term  the  natatory  ap- 
paratus of  the  Chelonian  reptiles,  and  of  the 
marine  Saurians,  hitherto  found  only  in  a  fossil 
state,  are  distinguished.  These  in  the  former, 
the  tortles,  are  formed  by  the  legs  and  toes 
being  covered  by  a  common  skin,  so  as  to  form 
a  kind  of  fin,  the  two  first  toes  of  each  1^  being 
armed  with  a  deciduous  nail.  The  coriaceous 
turtle,'  the  parent  of  the  Grecian  lyre,  which 
presents  no  small  analogy  to  the  Amphibians, 
has  no  scales  either  upon  its  body  or  feet,  but 
both  are  covered  with  a  leathery  skin,  even  its 
shell  resembling  leather,  and  therefore  it.  con-* 
nects  the  paddles  of  the  Chelonians  with  those 
of  the  marine  Mammalians.  It  may  be  defined 
as  a  natatory  organ,  formed  of  several  jointed 
digitations,  covered  by  a  common  leathery  or 
scaly  integument.  In  the  fossil  Saurians  the 
paddle  appears  to  be  formed  of  numerous  bones, 
arranged  in  more  than  five  digitations,  but  it  is 
shorter  and  smaller,  and  seems  better  calculated 

*  Vol.  L  p.  123.  *  Sphargis  coriacea. 


144  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

for  Still  waters  and  a  waveless  sea  than  to  con- 
tend with  the  tumultuous  fluctuations  of  the 
open  ocean/ 

Next  to  the  paddles  of  the  Turtles,  and  fossil 
SaurianSy  come  the  palmated  or  web-foot  of  the 
aquatic  tortoises,  and  of  numerous  oceanic  birds, 
in  which  the  toes  are  united  by  a  common 
skin.  In  the  paddle  the  leg  and  toes  together 
form  the  natatory  organ;  in  the  palmated,  or 
lobed  foot,  the  toes.  Thus  from  fins  we  seem  to 
have  arrived  at  digitated  legs. 

Wings. — ^Turning  from  the  denser  medium  of 
water,  we  must  next  inquire  what  organs  have 
been  given  to  animals  by  their  Creator  to  enable 
them  to  traverse  the  rarer  medium  of  air,  to  have 
their  hold  upon  what  to  the  sight  appears  a  non- 
entity, and  to  withstand  the  fluctuating  waves  of 
the  atmospheric  sea,  and  the  rush  of  the  fierce 
winds  which  occasionally  sweep  through  space 
over  the  earth.     The  name  of  wings  has  by  ge- 
neral consent  been  given,  not  only  to  the  fea- 
thered arm  of  the  bird^  but  also  to  those  filmy 
organs  extended,  and  often  reticulated,  by  bony 
vessels — the  longitudinal  ones  in  some  degree 
analogous  to  the  rays  of  the  fins  of  the  fishes, 
especially  of  the  flying  fishes — which  so  beauti- 
fully distinguish  the  insect  races ;  as  well  as  to 
the  rib-supported  membrane  forming  the  flying 

1  See  Philos.  Trans.  1816.  /.  xvi.  and  1819.  ^  xv. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  145 

oigans  of  the  dragon;  and  those  hand-wings 
by  which  the  bats  with  so  much  tact  and  such 
nice  perception  steer  without  the  aid  of  their 
eyes  through  the  shrubs,  and  between  the 
branches  of  trees ;  those  also  of  other  mammi- 
ferous  animals,  such  as  the  flying  squirrel  and 
flging  opossum  use  in  their  leaps  from  tree  to 
tree. 

Savigny  is  of  opinion  that  certain  dorsal 
scales,  in  pairs,  observable  in  two  of  the  genera^ 
of  bis  first  family  of  Nereideans,^  are  analogous 
to  the  elytra  and  wings  of  insects :  this  he  infers 
from  characters  connected  with  their  insertion, 
dorsal  position,  substance  and  structure,  but  not 
with  their  uses  and  functions;  for,  as  he  also 
states,  they  are  evidently  a  species  of  vesicle, 
communicating  by  a  pedicle  with  the  interior  of 
the  body,  which,  in  the  laying  season,  is  filled 
with  ^gs,^  a  circumstance  in  which  they  agree 
with  the  e^-pouches  of  the  Entomostracans ; 
and  therefore  Baron  Cuvier's  opinion,  that  there 
is  little  foundation  for  the  application  of  this 
term  to  these  organs^  seems  to  me  correct. 

Wings  may  be  divided  into  organs  oi  flight 
and  organs  of  suspension.  The  first  are  found  in 
insects^  in  which  they  are  distinct  from  the  legs ; 

^  Halithea  and  Polynoe.     See  Aphrodita  Clava.    Montague 
in  Lxjm.  Trans,  ix.  108,  L  vii./.  3. 
*  Aphr&ditcB.  ^  Syst.  d€sAnneL27. 

^  Regn.  Anim,  iii.  206. 

VOL.  II.  *  L 


140  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

in  birdsy  in  which  the  anterior  leg  of  quadrupeds 
becomes  a  wing ;  and  in  bats  and  vampyres,  in 
which  both  the  anterior  and  posta*ior  legs  sup* 
port  the  wing. 

The  second  kind  of  wings  is  found  in  the 
flying  catj  the  flying  squirrel^  and  the  flying 
cpassum;  and,  under  a  different  form,  in  the 
flying  dragon  of  modem  zoologists. 

Hie  wings  of  insects  differ  materially  from 
those  of  birds,  and  of  certain  Mammalians :  for 
instance,  the  bats  and  vampyres,  since  in  them 
they  are  not  formed  by  skin  or  membrane,  at- 
tached to  the  fore  leg,  or  both  legs,  but  are 
distinct  organs  implanted  in  the  trunk,  usimlly 
leaving  the  animal  its  classical  number  of  legs, 
for  its  locomotions  on  terra  firma.  These  organs 
are  composed  of  two  membranes,  closely  ap- 
plied to  each  other,  and  attached  to  elastic 
nervures  issuing  from  the  trunk,  and  accompanied 
by  a  spiral  trachea  or  air-vessel.  These  nervures 
vary  in  their  number  and  distribution :  in  some 
insects  the  wing  has  none  except  that  which 
forms  its  anterior  margin,"  and  in  others  die 
whole  wing  is  reticulated  by  them  ;*  the  Icmgi- 
tudinal  ones  often  give  an  inequality  to  the  sur- 
face, and  form  it  into  folds,  which  probably,  in 
flight,  it  can  relax  or  contract  according  to  cir- 


^  PsiluSy  &c.    See  ^mnt' Hymenopt.  t,  v.  and  xiii.  G.  48. 
2  Libellulinet, 


PREHEN80RY  ORGANS.  147 

cumstances.  In  some  genera'  the  wing  is  folded 
Icmgitudinally  in  repose,  and  in  others  also  trans- 
versely.* Id  the  higher  animals  the  wings  never 
exceed  a  single  pair ;  bat  in  insects  the  typical 
number  is  four;  and  though  some  are  called 
Dipterous^  or  two-winged,  yet  even  a  large  pro- 
portion of  these  have,  in  the  winglets/  the  rudi- 
ment of  another  pair.  The  anterior  pair,  called 
elytra,  &c.  in  the  beetles,  and  some  others,  are 
principally  useful  to  cover  and  protect  the  wings 
when  unemployed,  still  they  produce  some  effect 
in  flight,  and  they  partake  in  a  reduced  degree 
of  the  motion  of  the  wings,  those  of  the  cock- 
chaSBer^  describing  an  arc  equal  to  only  a  fourth 
part  of  that  of  the  latter  organs. 

M.  Jurine,  in  which  he  is  followed  by  M. 
Chabrier,  has  regarded  the  primary  wing  of  in- 
sects  as  analogous  to  the  wing  of  birds ;  but 
though  this  may  hold  good  in  some  respects,  it 
does  not  in  its  main  feature.  If  we  consider 
that  the  wing  of  birds  is  really  the  analogue  of 
the  fore-leg  of  quadrupeds,  and  replaces  it ;  and 
also  that  insects  have  a  representative  of  that 
leg  fixed  to  the  anterior  segment  of  the  trunk, 
thence  called  the  Manitrunk^  in  contradistinction 
to  the  AUtf-unk,  which  bears  the  wings ;  it  seems 
not  probable  that  the  anterior  leg,  and  the  ante- 
rior wing  which  belong  to   different  segments, 

1   Ve^pida.  *  Coleoptera. 

3  AlulcB,  ♦  Melolontha  vulgaris. 


148  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

should  be  analogues  of  the  same  organ.  The 
first  pair  of  wings,  or  their  representatives,  the 
elytra,  are  connected  with  the  hip-joint/  by  an 
intermediate  piece  called  the  scapular;'  and  the 
posterior  wings  are  connected  with  the  same 
joint  of  the  posterior  legs  by  the  parapleural^  bo 
that,  in  some  sort,  the  wings  of  insects  may  be 
regarded  as  appendages, — not  of  the  fore-legSt 
or  arms,  which  are  the  real  analogues  of  the 
fore-leg  of  quadrupeds,  and  wing  of  birds, — ^but 
the  first  pair  of  the  mid-legs,  and  the  second  of 
the  hind-legs. 

Some  winged  insects,  especially  the  dragon- 
flies,  like  the  crabs  and  spiders,  can  retrograde 
in  their  flight,  and  also  move  laterally,  without 
turning ;  thus  they  can  more  readily  pursue  their 
prey,  or  escape  from  their  enemies.  The  situa- 
tion of  their  wings  is  usually  so  regulated  in  the 
majority  with  respect  to  their  centre  of  gravity, 
as  to  enable  them  to  maintain  nearly  a  horizontal 
position  in  flight;  but  in  some,  as  the  stag- 
beetles,^  the  elytra  and  wings  have  their  attach- 
ment in  advance  of  that  point,  so  that  the  head, 
prothorax,  and  mandibles  do  not  fully  counter- 
poise the  weight  of  the  posterior  part  of  their 
body,  occasioning  this  animal  to  assume  a  nearly 
vertical  position  when  on  the  wing. 

The  apparatus  and  conditions  of  flight  in  birds 

1  Coxa,     See  Introd.  to  Ent.  iii.  661. 

s  Scapulare.  Ibid.  561.        ^  Ibid,  575.         ^  Lucanus. 


PREH£NSORY  ORGANS.  149 

and  insects  are  very  different,  varying  according 
to  the  functions  and  structure  of  the  animal. 
In  birds  a  longer  and  more  acute  anterior  ex- 
tremity distinguishes  the  \¥ing»  by  which  their 
Creator  enables  them  to  pass  with  more  ease 
through  the  air ;  but  in  insects  that  extremity 
is  not  a  trenchant  point  that  can  win  its  own 
way,  but  usually  is  very  blunt,  opposing  either 
the  portion  of  a  circle,  or  a  very  obtuse  angle  to 
it ;  hence  perhaps  it  is  that  the  common  dung- 
beetle,^  which  is  a  short  obtuse  animal,  '^  wheels 
its  droning  flight"  in  a  zig-zag  line,  like  a 
vessel  steering  against  the  wind,  and  thus  it 
flies,  as  every  one  knows,  with  great  velocity  as 
well  as  noise.  This  also  may  be  one  reason 
why  insects  have  usually  a  greater  volume  of 
wing  than  birds,  and  that  a  very  large  number 
are  fitted  and  adorned  with  four  of  these  organs, 
which  can  sometimes  hook  to  each  other,  by 
a  beautiful  contrivance,'  and  so  form  a  single 
ample  van  to  sail  on  the  aerial  waves,  and  bear 
forward  the  blufi*-headed  vessel.  The  motions, 
in  the  air,  of  numerous  insects  are  an  alternate 
rising  and  falling,  or  a  zig-zag  onward  flight,  in 
a  direction  up  and  down,  as  all  know  who  have 
observed  the  flight  of  a  butterfly,  or  a  kind  of 
hovering  in  the  air,  or  a  progress  from  flower  to 
flower,  or  backwards  and  forwards  and  every  way 

'  Geotrupes  stercararius,  &c.       <  Mon.  Ap,  AngL  u  108, 


150  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

in  pursuit  of  prey, — how  admirably  has  their 
Creator  furnished  them  to  accomplish  all  these 
motions  with  the  greatest  facility  and  grace. 
And  though  their  wings  are  usually  naked,  with- 
out any  representative  of  those  plumes  which  so 
ornament  the  wings  of  birds,  and  give  them  as  it 
were  more  prise  upon  the  air,  yet  in  one  numer- 
ous tribe,^  the  moths  and  butterflies,  they  rival 
the  birds,  and  even  exceed  them,  both  in  the 
brilliancy  of  the  little  plumes,  or  rather  scales, 
which  clothe  the  wings,  and  the  variety  of  the 
pattern  figured  upon  them,  and  likewise  of  their 
forms  and  arrangement.  So  that  every  one,  who 
minutely  examines  them  in  this  respect  with  an 
unbiassed  mind,  can  hardly  help  exclaiming,— 
I  trace  the  hand  and  pencil  of  an  Almighty 
Artist,  and  of  one  whose  understanding  is  infi- 
nite, and  who  is  in  himself  the  architype  of  all 
symmetry,  beauty,  and  grace  ! 

The  wings  of  a  variety  of  insects,  though  few, 
save  the  Lepidopteraf  are  ornamented  with  scales, 
are  planted  with  little  bristles^  more  or  leas 
numerous  or  dispersed ;  these  Chabrier  thinks, 
as  well  as  the  scales  now  alluded  to,  amongst 
other  uses,  are  means  of  fixing  the  air  in  flight, 
as  well  as  augmenting  the  surfaces,  and  pdlnts  of 
arrest,  in  each  wing.*  They  also  strengthen  the 
wing  and  add  to  its  weight,  and  doubtless  hai^e 

*  Lepidoptera.  •  Sur  le  Vol  des  Ins*  24. 


PR£Ii£N80RY  ORGANS.  Ie51 

Other  uses  not  m  easily  ascertaiDed.  Hair,  in 
scripture,  is  denominated  power,  and  probably 
those  fluids,  which  we  can  neither  weigh  nor 
coerce,  find  their  passage  into  the  body  of  the 
animal,  or  out  of  it,  by  these  little  conductors ; 
and  thus  the  various  piligerous,  plumigerous, 
pennigerous,  and  squamigerous  animals,  may 
oflfer  points  and  paths  not  only  to  the  air,  but 
to  more  subtile  fluids,  either  going  or  coming, 
whose  influences  introduced  into  the  system, 
may  add  a  momentum  to  all  the  animal  forces, 
or,  which  having  executed  their  commission  and 
become  neutralized,  may  thus  pass  ofi^  into  the 
atmosphere. 

But  of  all  the  winged  animals  which  God  has 
created  and  given  it  in  charge  to  traverse  the 
atmosphere,  there  is  none  comparable  to  the 
great  and  interesting  Class  of  birds,  which  emu- 
lating the  insects  on  one  side  by  their  diminutive 
size  and  dazzling  splendours,  on  the  other  vie 
with  some  of  the  Mammalians  in  magnitude  and 
other  characters*  Here  we  have  the  humming- 
birds of  America,  scarcely  bigger  than  the 
humble-bee;  and  there  the  savage  condour  of 
the  same  country,  whose  outstretched  wings 
would  serve  to  measure  the  length  of  the  giant 
elephant  or  rhinoceros.  Though  we  cannot 
iQount  into  the  air  ourselves,  yet  every  one,  from 
the  peasant  to  the  prince,  that  is  able  to  follow 
the  flight  of  the  birds  with  his  eyes,  is  delighted 


152  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

with  the  spectacle  of  life  that  they  exhibit  in  the 
aerial  regions,  and  we  should  scarcely  miss  the 
beasts  of  the  earth  and  all  the  creatures  that  are 
moving  in  all  directions  and  paces  over  its 
surface,  than  we  should  the  disappearance  of  the 
birds  of  every  wing  from  the  atmosphere.  And 
therefore  the  prophet  in  his  sublime  description 
of  the  desolation  of  Judah,  makes  the  disap- 
pearance of  the  birds  of  heaven  the  most 
striking  feature  of  his  picture.  /  beheld  the 
earthy  says  he,  aitd  /o,  it  was  without  form  and 
void :  and  the  heavens,  and  they  had  no  light ; 
I  beheld  the  tnountains^  and  loy  they  trembled^  and 
all  the  hills  moved  lightly.  I  belidd,  and  lo^  there 
was  no  man,  and  all  the  birds  of  the  heavens  were 
fled} 

The  wing  of  these  animals,  in  many  cases,  so 
powerful  to  bear  them  on  through  the  thin  air, 
and  counteract  the  gravity  of  their  bodies ;  to 
take  strong  hold  of  that  element  which  man 
cannot  subdue  like  water,  to  move  through  him"' 
self,  and  so  to  push  themselves  on,  often  with  the 
swiftness  of  an  arrow,  through  its  rushing  winds 
or  almost  motionless  breath :  the  wing  of  birds 
is  in  fact  the  foreleg  or  arm  adapted  and  clothed 
by  Supreme  Intelligence,  for  the  action  it  has 
to  maintain,  and  for  the  medium  in  which  that 
action  is  to  take  place,  and  concosts  of  nearly 

*  Jerem.  iv.  23 — 25, 


PRBHENSORY  ORGANS.  153 

the  same  parts  as  the  fore-leg  in  MammaliaDS,  for 
there  is  the  shoulder,^  fore-arm,^  and  the  hand»^ 
with  the  analogue  of  a  thumb,  called  the  wing- 
let,^  and  of  a  finger.^  The  ten  primary  quill 
feathers  are  planted  in  the  hand,  and  the  secon- 
daries j  varying  in  number,  on  the  fore-arm, 
these  quill-feathers,  being  very  principal  instru^ 
ments  of  the  wing  in  flight,  are  also  named  the 
remiges  or  rowers  of  the  vesseL  The  primary 
feathers  usually  vary  in  length,  the  external 
ones  being  the  longest,  so  as  to  cause  the  wing 
to  terminate  in  a  point;  those  that  cover  the 
shoulder  are  called  scapulars;  and  those  short 
ones  that  cover  the  base  of  the  wings  above  and 
below  are  called  coverts.^  Wings  usually  curve 
somewhat  inwards,  are  convex  above  and  con- 
cave below,  and  are  acted  upon  by  very  power- 
ful muscles.  Wonderful  is  the  structure  of  the 
feathars  that  compose  them,  and  each  is  a 
master-piece  of  the  Divine  Artificer.  In  general 
it  is  evident  that  each  has  been  measured  and 
wdghed  with  reference  to  its  station  and  func- 
tion«  Every  separate  feather  resembles  the 
Upinnate  leaves  of  a  plant ;  besides  the  obvious 
parts,  the  hollow  quill,  and  solid  stem  bearded 
obliquely  on  both  sides  with  an  infinity  of  little 
jAumes ;  each  of  these  latter  is  also  formed  with 

'  Humerus.  *  Cubitus. 

3  Carpus  and  Metacarpus.  ^  Alula. 

*  Digitus.  ^  Tectrices. 


154  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

a  rachis  or  mid-rib  set  obliquely  with  plumelets, 
resembling  hairs»  and  exactly  incumbent  on  the 
preceding  one,  and  adhering,  by  their  means, 
closely  to  it,  thus  rendering  the  whole  feather 
not  only  very  light,  but,  as  it  were,  air-tight.  In 
the  goose,  the  mid-rib  of  the  plumelets  of  the 
primary  feathers  is  dilated  towards  the  base  into 
a  kind  of  keel,  so  that  each  plumelet  at  the 
summit  looks  like  a  feather,  and  at  the  base  like 
a  lamina  or  blade. 

By  the  use  of  very  fine  microscopes  of  garnet 
and  sapphire  Sir  David  Brewster  succeeded  in 
developing  the  structure  of  the  plumelets;  he 
discovered  a  singular  spring  consisting  of  a 
number  of  slender  fibres  laid  together,  which 
resisted  the  division  or  separation  of  the  minute 
parts  of  the  feather,  and  closed  themselves 
together  when  their  separation  had  been  forcibly 
effected.^ 

If  we  examine  the  whole  wing,  and  the  dis- 
position and  connection  of  the  feathers  that 
compose  it,  we  shall  find  that  one  great  object 
of  its  structure  is  to  render  it  impervious  to  the 
air,  so  that  it  may  take  most  efiectual  hold  of  it, 
and  by  pushing,  as  it  were,  against  it,  with  the 
wing,  when  the  wing-stroke  is  downwards,  to 
force  the  body  forwards.  A  person  expert  in 
swimming  or  rowing,  may  easily  get  an  idea 

»  Lit.  Gazette,  Oct.  11,  1834,  690. 


PR£HEN80RY  ORGANS.  155 

how  this  is  effected,  hy  observing  how  the  pies* 
sure  of  his  anus  and  legs,  or  of  his  oars,  against 
the  denser  medium,  though  not  in  the  same 
direction,  carries  him,  or  his  boat,  forwards.  In 
the  case  of  the  bird,  the  motion  is  not  back- 
wards and  forwards,  but  upwards  and  down- 
wards, which  difference,  perhaps,  is  rendered 
necessary  by  the  rarer  medium  in  which  the 
motion  takes  place. 

To  facilitate  the  progress  of  the  bird  through 
the  air,  the  head  usually  fonns  a  trenchant  point, 
that,  easily  divides  it  and  overcomes  its  resis- 
tance ;  and  often  to  this  is  added  a  long  neck, 
which,  in  the  case  of  many  sea-birds,  as  wild 
geese  and  ducks,  is  stretched  to  its  full  length 
in  flight;  while  in  others,  where  centre  of 
gravity  requires  it,  as  in  the  heron, ^  bittern,' 
&c.,  it  is  bent  back. 

The  swiftness  of  the  flight  of  some  birds  is 
wonderful,  being  four  or  five  times  greater  than 
that  of  the  swiftest  quadruped.  Directed  by  an 
astonishing  acuteness  of  sight,  the  aquiline  tribes, 
when  soaring  in  the  air  beyond  human  ken,  can 
see  a  little  bird  or  newt  on  the  ground  or  on  a 
rock,  and  dart  upon  it  in  an  instant,  like  a  flash 
of  lightning,  giving  it  no  time  for  escape.  But 
though  some  birds  are  of  such  pernicious  wing, 
thcane  are  others  of  the  most  gigantic  size,  for 

*  Ardea  cinerea.  *  A.  sUllaris. 


156  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

instance  the  ostHch^^  emu^  &c.  that  have  only 
rudiments  of  wings,  and  which  never  fly,  and  for 
their  locomotions  depend  chiefly  upon  their  l^^ 
to  which  the  muscles  of  power  are  given,  instead 
of  to  the  wings. 

Amongst  the  terrestrial  animals  that  give  suck 
to  their  young,  there  is  a  single  Family  which 
the  Creator  has  gifted  with  organs  of  excur-» 
sive  flight,  and  these  afibrd  the  only  example  of 
the  third  kind  of  those  organs  mentioned  above. 
These  cannot,  like  insects  and  birds,  traverse  the 
earth  upon  legs^  as  well  as  flit  through  the  air 
upon  wings;  for  the  analogues  of  the  legs  of 
quadrupeds,  not  solely  of  the  anterior  pair,  as  in 
birds,  but  of  both  pairs,  form  the  bony  structure 
by  which  the  wing  is  extended  and  moved,  and 
to  which  it  is  attached.  It  will  be  immediately 
seen  that  I  am  speaking  of  the  hats  and  vam- 
pyres.  These  animals,  which  form  the  first 
Family  of  Cuvier's  Order  of  Carnivorous  Mam- 
malians,^ are  denominated  Cheiropteruy  or  hand* 
winged,  because  in  them  the  four  fingers  of  the 
hand,  the  thumb  being  left  free,  are  very  much 
elongated  so  as  to  form  the  supports  and  ex- 
tensors of  the  anterior  portion  of  the  membrane 
of  which  the  wing  is  formed  ;  while  the  hind  1^ 
and  the  tail,  in  most,  perform  the  same  office  for 
the  posterior  portion  of  the  wing :  so  that  two 

1  Struthio.  <  Casuarius.  ^  Les  Camassien* 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  157 

wings  appear  to  be  united  to  form  one  ample 
organ  of  flight.  The  membrane  itself,  which 
forms  the  wing,  is  only  a  continuation  of  the 
skin  of  the  flanks :  as  in  the  wings  of  insects,  it 
is  double,  very  fine,  and  so  thin  as  to  be  semi- 
transparent;  it  is  traversed  by  some  blood* 
ressels,  and  muscular  fibres — doubtless  accom-- 
panied  by  nerves — which  when  the  wings  are 
folded  form  little  cavities  placed  in  rows,  re-* 
sembling  the  meshes  of  a  net.  As  bats  are  not 
provided  with  air-cells,  or  air  in  their  bones,  like 
birds,  and  their  flight  is  unassisted  by  feathers, 
these  wants  are  compensated  to  them  by  wings 
four  or  five  times  the  length  of  their  body* 
Their  flight  is  of  a  difierent  character  from  that 
of  birds,  resembling  rather  the  flitting  of  a 
butterfly;  when  we  consider  that  the  peculiar 
function  of  bats  is  to  keep  within  due  limits  the 
numbers  of  crepuscular  and  nocturnal  insects, 
especially  moths,  we  see  how  necessary  it  was 
that  they  should  be  enabled  to  traverse  every 
spot  frequented  by  the  objects  their  instinct 
urges  them  to  pursue  and  devour.  For  this 
piu^ose  their  wings  are  admirably  adapted  not 
only  by  their  volume,  but  by  their  power  of  con- 
tracting them,  and  giving  them  various  inflections 
in  flight,  so  that  their  speed  is  regulated  by  the 
object  they  are  pursuing. 

When  we  further  reflect  that  their  eyes  are 
small  and  deep-seated,  we  may  conjecture  that 


158  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

it  requires  extraordinary  tact  and  delicacy  of 
sensation  in  some  other  oi^ns  to  supply  this 
defect  in  its  sight.  Spallanzani  found  that 
blind  bats  fly  its  well  as  those  that  have  eyes ; 
that  they  avoided  most  expertly  threads  of  fine 
silk  which  he  had  so  stretched  as  just  to  leave 
room  for  them  to  pass  between  them ;  that  they 
contracted,  at  will,  their  wings,  if  the  threads 
were  near,  so  as  to  avoid  touching  them ;  as  well 
as  when  they  passed  between  the  branches  of 
trees;  and  also  that  they  could  suspend  them- 
selves in  dark  places,  such  as  vaults,  to  the  pro- 
minent angles.  He  deprived  the  same  indi- 
viduals of  other  organs  of  sensation,  but  they 
ware  equally  adroit  in  their  flight,  so  that  be 
concluded  they  must  have  some  sensiferous 
organs  diflerent  from  those  of  other  dnimals  to 
liable  them  to  thread  the  labyrinths  through 
which  they  ordinarily  pass. 

Dr.  Grant  observes  on  this  subject — *^Bats 
are  nocturnal,  but,  contrary  to  what  is  generally 
the  case  with  nocturnal  animals,  their  eyes  are 
minute  and  feeble,  and  indeed,  comparatively 
speaking,  of  minor  importance,  for  so  exquisite 
is  the  sense  of  feeling  diflused  over  the  surface 
of  their  membranous  wings,  that  they  are  aUe 
to  feel  any  vibration  of  air  however  imperceptible 
by  us;  they  can  tell,  by  the  slight  rebound  of 
the  air,  whether  they  are  flying  near  any  wall, 
or  opposing  body,  or  in  free  space  though  their 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  159 

eyes  be  sealed  or  removed."^  A  similar  obser- 
vation was  long  ago  made  by  Mr.  Bingley.^ 

We  see  in  the  circumstances  here  detailed  a 
remarkable  instance  of  the  Pow#;  Wisdom,  and 
Goodness  of  the  Creator,  in  compensating  for  the 
absence  or  imperfection  of  one  or  more  senses, 
by  adding  to  the  intensity  of  another,  and  in 
establishing  its  principal  seat  in  organs  so  nicely 
adapted  to  derive  most  profit  by  the  information 
conununicated. 

An  animal  nearly  related  to  the  vampyres,  the 
cat-ape^*  commonly  called  the  flying  cat,  and 
by  some  the  flying  dog,  though  nearly  related  to 
the  bate,  and  included  by  Cuvier  in  the  same 
Family,  difiers  essentially  from  them,  in  being 
furnished  with  organs  formed  by  the  skin  of  the 
flanks  connected  with  the  legs  of  each  extremity, 
which  are  calculated  for  mspension  rather  than 
flight,  being  used,  as  Cuvi^  remarks,  merely  as 
a  parachute^  and  thus  belong  to  the  second  kind 
of  wings,  mentioned  above.  This  animal,  which 
climbs  like  a  cat,  vaults  from  one  tree  to  another, 
by  the  aid  of  the  above  skin,  which  supports  it 
ia  the  air.  The  petaurisls^*  or  flying  squirrels, 
and  the  phalangists^^  or  flying  opossums  are 
similariy  equipped,  and  for  a  similar  purpose. 

1  Quoted  in  LU,  Gaz.  Feb.  9,  1834. 

«  Man.  of  Brit,  Qtuid.  34.  ^  Galeopithecus. 

♦  Petaurus,  *  Phalangista^ 


160  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

The  common  squirrel^^  using  its  tail  as  a  rudder, 
leaps  with  great  agility  from  tree  to  tree,  without 
the  aid  of  this  kind  of  parachute,  the  force  of 
its  spring  being  sufficient  to  counteract  that  of 
gravity.  Providence  has  evidently  added  an 
organ  of  suspension,  in  the  case  of  the  three 
former  animals,  either  because  their  vaults  were 
necessarily  longer,  or  because  the  greater  weight 
of  their  bodies  required  it. 

The  dreaded  name  of  dragon^  attached  to  the 
monsters  of  fable,  has  excited  in  our  imagination 
ideas  of  beings  clothed  with  unwonted  terrors, 
from  our  earliest  years,  so  that  when  we  find  the 
only  animal  that  inherits  their  name  is  an  insig- 
nificant lizard^  not  more  than  eight  inches 
long,  we  are  tempted  to  exclaim,  Parturitmt 
monies.  This  little  animal,  under  the  name  of 
wings,  is  furnished  with  two  dorsal  appendages 
independent  of  the  legs,  formed  of  the  skin,  and 
actually  supported  by  the  six  first  short  ribs, 
which,  instead  of  taking  their  usual  curvature, 
are  extended  in  a  right  line.  These  organs  are 
not  used  to  fly  with,  but  to  support  the  animal 
in  its  leaps  from  branch  to  branch,  and  from 
tree  to  tree. 

We  see  in  this  instance,  how  exactly  the 
means  are  adapted  to  the  end  proposed.  This 
animal  walks  with  difficulty,  and  consequently 


1  . 


Sciurus  vulgaris. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  161 

seldom  descends  from  the 'trees.  It  is  there- 
fore ^labled  to  move  from  one  part  of  a  tree  to 
another,  not  by  its  legs,  but  by  an  organ  formed 
out  of  its  rihs!  How  various  and  singular,  in 
this  instance,  as  well  as  in  that  of  serpents, 
before  alluded  to,^  are  the  means  adopted  by  a 
Being,  who  is  never  at  a  loss  to  answer  the  fore- 
seen call  of  circumstances  by  wise  expedients. 

Steering  Organs.^ — But  wings  are  not  the  only 
organs  of  flight  with  which  the  Creator  has  fitted 
those  animals,  to  which  he  has  assigned  the  air 
as  the  theatre  of  their  most  striking  and  interest- 
ing locomotions.  They  would  be  like  a  ship  at 
sea  without  a  rudder^  and  be  altogether  at  the 
mercy  of  every  wind  of  heaven,  had  they  no 
means  to  enable  them  to  steer  their  vessel  through 
the  fluctuations  of  the  viewless  element  assigned 
to  them.  The  eagle  and  the  vulture  would  be 
gifted  in  vain  with  the  faculty  of  seeing  objects 
at  a  great  distance,  had  they  no  other  organ 
than  their  sail-broad  vans  to  direct  them  in  their 
flight.  The  same  remark  will  apply  as  well  to 
die  insect  as  to  the  bird,  which  would  in  vain 
endeavour  to  discharge  its  functions,  unless  it 
could  steer  its  course  according  to  the  direction 
of  its  will  and  the  information  furnished  by  its 
senses.    But,  upon  examination,  we  shall  find 

*  See  above,  p.  130.  •  Guhemacula, 

VOL.  II.  M 


162  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

that  God  hath  not  left  himself  without  witness 
in  this  department,  but  hath  furnished  every  bird 
and  insect  with  such  an  organ  of  steerage  as  the 
case  of  each  required ;  nay,  even  amongst  the 
beasts  and  the  reptiles  we  may  discover  similar 
means  of  directing  their  motions,  especially  when 
they  leap,  whether  from  the  ground,  or  from 
tree  to  tree. 

The  caudal  fin^  or  tail  of  fishes,  may  be 
regarded  as  belonging  in  some  degree  to  this 
head ;  but  as  this  is  also  their  principal  organ 
of  locomotion,  I  thought  it  best  to  consider  it 
with  the  other  fins. 

The  abdomen  of  many  insects  seems  to  serve 
them  as  a  rudder,  being  composed  of  several 
inosculating  ring^  formed  each  of  a  dorsal  and 
ventral  segment;  it  is  capable  of  considerable 
flexion  in  almost  all  directions ;  it  can  be  ele* 
vated  or  depressed,  and  turned  to  either  side,  so 
that  it  seems,  in  a  great  degree,  calculated  to 
enable  insects  to  change  the  course  of  th^r 
flight  according  to  their  will.  But  besides  this 
important  organ — ^which  by  the  air  it  is  constantly 
inspiring  adds  force  also  to  the  internal  impulse, 
and  to  the  air-vessels  in  the  wings — ^insects  have 
other  auxiliaries  to  keep  them  in  their  right 
course.  Whoever  has  seen  any  grasshopper 
take  flight,  or  leap  from  the  ground,  wUl  find 
that  they  stretch  out  their  hind  legs,  and,  like 
certain  birds,  use  them  as  a  rudder.    The  tails 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  163 

also  of  the  day-flies^  seem  to  be  used  by  them  as 
a  kind  of  balancer  in  their  choral  dances  up 
and  down  in  the  sun's  declining  beam* 

But  the  most  interesting  and  beautiful  organ 
tm  steering  animals  in  the  air,  is  that  formed  by 
the  tail  feathers  of  birds,  called  by  ornithologists, 
reetrices^  or  governing  feathers,  because  they 
are  used  to  direct  their  course ;  these  are  feathers 
planted  in  the  rump,^  usually  twelve  in  number — 
but  in  some  amounting  to  nearly  twenty — con- 
stituting two  sets  of  feathers  of  six  each,  and 
forming  tc^ether  a  kind  of  fwk  like  the  caudal 
fin  of  some  fishes ;  the  inside  of  each  feather  is 
set  with  much  larger  plumelets  than  the  outside, 
so  that  there  is  a  double  series  of  corresponding 
feathers  beginning  one  on  the  right  side,  and 
the  other  on  the  left;  the  middle  feathers  in 
each  series  differ  sometimes  from  the  five  ex* 
tenor  ones,  being  more  acute,  and  wearing  a 
different  aspect.  In  flight  the  tail-feathers  ap<^ 
pear  to  be  expanded,  and  probably  the  bird,  by 
giving  an  impulse  to  either  series,  can  turn  this 
way  or  that ;  or  by  their  depression  or  elevation, 
judging  from  their  analogy  with  the  caudal  fin 
of  fishes,  rise  or  fall.  The  rudder-tail  here  de- 
scribed is  that  of  the  male  bull-finch ;'  in  many 
birds  of  the  Gallinaceous  Order,  as  the  common 
cock  and  peacock,  these  feathers  form  a  glorious 

*  Ephemera.  *  Uropygium,  *  Loxia  pyrrhula. 


164  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

ornament^  but  seem  to  lose  their  use  as  a  steer- 
ing apparatus.  In  the  black  game^  the  two  sets 
of  feathers  of  the  tail  turn  outwards,  one  on  each 
side,  and  so  form  a  fork ;  and,  in  our  domestic 
poultry,  these  sets  of  feathers,  when  not  ex- 
panded, fold  upon  each  other.  Some  of  the 
waders,^  the  tail-feathers  of  which  are  short,  use 
their  long  legs^  like  the  grasshoppers,  as  a 
rudder  in  flight,  stretched  out  straight  behind 
them. 

Many  of  the  web-footed  birds,^  as  the  goose 
and  duck  tribes,  also  have  these  feathers  very 
short,  which  seems  a  convenient  provision  for 
aquatic  birds,  but  whether  their  legs  assist  in 
directing  their  course  seems  not  to  have  been 
ascertained.  Some  of  them,  however,  as  the 
pin-tail  duck,^  have  the  middle  feathers  of  the 
tail  elongated,  as  they  are  in  many  other  birds ; 
in  the  swallow  tribe,*  and  the  sea-swallow,^  the 
external  feathers  of  the  tail  are  elongated,  as 
these  birds  are  frequently  turning  when  in  the 
air,  and  flying  backwards  and  forwards ;  their 
Creator  has  thus  equipped  them  for  their  ever 
changing  evolutions.  Some  birds,  as  the 
thrushes,^  magpies,®  and  other  crows,  have  all 
the  tail  feathers  long,  which  gives  great  power 
to  them  in  flight. 

*  Tetrao  Tetrix,  «  Grallatores.  »  Palmipedes. 

*  Atuu  acuta,  *  Hirundo.  .^  Sterna. 
'  Turdu9,                       8  Corvut  Pica. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  165 

The  taUs  of  quadrupeds,  both  oviparous  and 
viviparous,  appear,  in  many  cases,  to  act  in 
some  degree  as  a  rudder.  They  are  not  only 
useful  to  those  lately  mentioned,  that  by  the 
assistance  of  a  kind  of  parachute,  leap  from 
tree  to  tree ;  but  likewise  to  the  feline  race,  when 
they  spring  upon  their  prey;  the  tail  is  then 
extended  stiffly  in  a  right  line,  as  if  to  guide 
them  through  the  air  straight  to  the  object  they 
have  been  watching  from  their  lair.  The  long 
tail  also  of  many  lizards  may,  in  their  sinuous 
windings,  serve  some  purpose  connected  with 
their  locomotion  related  to  the  one  under  dis- 
cussion, though  we  have  not  data  sufficient  to 
speak  positively  on  the  subject. 

Legs^ — ^We  are  now  arrived  at  organs  that  are 
the  most  perfect  instruments  of  locomotion  and 
prehension,  organs  which  are  found  in  their 
greatest  perfection  in  the  highest  animals,  arti- 
culated legs  and  arms^  terminating  in  the  most 
perfect  instrument,  upon  the  due  employment  or 
misemployment  of  which  the  weal  or  woe  of  the 
whole  human  race,  as  far  as  second  causes  are 
concerned,  depend. 

The  legs  of  animals  may  be  considered  gene- 
rally as  to  their  number^  composition^  and  adap^ 
tation  to  their  functions. 

As  to  their  number ^  taking  the  legs  of  verte- 
brated  animals,  which  may  be  r^arded,  being  the 


166  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

most  perfect,  as  a  standard  to  measure  others  by, 
we  may  assume  that  four  is  the  most  perfect 
number.  Thus,  in  man,  the  highest  animal, 
there  are  two  for  locomotion,  and  two  principally 
for  prehension.  Taking,  therefore,  man  for  the 
ultimate  point  to  which  all  tend,  let  us  see  how, 
in  this  respect,  the  scale  is  formed. 

We  observed  in  certain  tribes  of  the  Anneli- 
dans,  an  approach  to  jointed  legs,  and  it  should 
seem  a  link,  connecting,  in  some  degree,  that 
Class  with  the  Myriapods;  with  these  last, 
therefore,  we  may  start  in  our  consideration  of 
articulated  locomotive  organs,  and  here  we  find 
a  long  body  moved  by  numerous  legs,  gradually 
acquired,  as  we  have  seen,  with  its  increasing 
length.  We  may  observe,  that  in  the  superior 
tribes  of  animals,  the  four  l^s  being  planted  in 
pairs  at  each  extremity  of  the  body,  the  gradual 
increase  of  stature  did  not  require  additional 
props,  but  only  the  proportionate  growth  of  the 
existing  or  natal  legs  and  arms ;  but  in  the  Myri- 
apods,  where  the  great  increase  of  the  body  in 
length  is  not  between  the  original  extremities, 
but  beyond  them,  additional  supports  were  requi- 
site, so  that  as  the  body  increased  in  length,  its 
Creator,  in  his  goodness  willed — that  it  might  not 
draw  its  slow  length  along  like  a  wounded  snake 
— that  it  should  be  furnished  at  the  same  time 
with  a  proportionate  increase  in  the  number  of 
its  locomotive  organs.  These  animals  then,  with 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  167 

reBpect  to  number  of  legs,  may  be  regarded  as 
at  the  foot  of  the  scale,  and  are  the  furthest 
removed  from  man. 

From  the  Myriapods,  we  go  to  the  great  Cms- 
taceoH  host,  in  which,  including  the  maxillary 
legs^  the  real  analogue  of  the  legs  of  Hexapods, 
the  typical  number  is  sixteen ;  and  from  these, 
the  transition  is  naturally  to  the  spiders^  which 
have  half  that  number,  and  from  them  to  the 
insect  tribes,  walking  only  upon  six  legs.  Having 
arrived  at  a  hexapod  type,  we  may  observe  that 
one  pair  of  the  legs  has  a  direction  towards  the 
head,  and  are  located  in  the  anterior  segment  of 
the  trunk;  and  that  the  other  two  pairs  have 
a  direction  the  contrary  way,  towards  the  ab- 
domen, and  are  located  in  that  part  of  the 
trunk  which  bears  the  wings,  and  of  these, 
the  last  pair  may  be  regarded  as  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  legs  in  man,  and  of  the  hind  legs 
of  quadrupeds. 

As  to  the  composition  of  legs,  if  we  take  the 
arm  and  leg  of  man  for  the  type  t)r  standard 
with  which  to  compare  all  the  articulated  organs 
of  locomotion  and  prehension  with  which  ani- 
mals are  gifted,  we  shall  find  a  considerable, 
though  not  an  entire,  correspondence  between 
them.  Anatomists  usually  divide  the  at-m^  or 
anterior  extremity,  into  four  principal  portions, 
namely,  the  shoulder-blade^^  the  slwvlder^^  the 

»  Scapula,  *  Humerus. 


168  LOCOMOllVfi  AND 

fwe-army  and  the  hand;*  but  the  leg  only  mto 
three — the  thigh^^  the  shank*  and  the  foot.* 
The  first  of  these,  however,  the  thigh,  inoscu- 
lates with  the  lower  part  of  a  bone,  called  the 
nameless  hone^  which  in  very  young  subjects 
forms  three,  named  the  hwmch^  the  share- 
bone^  and  the  hip-bone  :^  now  this  bone  ap- 
pears evidently  the  analogue  of  the  shoulder- 
blade  in  the  anterior  leg  or  arm,  and  thus,  ad- 
mitting this,  both  extremities  in  the  number  of 
principal  parts  correspond  with  each  other. 

As  the  vertebrated  animals,  for  the  most  part, 
agree  with  their  prototype  in  the  greater  articu- 
lations of  their  anterior  and  posterior  extremi- 
ties, though  much  modified  in  particular  in- 
stances and  for  particular  uses,  I  shall  now  only 
compare  the  legs  of  the  great  sub-kingdom  of 
Condylopes,  or  invertebrated  animals  with  jointed 
legs,  with  those  of  man,  and  other  Mammalians, 
and  inquire  how,  in  the  above  respect,  they  con- 
sist of  analogous  parts. 

The  remarkable  distinction  which  separates 
the  vertebrated  from  the  invertebrated  animals, 
namely,  that,  in  the  former,  the  muscles  have  no 
external  points  of  attachment ;  and,  in  the  latter, 

'  Cubitus,  including  two  parallel  bones,  the  Ulna  and  RcuHus. 
^  Manus,  '  Femur, 

*  Cms,  including  also  two  parallel  bones,  Tibia  and  Fibula. 

*  Pes.  ^  Os  innominatum,  ^  Os  ilium, 
^  Os  pubis.          d  Os  ischium. 


PREHEN80RY  ORGANS.  1 69 

with  a  few  partial  exceptions,  no  internal  ones — 
most  produce  a  marked  difference  in  all  parts  of 
their  several  structures,  and,  amongst  the  rest, 
between  their  organs  of  locomotion  and  prehen- 
sion :  and  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that 
they  will  be  perfectly  analogous  in  their  compo- 
sitioQ.    Thus  in  the  invertebrates  tbe  parts  cor- 
responding with  the  fore-arm  and  shank  of  the 
vertebrates  do  not  consist  of  two  parallel  bones ; 
the  hand  and  the  foot  also  are  essentially  dif- 
ferent; and  the  parts  by  which  the  extremities 
in  one  case  articulate  with  the  vertebral  column 
towards  its  summit  and  base,  and  in  the  other 
with  the  trunk  of  the  animal  at  various  points, 
are  usually  extremely    dissimilar:    in  several 
beetles,  however,  the  basilar  joints,  especially  of 
the  hind  legs,  assume  something  of  the  character 
and  form  of  the  shoulder-blade  of  Mammalians ; 
and  in  certain  water-beetles  ^  the  posterior  pair 
are  immoveietble.     In  quadrupeds,  usually,  the 
thighs   are    remarkably    clothed   with   muscle, 
especially  towards  their  base ;  but,  in  the  Covl- 
dylopes,  with  the  exception  of  some  beetles  and 
jumping   insects,  where  a  powerful    muscular 
apparatus  was  requisite,  they  are  not  conspicu- 
OQsly  incrassated,  so  as  to  contain  muscles  of 
great  volume. 
From  these  circumstances  I  am  induced  to 

*  Dytiscus,     L. 


1 70  LOCOM OTTVE  AND 

confine  my  observations  to  the  nummeal  com- 
position of  the  locomotive  and  prehensory  organs 
of  Condylopes,  and  animals  that  give  sack  to 
their  young. 

In  orda  to  perceive  clearly  how  far  they  agree 
or  disagree  in  this  respect,  it  will  be  adviseabk 
first  to  inquire  whether  these  organs  in  Condy- 
lopes  themselves  can  be  reduced  to  a  common 
type. 

The  Crustaceans  and  Arachnidans,  including 
under  the  latter  denomination  all  regarded  by 
Latreille  as  belonging  to  the  Class,  at  the  first 
inspection  of  the  organs  in  question,  appear  to 
have  one  joint  more  than  insects.  This  super- 
numerary  joint  is  thefourthf  in  The  Introduetm 
to  Entomology  named  the  Epicnemis^^  which  is 
there  regarded  as  an  accessory  of  the  shank. 
But  from  fiirther  observation,  and  from  a  compa- 
rison of  this  joint  of  the  Arachnidans  with  an 
analogous  one  in  the  Crustaceans,  in  which  it  is 
longer  and  more  conspicuous,  I  feel  convinoed 
that,  short  as  it  is  in  them,  it  is. really  the  dumk 
in  that  Class,  and  that  the  long  joint  usually  re- 
garded as  the  shank  is  analogous  to  the  first, 
often  dilated  and  elongated,^  joint  of  the  tarsofl 
in  insects.  That  this  joint  belongs  to  the  tarsus 
or  foot  will  be  further  evident  from  the  following 
circumstance.    If  we  examine  the  anterior  leg,  or 

'  Vol.  iii.  668. 

<  £.  G.     In  the  Bees  and  many  other  Hymenoptera. 


PREHEN80RY  ORGANS.  171 

aim,  of  the  lobster  or  crab^  we  shall  find  that  the 
joint  in  question,  which  is  the  fifth  of  the  leg,^ 
is  what  is  called  the  metacarpal  joint,  a  process 
of  which  forms  the  index  or  finger  of  the  didac- 
tyle  hand  or  forceps  of  these  animals,  and  the 
succeeding  and  terminal  joint  the  opposing 
thimb.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  this  joint 
belongs  not  to  the  shank  or  cubit,  but  to  the 
foot;  and  that  consequently  a  Crustacean  or 
Arachnidan  leg  or  arm  numerically  corresponds 
in  its  greater  articulations  with  that  of  an  insect. 
Haying  proved,  I  hope,  to  the  satisfSetction  of 
the  reader,  that  the  legs  of  Condylopes,  with 
legard  to  the  number  of  their  principal  articula- 
tions are  reducible  to  one  type, — ^unless  we  may 
except  some  of  the  Acartdans^  or  mites,  and  the 
Branchiopod  EntomostracoMSy  which  appear  re« 
ducible  to  no  general  rule — I  shall  next  endea- 
Tour  to  show  that  the  Condylope  leg  does  not 
usually  difier  numerically  fi*om  that  of  the  quad- 
mped  or  mammalian  ;  and  that  the  former  con- 
sists of  only  feur  principal  articulations  as  well 
as  the  latter,  and  it  will  not  require  many  words, 
or  any  laboured  disquisition,  to  prove  this.  The, 
10  called,  trochanter  is,  with  great  propriety,  con- 
sidered by  M.  Latreille  as  being  a  joint  of  the 
thigh,  as  it  really  is,  and  in  many  cases,  espe- 
cially in  Coleopterous  insects,  has  no  separate 

'  Plate  X.  Fig.  1. 


172  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

motion ;  consequently  if  this  opinion  be  ad- 
mitted, the  number  of  articulations,  both  in  the 
Condylopes  and  Mammalians,  will  be  the  same. 

Animals  that  are  built  upon  a  skeleton,  or  in- 
cased in  an  external  crust  or  rigid  integument^ 
in  order  to  have  the  power  of  free  locomotion 
and  prehension,  must  necessarily  be  fitted  with 
jointed  organs,  whose  articulations  are  more 
numerous  at  the  extremity,  where  the  principal 
action  is,  that  those  parts  may  so  apply  to  sur- 
faces as  to  enable  the  animal  to  take  sufficient 
hold  of  them  for  either  of  the  above  purposes. 

There  is  a  circumstance  connected  with  the 
legs  of  insects  which,  at  first  sight,  seems  to 
throw  some  doubt  upon  this  conclusion.  The 
shank  has  often  at  its  apex,  and  sometimes 
the  cubit,  certain  little  moveable  organs,  which 
have  been  called  spurs^  but  which  really  appear 
to  aid  the  animal  in  its  locomotions,^  and  in 
some  they  even  terminate  in  suckers  :*  as  these 
organs  are  co-ordinate  with  the  jointed  tarsus, 
they  seem  in  some  sort  a  kind  of  auxiliary  di- 
gitation.  In  the  mole-cricket  ^  the  structure  is 
still  more  anomalous,  the  cubit  terminating  in 
four  strong  digitations  or  claws,  opposed  to 
which  is  the,  so  called,  tarsus,  which  seems  ana- 
logous in  some  sort  to  a  jointed  thumb,  so  that 
the  whole  represents  a  pentadactyle  hand.    A 

*  Introd.  to  Ent,  iii.  674. 

«  PhiloB.  Trans.  1816,  t.  xix./.  8.  9.  »  Gryllotalpa. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  173 

sunilar  anomaly  distinguishes  the  posterior  pair 
of  legs  of  one  of  the  Entomostracans,  the  king- 
crab:  in  these,  besides  the  tarsus  armed  with 
two  claws»  there  are  four  moveable  digitations.^ 

Though  the  Creator  has  evidently  connected 
the  ^here  of  animals  by  some  organs  or  cha- 
racters common  to  the  whole,  and  generally 
speaking,  in  the  tribes  that  we  are  comparing, 
has  formed  the  organs  which  I  am  considering, 
as  to  their  articulations,  upon  a  common  type ; 
yet  occasionally  we  see  departures  from  a  strict 
adherence  to  the  likeness,  as  in  the  cases  here 
specified,  where  the  circumstances  and  functions 
of  an  animal  required  such  departure. 

Adaptation  of  Legs. — It  is  by  the  adaptation 
of  its  legs  to  the  circumstances  of  an  animal,  and 
to  the  functions  which  it  was  created  to  exercise, 
that  the  design  of  an  Intelligent  Cause  is  appa- 
rent, and  the  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of 
the  Creator  manifested. 

The  well  known  adage,  Natura  nan  facit 
saltuSf  is  exemplified  in  the  passage,  with  respect 
to  their  locomotive  organs,  from  the  expansile 
Annelidans  to  the  rigid  Condylopes ;  for  in  num- 
berless instances,  we  have  in  the  larvae  of  insects 
a  kind  of  intermediate  animal,  in  some  degree 
expansile,  some  of  which  move  like  the  leech,* 
and  others  are  apodes,  like  worms,  moving  by 

*  Savigny,  Anim.  sans  Vertebr.  i.  t.  viii.  f,  1 .  k. 
s  The  Geometric  caterpillars  or  loopers. 


174  LOCOUOTIVE  AND 

the  contortioDB  of  their  bodies,  a  large  proportion 
at  the  same  time  having  the  jointed  legs  of  their 
Class  when  arrived  at  perfection,  and  in  their 
spurious  legs  imitating,  in  some  sort,  the  locomo- 
tive organs  of  the  Annelidans. 

The  principal  offices  of  legs  are  to  enable  the 
animal  to  procure  the  kind  of  food  which  its 
nature  requires;  to  be  employed  in  operations 
connected  with  the  continuation  of  its  kind; 
and  to  be  instrumental  in  its  escape  from  danger 
and  from  the  pursuit  of  its  enemies ;  and  the 
means  by  which  these  ends  are  accomplished 
are  the  comparative  length  of  its  legs;  their 
volume^  either  in  whole  or  in  part ;  the  struc- 
ture of  their  extremity^  either  for  locomotion 
or  prehension ;  or  where  the  extremity  of  the 
legs  is  not  adapted  to  the  latter  function,  certain 
compensating  contrivances  calculated  to  supply 
that  want. 

To  enable  some  animals  to  come  at  their  food, 
sometimes  a  great  difference,  as  to  measure, 
between  their  anterior  and  posterior  extremities, 
is  necessary.  At  the  first  blush,  and  before  we 
were  acquainted  with  its  habits,  should  ve 
chance  to  meet  with  a  giraffe^^  so  striking  is  the 
seeming  disproportion  of  many  of  its  parts,  that 
we  should  be  tempted  to  take  it  for  an  abortion 
in  which  the  posterior  parts  were  not  fully  de- 

1  Camehpardalis  Giraffa. 


PREHKNSORY  ORGANS.  175 

reloped.  Observing  its  length  of  neck  and  ele* 
▼ated  withers,  the  apparently  unnatural  declivity 
of  its  back,  and  the  comparative  lowness  of  its 
hind  quarters^  we  should  conclude  that  such 
must  be  the  case.  But  if  we  proceeded  to  in* 
quire  into  the  nature  of  its  food,  and  were  told 
diat  it  subsisted  by  cropping  the  branches  of 
certain  trees  which  thus  it  was  enabled  to  reach, 
the  truth  would  flash  upon  us,  we  should  imme- 
diately perceive  the  correspondence  between  its 
structure  and  its  food,  and  acknowledge  the  de- 
sign  and  contrivance  of  a  benevolent  Creator  in 
this  formation. 

A  similar  idea  would  perhaps  occur  to  us  the 

first  time  we  saw  a  jerhoa^^  or  a  hanguroo.^ 

Hasselquist  says  of  the  former-*— that  it  might  be 

described  as  having  the  head  of  a  hare,  the 

whiskers  of  a  squirrel,  the  snout  of  a  hog,  the 

body,  ears,  and   fore-legs  of  a   mouse,  hind- 

1^^  like  those  of  a  bird,  with  the  tail  of  a 

lion  ;  and  an  ancient  zoologist  would  have  made 

a  monster  of  it  that  might  have  rivalled  the 

chimsra.    The  kanguroo  also  would  have  met 

with  a  similar  fate*    Though  the  jerboa  is  not  a 

marsupian  animal  like  the  kanguroo,  yet  they 

have  many  characters  in  common.    They  both 

have  very  slender  fore-quarters,  and  short  and 

dender  fore-legs;   their  hind-quarters,  on  the 

contrary,  are  remarkably  robust  and  incrassated, 

^  Dipus.  *  Macropus, 


176  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

and  they  sit  erect,  resting  upon  them  like  a  hare ; 
both  have  a  long  powerful  tail,  which  they  use 
as  a  fifth  leg.  The  object  of  this  formation,  at 
the  first  glance,  so  at  variance  with  all  ideas  of 
symmetry,  appears  to  be  a  swifter  change  of 
place,  and  more  ready  escape  from  annoyance 
or  violence.  The  jerboa  is  stated  to  take  very 
long  leaps,  and  those  of  the  kanguroo  are  said  to 
extend  from  twenty  to  twenty^ight  feet,  and 
they  rise  to  an  elevation  of  from  six  to  eight  feet. 
When  they  leap  they  keep  their  short  fore-leg 
pressed  close  to  their  breast,  and  their  long  and 
robust  tail,  having  first  assisted  them  in  their 
leap,  is  extended  in  a  right  line.  A  double  end 
is  answered  by  their  peculiar  structure ;  sitting 
on  their  haunches,  they  can  leisurely  look 
around  them,  and  if  they  spy  any  cause  of 
alarm  make  off  by  the  means  just  stated.  Their 
attenuated  fore-quarters  and  short  fore-legs  ren- 
dering it  much  more  easy  for  them,  overstepping 
every  obstacle,  to  dart  into  the  air ;  their  centre 
of  gravity  is  then  removed  nearer  the  hind 
quarters,  so  that  the  tail  can  act  as  a  counter- 
poise to  the  anterior  part  of  the  body. 

The  jerboa  also,  like  the  kanguroo,  when 
alarmed,  springs  into  the  air.  When  ready  to 
take  flight,  it  stands,  as  it  were,  on  tip-toe,  sup- 
porting itself  by  its  tail.  Its  fore-legs  are  then 
applied  so  closely  to  the  breast  as  to  be  in- 
visible, whence  the  ancients  called  it  Dipus^  or 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  177 

biped;*  having  taken  their  spring  they  alight 
upon  their  fore-feet,  and  elevating  themselves 
again,  they  are  off  so  rapidly,  that  they  seem 
to  be  always,  so  to  speak,  upon  the  wing. 
They  use  their  long  tail  to  support  themselves 
whea  they  recover  from  their  leaps,  giving  it  the 
curvature  of  the  letter  S  reversed,  thus,  c»  • 
When  their  tail  has  been  shortened  at  differient 
lengths,  it  has  been  found  that  their  leap  is 
diminished  in  the  same  proportion  ;  and  when 
it  was  wholly  cut  oflf  they  could  not  leap  at  all. 

We  see,  in  one  Order  of  the  Birds,^  the 
Waders,  a  remarkable  disproportion  of  the  legs 
to  those  of  the  rest  of  the  Class ;  they  look  as  if 
they  vFalked  upon  stilts,  whence  the  name  of  the 
Order,  so  disproportionally  long  are  their  legs  to 
those  of  the  generality  of  birds.  I  have  before 
noticed  the  use  of  these  legs  to  them  in  flying,^ 
but  the  principal  object  of  this  structure  is  to 
enable  them  to  prey  upon  aquatic  animals, 
fishes,  worms,  and  the  like.  Whoever  is  in  the 
habit  of  frequenting  estuaries,  and  other  waters, 
will  generally  see  some  of  these  birds,  as 
herons  and  bitterns,  standing  in  them,  where 

•  Herodot.  Melpom,  §  192.  Ed.  Reizii. 

'  It  is  to  be  observed  in  general,  with  respect  to  the  Class  of 
BirdSy  that  the  conspicuous  part  of  their  legs  is  not  the  shank, 
which  is  chiefly  covered  by  muscle  and  feathers,  but  is  formed 
of  the  tarsal  and  metatarsal  bones  united  into  one. 

•  Stee  above,  p.  164., 

VOL.  II.  N 


178  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

shallow,  and  ever  and  anon  dipping  their  heads, 
and  then  emei^ing  swallow  their  capture.  The 
design  of  this  structure  must  be  obvious  to  every 
eye,  namely,  to  qualify  these  birds  of  prey  to 
assist  in  keeping  within  due  limits  the  popula- 
tion of  the  various  waters  of  our  globe,  which 
other  predaceous  animals  cannot  come  at. 

Another  tribe  of  long  l^^d  birds,  which 
Cuvier  considers  as  belonging  to  the  present 
Order,  though  their  habits  and  habitat  are  al- 
together different,  and  which  constitute  his 
family  of  short-winged  wadere>*  is  that  to  which 
the  Ostrich*  and  Emu*  belong,  but  in  these  the 
object  of  this  structure  is  to  fit  them  not  for 
standing  in  the  water,  but  for  running  in  the 
sandy  desert ;  and  such  is  the  velocity  of  the 
ostrich  that  it  can  outstrip  the  fittest  Arabian 
courser  when  pursued. 

Other  birds  are  remarkable  for  the  shdrtness 
and  strength  of  their  legs ;  of  this  description 
are  the  aquiline  race,  which  are  thus  fitted  by 
their  Creator  for  seizing  and  holding  fast  any 
prey  which  their  piercing  sight  discovers. 

There  is  one,  and  a  very  elegant  bird,  belong- 
ing to  this  Order,  the  secretary-bird,*  the  legs 
of  which  are  so  long,  that  many  ornithologists 
have  arranged  it  with  the  waders.     It  is,  how- 


'  Echassiers  brevipennes,       ^  Struihio  Camelus. 

5  Casuarius  Emeu.  *  Ophiotkeres  aistaius,  Veill. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  179 

ever,  very  properly  placed  amongst  the  predace- 
ous  birds.  Its  long  legs  are  given  it  to  enable 
it  to  pursue  the  serpents,  which  form  its  food. 
We  see,  in  this  instance,  a  departure  fi*om  one 
of  the  typical  characters  of  its  own  tribe,  and 
those  of  another  adopted  in  order  to  accommo- 
date the  animal  to  the  circumstances  in  which 
it  was  the  Divine  will  to  place  it,  and  to  fit  it  for 
the  fimction  which  it  was  there  to  exercise. 

Amongst  the  Reptiles  there  is  little  diversity, 
as  to  the  relative  proportions  of  the  organs  we 
are  considering,  and  their  parts ;  in  the  Batra- 
thictnsj  or  frogs  and  toads,  which  are  mostly 
leaping  and  swimming  animals,  the  hind  legs 
are  elongated  to  accommodate  them  to  those 
kinds  of  locomotion ;  and  in  some  of  the  Sauri- 
ans  or  lizards,  which  are  approaching  to  the 
Ophidians  or  serpents,  the  legs  are  very  short,^ 
and  sometimes  reduced  to  a  single  pair ;  ^  even 
in  some  serpents  iiidiments  of  a  pair  of  legs  l^ave 
been  discovered,  particularly  in  the  Boa.* 

Some  insects  are  remarkable  for  the  vast 
length  of  their  anterior  pair  of  legs ;  what  may 
be  the  object  of  this  formation  has  not  been 
discovered  except  that,  in  one  instance,^  it  is 
found  only  in  one. sex.  The  animal  I  allude  to 
belongs  to  the  tribe  of  Capricorn  beetles,^  and 


*  £.  G.  in  Seps,        -  As  in  Bipes.       ^  ZooL  Journ,  iii.  253. 
^  Acrocinus  longimanus,  ^  -Cerambyx,     L. 


180  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

seems  not  to  be  uncommon ^  in  Brazil.  The  fore 
legs  of  the  male  are  more  than  twice  the  length 
of  the  body,  while  those  of  the  female,  though 
longer  than  the  others,  are  scarcely  half  so 
long. 

Many  insects  are  formed,  in  some  degree, 
after  the  pattern  of  the  kangaroo  and  the  jerboa, 
in  order  to  enable  them  to  transport  themselves 
by  leaping  beyond  the  reach  of  their  enemies. 
The  thighs  of  their  hind  legs  are  incrassated  so 
as  to  afford  a  box  capable  of  containing  muscles 
sufficiently  powerful,  by  their  action,  to  send 
them  through  the  air  to  an  almost  incredible 
distance.  If  we  examine  the  structure  of  the 
posterior  legs  of  any  common  grasshoppei\  we 
immediately  see,  both  from  the  position  of  the 
joints  with  respect  to  each  other,  and  the  shape 
and  volume  of  the  elongated  thigh,  that  they  are 
made  for  leaping.  The  shank,  when  the  animal 
prepares  to  leap,  forms  an  acute  angle  with  the 
thigh,  so  that  being  suddenly  unbent,  it  springs 
ibrward,  often  to  the  distance  of  two  hundred 
times  its  own  length.  Many  carriages  are  set 
upon  springs  made  to  imitate  the  position  of 
this  insect  preparing  to  leap,  which  are  known 
by  the  name  of  grasshopper  springs.^ 

Several  beetles  rival  the  grasshoppers  in  their 
leaps,   and  have  their  posterior   thighs  much 

^  See  Introduction  to  Entojnology  ^  ii.  310. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  181 

disproportioned  to  the  bulk  of  their  bodies, 
which  allow  space  for  a  sufficient  muscular  ap- 
paratus, to  send  them,  like  an  arrow  from  a  bow, 
to  a  great  distance.  If  a  finger  be  held  to  a  leaf 
covered  by  the  turnip  flea^  in  the  twinkling  of 
an  eye,  all  skip  off  and  vanish.  We  may  hence 
imagine  with  what  expedition  they  disappear  at 
the  approach  of  any  insectivorous  bird.  Thus 
their  Creator,  who  cares  for  the  meanest  of  his 
creatures,  has  furnished  them  with  means  of 
escape,  to  prevent  their  annihilation,  and  to 
preserve  them  in  such  force,  as  may  best  answer 
bis  end  in  creating  them. 

But  besides  partial  modifications  of  the  stnic- 
ture  of  these  organs  for  particular  uses,  others 
are  more  general  and  affect  the  whole  leg. 
Every  one  is  aware  how  well  adapted,  by  their 
fleetness,  some  of  the  Ruminant  Mammalians 
are  to  make  their  escape  from  their  ravenous 
pursuers,  the  most  adroit  and  the  most  ruthless 
of  which  is  the  mighty  hunter^  man. 

If  we  look  at  the  legs  and  hoofs  of  the  deer 
tribe,^  the  former  long,  slender,  and  elastic  ;  and 
the  latter  calculated  for  sure  footing ;  and  if  we 
consider  besides  the  quickness  of  their  senses  of 
seeing  and  hearing,  we  see  at  once  that  their 
structure  is  the  effect  of  -design^  and  that  the 

*  HalHcu  oleracea,  Nemorum,  Sfc.  ^  Cervus,     L. 


182  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

deepest  intellect  presided  at  its  first  fabrication.^ 
Though  man,  as  well  as  every  ferocious  beast, 
pursues  these  beautiful  and  elastic  animals,  it  is 
only  because  he  is  GuliB  deditus^  seldom  with  any 
view  to  seek  their  alliance,  or  to  turn  them  to 
his  purposes.  There  are  some,  however,  as  well 
as  the  rein- deer,*  cherished  by  the  Laplander 
as  his  principal  treasure,  but  pursued  by  the 
American  savage  only  to  be  devoured,  which 
probably  might  be  employed  with  advantage,  as 
well  as  the  dog,  in  countries  not  suited  to  our 
beasts  of  burthen;  «tnd  it  has  been  supposed 
that  the  Wapiti*  might  be  trained  and  rendered 
useful,  I  am  ignorant,  however,  whether  any 
steps  have  ever  been  taken  to  ascertain  this. 

But  the  legs,  as  well  as  instruments  of  flight 
and  escape,  are  adapted  in  fiercer  animals  to 
the  pursuit  and  prehension  of  their  prey,  and  in 
this,  and  many  other  respects,  their  hand  or 
foot  is  the  part  principally  interesting.  This  is 
used  for  so  many  various  purposes,  that  perhaps 
it  will  be  best  to  take  a  summary  survey,  in  this 
respect,  of  all  the  Classes  of  animals  with  arti- 
culated legs,  and  briefly  point  at  their  different 
structures  and  their  uses. 

As  I  have  already  given  an  account  of  the 
two  kinds  of  forceps  of  Crustaceans,^  I  shall 

»  See  Roget,  B,  T,  i.  506.  2  Cervus  Tarandus. 

^  C.  Stongyloceras,  ♦  See  above,  p.  37,  38. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  183 

b^Q  with   the    leg8   of  the  Arachnidans^    or 
spiders.    Every  one  who  examines  the  web  of  a 
common  spider,  whether  it  is  formed  of  con- 
centric circles  supported  by  diverging  rays,  or 
whether  it  imitates  any  finely  woven  substance, 
will  be  convinced  that  she  must  be  furnished 
with  a  peculiar  set  of  organs  to  effect  these 
purposes :   that  she  must  have  somethii^  like 
a  band  to  work  with.    Amongst  the  small  things 
that  are  wise  upon  earth,  Solomon  mentions 
the  slider ;    and  the   way  by  which  he  tells 
us  she  shews  her  wisdom  is  by  her  prehen- 
8ory  powers — she  takes  hold  with  her  hands} 
And  truly  what  Arachne  does  with  her  hands 
and  her  spinning  organs  is  very  wonderful,  as  I 
shall  have  occasion  hereafter  to  shew;   I  shall 
now  only  make  a  few  observations  upon  the 
organs  by  which  she  takes  hold. 

Spiders  are  gifted  with  the  faculty  of  walking 
against  gravity,  even  upon  glass,  and  in  a  prone 
position.  According  to  the  observations  of  Mr. 
Blackwall,  this  is  not  effected  by  producing 
atmospheric  pressure  by  the  adhesion  of  suckers, 
but  by  a  brush  formed  of  *'  slender  bristles 
fringed  on  each  side  with  eicceeding  fine  hairs 
gradually  diminishing  in  length  as  they  ap- 
proach its  e:(tremity,  where  they  occur  in  such 
profusion  as  to  form  a  thick  brush  on  its  inferior 

*  Prcw.  XXX.  28. 


184  .     LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

surface."^  These  brushes  he  first  discovered  on 
a  living  specimen  of  the  bird-spidery^  and  the 
same  structure,  as  far  as  his  researches  were 
carried,  he  found  in  those  spiders  which  can 
walk  against  gravity  and  up  glass.  This  is  one 
of  the  modes  by  which  they  take  hold  with  their 
handstand  thus  they  ascend  walls,  and  set  their 
snares  in  the  palace  as  well  as  the  cottage. 
Whoever  examines  the  underside  of  the  last 
joint  or  digit  of  the  foot  of  this  animal  with  a 
common  pocket-lens,  will  see  that  it  is  clothed 
with  a  very  thick  brush,  the  hairs  of  which, 
under  a  more  powerful  magnifier,  appear  some- 
what hooked  at  the  apex ;  in  some  species  this 
brush  is  divided  longitudinally,  so  as  to  form 
two. 

But  the  organs  that  are  more  particularly  con- 
nected with  the  weaving  and  structure  of  the 
snares  of  the  spiders  are  most  worthy  of  atten- 
tion. Setting  aside  the  hunters,^  and  others 
that  weave  no  snares  to  entrap  their  prey,  I 
shall  consider  those  I  intend  to  notice,  under 
the  usual  names  of  weavers^  and  retiaries.^ 

Before  Mr.  Blackwall  turned  his  attention  to 
the  proceedings  of  these  ingenious  and  indus- 
trious animals,  it  had  not  been  ascertained,  in 
what   respect  their    modes    of   spinning   their 

*  Blackwall  in  Linn.  Trans,  xvi.  481.  t,  xxxLf,  5. 

'  My  gale  avicularia.  *  Aranecs.  vcnaton<e. 

*  A,  textoricp.  *  A.  retiaria. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  1B5 

webs,  and  the  organs  by  which  they  formed 
their  respective  manufactures  differed.  But  Mr. 
Blackwall,  whose  observations  were  principally 
made  upon  one  of  the  weavers^  which  frequents 
the  holes  and  cavities  of  walls»  and  similar 
places,  observes  that  it  spins  a  kind  of  web  of 
different  kinds  of  silk,  the  surface  of  which  has 
a  flocky  appearance,  from  the  web  being  as  it 
were  ravelled. 

This   web    is    produced,   he  observes,  by   a 
double  series  of  spines,  opposed  to  each  other,  and 
planted  on  a  prominent  ridge  of  the  upper-side 
of  the  metatarsal  joint,  or  that  usually  regarded 
as  the  first  joint,  of  the  foot  of  the  posterior  legs 
on  the  side  next  the  abdomen.     These  spines 
are  employed  by  the  animal  as  a  carding  ap- 
paratus, the  low  series  combing,  as  it  were,  or 
extracting,  the  ravelled  web  from  the  spinneret,* 
and  the  upper  series,  by  the  insertion  of  its 
spines  between  those  of  the  other,  disengaging 
the  web  from  them.*    By  this  curious  operation, 
which   it  is  not  easy  to  describe  clearly,  the 
adhesive  part  of  the  snare  is  formed,  thus  lai^e 
flies  are  easily  caught  and  detained,  which  the 
animal,   emerging  from  its  concealment,  soon 
despatches  and  devours. 

The  organs  by  which  the  retiary  spiders  form 
their  curious  geometric  snares  have  generally 

'   Clubiona  atrox,  '  Mammulfe. 

^  Blackwull,  ubi  sup.  473. 


186  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

been  described  as  three  claws,  the  two  upper- 
most armed  with  parallel  teeth  like  a  comb,  and 
the  lower  one  simple  and  often  depressed;  but 
Mr.  Blackwall  found,  in  a  species  related  to 
the  common  garden  spider/  eight  claws,  seven 
of  which  had  their  lower  side  toothed.^  The 
object  of  this  complex  apparatus  of  claws  simple 
and  pectinated,  is  to  enable  these  animals  to  take 
hold  of  any  thread ;  to  guide  it ;  to  pull  it ;  to 
draw  it  out ;  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  any  thing 
ensnared,  whether  it  be  animate  or  inanimate; 
and  to  suspend  itself.  In  fact  the  Creator  has 
made  their  claws  not  only  hands  but  eyes  to 
these  animals. 

Besides  these  organs,  scattered  moveaUe 
spines  or  spurs  are  observable  upon  the  legs,  es- 
pecially the  three  last  joints,  which  I  consider  88 
forming  the  foot,  but  sometimes  also  upon  the 
thighs  of  spiders,  which,  as  they  can  be  elevated 
and  depressed  at  the  will  of  the  animal,  pro- 
bably are  used  as  a  kind  of  finger,  when  occa- 
sions require  it. 

In  the  multiform  apparatus  of  these  ingenious 
animals^  as  far  as  we  understand  its  use,  we  see 
how  they  are  fitted  for  their  office,  by  contri- 
buting to  deliver  mankind  from  a  plague  of 
flies,  which  would  otherwise,  like  those  which 

*  Epeira  Diadema,    The  species  examined  by  Mr.  B.  was 
E.  apoclisa. 
'  Blackwall,  ubi  sup.  476. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  187 

swarmed  in  Egypt,  annoy  us  beyond  toleration, 
and  corrupt  our  land. 

If  the  spider  taketh  hold  with  her  hands,  and 
spreads  her  snare  in  kings'  palaces,  what  shall 
we  say  of  the  bee,  who  with  her  hands  erects 
herself  her  many-storied  palaces,  each  story 
ccmsisting  of  innumerable  chambers,  far  more 
durable,  and  built  of  a  material  infinitely  ex- 
ceeding the  flimsy  webs  of  Arachne.  Her 
Creator  hath  instructed  her,  and  fitted  her  with 
the  means,  to  gather  from  every  flower  that 
blows  a  pure  and  sweet  nectar,  from  which, 
received  into  her  stomach,  she  elaborates  the 
beautiful  and  important  product  of  which  her 
wondrous  structures  are  formed ;  and  from  the 
same  source  she  is  also  instructed  to  load  herself 
with  a  fine  ambrosial  dust,  which,  kneaded  by 
her  into  a  paste,  constitutes  the  chief  subsistence 
of  herself  and  the  young  of  the  community  to 
which  she  belongs. 

Almost  every  organ,  implanted  in  her  frame 
by  her  beneficent  Creator,  is  employed  by  this 
symbol  and  exemplar  of  virtuous  industry  as 
a  hand  in  her  several  works  and  manipulations. 
Her  antenfUBj  those  still  mysterious  organs,  in- 
form her  in  what  flowers  she  may  find  honey, 
and  which  to  pass  by ;  they  plan  and  measure 
her  work,  and  by  them  she  examines  whether 
all  is  right ;  she  also  uses  them  to  converse  with 
her  associates,  and  for  various  other  purposes ; 


188  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

her   tongue  is  likewise   an  instrument  equally 
useful  to  her ;  it  can  assume  various  shapes  as  oc- 
casions demand ;   it  collects  the  honey  from  the 
nectar-organs  of  the  flower ;  it  tempers  the  wax 
for  building  and  prepares  it  for  the  action  of  the 
niandihles.     With   these  last  organs  she  works 
up  the  wax  till  it  is  fit  for  use.    The  plumy  hairs 
of  her  body,  especially  in  the  humble-bees,  are 
useful  in  detaining  the  dust  of  the  anthers.   Her 
legs^  more  particularly  the  posterior  pair,  though 
not  used  immediately  in  her  structures,  are  ex- 
tremely  important  organs,  both  for  preparing 
her  food  and  the  material  with  which  she  builds 
her  palace.    At  the  junction  of  the  shank,  with 
the  first  joint  of  the  foot  of  this  pair,  a  kind  of 
forceps  is  formed,  by  the  angle  at  the  apex  of 
the  former  and  the  base  of  the  latter,  with  which 
the  bee  takes  a  plate  of  wax  from  the  wax- 
pockets  under  her  abdomen,  and  delivers  it  to 
the   anterior  pair  of  legs,   by  which  it  is  sub- 
mitted to  the  action  of  the  mandibles.    The 
shanks  of  the  posterior  legs  likewise  on  their 
upper  side  have  a  cavity  surrounded  with  hairs, 
which  form  a  kind  of  basket,  in  which  the  dili* 
gent  labourer  carries  a  mass  of  pollen,  kneaded 
by  the   aid   of  the  comb   at  the  end  of  the 
shank  into  a  paste,  which  is  deposited  in  the 
cells,  and  contributes  to  form  the  family  store  of 
provision . 
What  a  number  of  compensating  contrivance^ 


PREHBNSORY  ORGANS.  189 

does  this  single  animal  exhibit,  and  how  wonder- 
fully and  admirably  has  Supreme  Wisdom  and 
Goodness  contrived  for  her,  and  Almighty 
Power  given  full  eflFect  to  what  they  planned ! 
Nothing  is  superfluous  in  her,  every  hair  and 
every  angle  has  its  use ;  so  that  well  may  we 
adore  Him  who  created  the  honey-bee,  and,  at 
whose  bidding,  and  by  whose  instruction,  she 
erects  those  wonderful  edifices  that  have  been 
the  admiration  of  every  age/ 

Instinct  directs  many  animals,  as  well  as 
traversing  tlie  surface  of  the  earth,  to  seek  a 
subterranean  abode  within  its  bosom.  Amongst 
insects,  though  there  are  many  that  burrow, 
none  is  more  remarkable  than  the  mole-cncket.^ 
The  most  superficial  observer,  when  he  looks  at 
this  creature,  must  see  at  once  from  its  structure, 
especially  that  of  its  fore- legs,  what  its  function 
is.  If  he  compares  other  crickets  with  it,  a 
singular  change  will  strike  him,  the  bulk  of  the 
posterior  thighs,  far  exceeding  that  of  the  same 
joint  in  the  other  legs,  will  appear  to  be  chiefly 
transferred  to  the  anterior  pair  of  legs,  which, 
the  size  of  the  creature  considered,  are  as  power- 
ful instruments  for  excavating  the  earth  as  can 
be  found  in  any  animal  now  in  existence :  all 
the  joints  of  this  leg  are  very  much  dilated^ 
especially  the  haunch  and  the  thigh,  which  con-* 

^  See  Bochart  Hierozoic,  ii.  516.  a.  '  Gryllotalpa. 


190  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

tain  the  powerful  muscles  that  move  the  appa- 
ratus for  burrowing.  This  consists  of  a  trian- 
gular joint,  the  analogue  of  the  shank  of  the 
other  legs,  but  assuming  the  form  of  a  hand  with 
the  palm  turned  outwards,  as  in  the  mole,  and 
terminating  in  four  strong  claw*like  digitations ; 
on  the  side  next  the  head  these  fingers,  in  the 
middle,  are  longitudinally  elevated  and  naked; 
while  the  sides  are  longitudinally  excavated  and 
hairy,  which  give  this  part  some  resemUance  to 
the  foot  and  claws  of  burrowing  quadrupeds. 
The  thigh  is  hollowed  out  underneath,  evidendy 
to  receive  the  joint  just  described,  and  over- 
hanging this  cavity,  at  the  base,  is  a  stout  tri- 
angular tooth,  which  probably  is  employed  to 
clean  the  hand  when  necessary ;  on  the  outside 
opposed  to  the  hand  is  the  analogue  of  the  tarsus 
consisting  of  three  joints,  the  two  first  lai^e  and 
triangular,  with  the  upper  edge  curved  and  the 
lower  straight  and  hairy  at  the  base,  the  other 
is  of  the  ordinary  form,  and  armed  with  two 
straight  claws.  These  teeth,  as  well  as  those  of 
the  shank,  have  a  trenchant  edge  on  the  straight 
side,  and  together  are  supposed  to  act  the  part 
of  a  pair  of  shears,  and  to  cut  any  roots  that  may 
interfere  with  its  progress.  Rosel,  however, 
thinks,  the  use  of  these  teeth  of  the  tarsus  is 
merely  to  clean  the  burrowing  hand,  which  it 
may  also  do.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the 
trenchant  edge  is  opposite  in  the  teeth  of  the 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  191 

shank  and  tarsus,  as  in  a  pair  of  scissors,  which 
£aivors  the  idea  that  they  are  used  sometimes  for 
cutting.  The  position  of  the  shank  is  vertical, 
with  the  teeth  next  the  giH)und,  so  that  the 
animal,  when  disposed  to  burrow,  has  nothing  to 
do  but  to  plunge  these  claws  into  the  soil  and 
push  outwards,  and  then  extracting  her  arms 
proceed  in  the  same  way  till  she  has  accom- 
plished her  object.  The  apex  of  the  shanks,  of 
the  two  posterior  pairs  of  legs,  is  armed  with 
several  spines  which  probably  assist  either  in 
making  progress,  or,  when  necessaiy,  to  retro- 
grade. 

"  It  might,  i  think,  be  asserted/'  observes  Dr. 
Kidd,  in  his  valuable  and  interesting  memoir 
On  the  atmt&fny  of  the  mol^cricket^^  "  without 
fear  of  contradiction,  that  throughout  the  whole 
range  of  animated  nature,  there  is  not  a  stronger 
instance  of  what  may  be  called  intentional 
structure,  than  is  afforded  by  that  part  of  the 
mole-cricket  (the  etmteriar  leg)^  which  I  am  now 
to  deteribe.''  And  certainly,  we  see  and  own 
without  hesitation,  as  even  the  most  sceptical 
would  Scarcely  refuse  doing,  that  this  arm  was 
planned,  and  all  its  various  parts,  dependent 
upon  and  mutually  affecting  each  other,  by  a 
calculating  Mind,  which  framed  and  put  the 
whole  together  to  answer  a  particular  purpose. 

•  Pklloi.  Trans.  1825,217. 


192  LOCOMDTIVE  AND 

The  Class' of  reptiles  affords  no  very  striking 
instances  of  the  adaptations  we  are  considering, 
except  in  the  case  before  noticed  of  the  gecko 
lizards,  and  the  tree-frogs/  which,  by  means  of 
suckers,  are  enabled  to  support  themselves  and 
walk  against  gravity.  Like  Mammalians,  rep- 
tiles are  usually  furnished,  but  not  invariably, 
with  four  legs,  and  a  pentadactyle  foot. 

In  an  animal  of  this  Class,  celebrated  from  of 
old,  the  Chameleon^  a  remarkable  modification 
of  this  structure  is  observable.  It  is  stated  with 
respect  to  this  animal,  that  it  moves  very  slowly, 
that  it  will  sometimes  remain  whole  days  on  the 
same  branch :  and  it  is  only  with  great  circum- 
spection, and  after  taking  great  care  to  get  firm 
hold  with  its  prehensile  tail,  that  it  ventures  to 
set  a  few  steps:  it  may  be  expected,  therefore, 
that  its  principal  organs  of  locomotion  should  be 
adapted  to  give  it  secure  footing  on  the  branch 
it  selects  for  its  station. 

Aristotle,  in  his  account  of  this  animal,^  ob- 
serves that  "  each  of  its  feet  is  divided  into  two 
parts,  an  arrangement  resembling  that  of  our 
thumb,  opposed  to  the  rest  of  the  hand ;  and  a 
little  short  of  this,*  each  of  these  parts  is  divided 
into  certain  fingers ;  in  the  fore-legs  the  internal 

*  Hyla,  '  ChamcBleo  africanusy  &c. 
'  Aristot.  Hist.  Anim,  1.  ii.  c.  11. 

*  Gr.  Eti  /3paxc«.     Meaning,  I  suppose,  that  the  toes  are  not 
80  long  as  the  primary  division  of  the  foot. 


PREHENSOfcV  ORGANS.  193 

ones  being  three,  and  the  external  two/  but 
in  the  hind  the  internal  fingers  are  three,  and 
the  external  two,^  and  these  fingers  have 
crooked  claws."  By  this  structure  of  the  feet, 
and  arrangement  of  the  fingers  or  toes,  the 
three-toed  lobe  is  on  one  side  of  the  branch  at 
the  anterior  extremity  of  the  animal,  and  on  the 
other  at  the  posterior,  and  by  this  counteractioa 
of  each  other's  pressure,  enable  it  to  maintain  its 
position  against  any  force  that  may  be  likely  to 
disturb  it.  The  lobes  are  longer  than  the  fingers, 
and  thus  by  their  means  it  can  hold  very  firmly, 
and  watch  the  flies  and  insects  which  form  its 
food,  and  are  entrapped  by  the  gluten  with 
which  its  long  tongue  is  besmeared. 

The  analogue  of  the  fore-leg  of  quadrupeds 
in  hirdsj  as  we  have  seen,  is  converted  into  an 
organ  of  flight,  and  cannot  be  employed  as  an 
organ  of  prehension ;  sometimes,  indeed,  in  their 
combats,  it  is  used  to  annoy  their  opponents,  and 
is  occasionally  armed  with  a  spur,  but  the  pre- 
hensory  faculty  is  transferred  to  the  beak  and 
the  remaining  pair  of  legs ;  with  these  latter  the 
eagles  and  other  birds  of  prey  usually  seize  the 
animals  that  they  devour ;  with  these  also  fructi- 
vorous  birds,  as  the  parrots,  paroquets,  &c.  hdd 
the  fruit  while  they  eat  it,  and  the  Gallinaceous 

»  Plate  XIV.  Fio.  2.  »  Ibid.  Fig.  3. 

VOL.  II.  O 


194  LOCOMOXIVE  AND 

Order  scratch  the  earth  to  find  food  for  them- 
selves and  chicks;  the  foot  of  birds  is  mo0t 
commonly  tetradactyle,  with  one  toe  or  thumb  at 
the  heel  and  the  other  three  in  front ;  in  one 
Order,^  the  birds  forming  which  have  occasion 
to  fix  themselves  firmly  on  their  perch,  tbe 
thumb  and  the  external  toe  both  point  back- 
wards, so  as  to  form  a  cross  with  the  others 
and  the  rest  of  the  leg.  In  the  emu  the  foot 
consists  of  three  toes,  and  in  the  ostrich  of 
only  two,  there  being  no  thumb  in  either. 
Many  of  the  aquatic  birds  have  the  toes  con- 
nected by  membrane,  and  so  forming  oars  for 
swimming ;  and  in  some  each  toe  has  a  margin 
of  membrane,  which  is  usually  notched,  these 
last  are  called  lobed  feet. 

But  the  absence  of  the  fore-leg  in  birds  is 
admirably  compensated  by  the  beak ;  with  this 
they  generally  collect^  as  well  as  devour  their 
food.  Some  indeed  employ  their  tongue  in  this 
service.  Of  this  description  is  the  woodpecker' 
and  the  humming  Bird  ;^  the  former  using  it  to 
catch  insects^  and  the  latter  to  imbibe  the  nectar 
of  flowers,  for  which  purpose  these  little  gems 
amongst  the  birds  have  a  long  slender  tongue, 
somewhat  resembling  that  of  a  butterfly,  and 
moved  by  an  apparatus,  in  some  degree,  like 


*  Seansores,  *  Picus, 

5  Trochilus.  *  See  Dr.  Roget,  B.  T.  ii.  132. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  195 

that  of  the  woodpecker.^  The  beak  of  birds  is 
uniformly  constructed  with  respect  to  their  food, 
and  varies  ad  infinitum.  Perhaps  in  none  is 
it  more  remarkable  than  in  those  of  Cuvier's 
two  last  Orders,  the  waders  and  web-footed 
birds.  These,  especially  the  last,  can  use  their 
l^;s  only  for  locomotion,  either  on  shore  or  in 
die  water,  and  therefore  their  beaks  have  the 
whole  function,  not  only  of  taking,  but  of  hunt- 
inff  for  food  devolved  upon  them,  and  accord- 
ingly are  fitted  for  it  by  their  structure.^  Gene- 
rally speaking,  they  may  be  stated  to  be  of  two 
kinds.  Beaks  for  catching  worms,  and  beaks  for 
catching  fishes ;  of  the  first  description  are  those 
of  the  woodcock,'  snipes,^  and  numerous  other 
waders ;  and  of  the  last,  amongst  the  most  re- 
markable, are  those  of  the  spoonbilP  and  peli- 
can.* The  former — which  the  French,  perhaps 
with  more  propriety,  call  the  spatula-bill,^  ^  its 
beak  resembles  a  spatula  rather  than  a  spoon — 
dabble  with  their  bill  in  the  mud,  for  which  it  is 
well  calculated,  and  thus  capture  small  fishes, 
shell-fish,  reptiles,  and  other  aquatic  and  am-* 
phibious  animals,  which  the  tubercles  within  it 
are  also  calculated  to  retain  and  crush.    But  the 


'  See  Vieillot.  N.  D.  D'Hist.  Nat.  vii.  342.  t.  B.  38. 

*  ■ 

-  Roget,  B,  T,  ii.  391.  '  Scolopax  rusticola, 

^  Sc.  gallinago,  and  gallinula.  ^  Platalea  leucorodia. 

*  Pelecanus  Onocrotalus.  ''  Spatule, 


196  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

latter,  the  pelican,  has  the  most  remarkable 
organ  for  taking  its  food,  and  is  a  bird  known 
and  celebrated  from  the  earliest  ages.  The 
lower  mandible  is  fitted  with  a  kind  of  sac, 
formed  of  the  dilated  skin  of  the  throat,  which 
Yieillot  says  can  be  so  expanded  as  to  contain 
between  two  and  three  gallons  of  water .^  When 
fishing  these  birds,  sometimes,  rise  to  a  pro- 
digious height,  at  others  they  skim  the  surface 
of  the  water,  or  hover,  at  a  moderate  elevatioD, 
that  they  may  more  readily  precipitate  them- 
selves upon  their  prey.  The  sudden  fall  of  so 
powerful  an  animal,  the  whirling  round,  the 
boiling  which  the  great  extent  of  its  wings  occa- 
sions in  the  water,  so  astounds  and  stuns  the 
fishes  that  few  escape.  Then  rising  again  and 
again  descending,  it  continues  this  manoeuvre 
till  it  has  filled  its  pouch.  When  this  is  accom- 
plished it  retires  to  some  rocky  eminence  where 
it  devours  what  it  has  caught,  which  sometimes, 
Yieillot  says,  will  amount  to  as  many  fishes  as 
would  satisfy  six  men.'  It  presses  its  pouch 
against  its  breast  when  it  feeds  its  young,  in 
order  to  disgorge  the  fishes,  whence  probably 
arose  the  fable  of  its  feeding  them  with  its  own 
blood. 

But  the  beak  is  not  only  used  by  birds  in 
collecting  their  food,    some  also  it  assists  in 

'  N.  D.  B'HUt.  Nat.  xxv.  139.         •  Ubisupr.  138. 


PRSHENSORY  ORGANS.  197 

tUmhing;  parrots  are  remarkable  for  this,  and 
also  employ  their  tail  for  the  same  purpose. 

Truly,  when  we  examine  and  compare  all 
these  organs  of  prehension  as  well  as  manduca- 
tion,  and  the  infinite  modifications  of  them,  to 
suit  the  peculiar  kind  of  food  and  circumstances 
of  every  tribe,  we  cannot  help  exclaiming — God 
is  here,  we  behold  the  eyident  footsteps  of  in- 
finite wisdom,  power,  and  goodness.  Well 
might  our  Saviour  say.  Behold  the  fowls  of  the 
air ;  for  they  sow  not,  neither  do  they  reapy  nor 
gather  into  barns;  yet  your  Heavenly  Father 
feedeth  them} 

The  legs  of  Mammalians^  with  respect  to  their 
extremity,  may  be  considered  as  divided  into 
those  that  have  powers  of  prehension,  more  or 
less,  and  those  that  have  only  powers  of  loco^ 
motion.    I  shall  begin  with  the  latter. 

1 .  These  consist  of  Baron  Cuvier's  seventh  and 
eighth  Orders  of  the  Class  above  mentioned; 
namely,  the  Pachyderms^  or  thick  skinned 
beasts,  and  the  Ruminants^  or  those  that  chew 
the  cud. 

The  great  man,  just  named,  considers  the 
horse  and  ass,  constituting  the  equine  genus,^ 
as  forming  a  Family  of  the  first  of  these  Orders, 
to  which  he  has  given  the  ancient  appellation  of 

^  Matth.  vi.  26.  «  Equus. 


198  LOCOMOTIVB  AND 

Solipedf^  or  whole-hoofed.  He  originally  re- 
garded the  Solipeds  as  forming  a  separate  Order, 
and,  indeed^  comparing  them  with  the  other 
Pachyderms,  as  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  hip* 
popotamus,  hog,  &c,,  the  horse  genus  seems 
scarcely  to  belong  to  the  same  Order.  Illiger, 
who  altered  the  name,  but  without  sufficient 
reason,  to  SoUdungvla^  considers  them  as  dis- 
tinct. 

Though  the  speed  of  the  deer,  except  in  a 
single  instance,  on  account  of  their  usually  slight 
form  and  slender  limbs,  has  not  been  applied  by 
man  to  his  purposes,  and  to  add  to  the  Telocity 
of  his  progress,  yet  in  the  soliped  race,  es- 
pecially in  that  tioble  quadruped  the  harse^  we 
have  an'  animal  endowed  with  equal  speed  and 
greater  strength,  and  by  their  undivided  hoof, 
where  speed  as  well  as  strength  is  required,  cal- 
culated, with  much  more  advantage  and  less  in- 
jury, to  traverse — both  as  beasts  of  burthen  and 
draft,  and  as  adapted  peculiarly  for  the  con- 
veyance of  man  himself— not  only  soft  and 
verdant  prairies,  but  hard  and  rocky  roads. 
Hence  this  animal  has  been  employed  by  man 
from  a  very  early  period  of  society.  We  do  not 
indeed  know  whether  the  mighty  hunter,  Nim- 
rod,  went  to  the  chase  of  man  and  beast  on 
horseback,  though  it  is  not  improbable ;  but  both 

^  Gr.  MoFv^.     Aristot. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  199 

the  boiBe  and  the  ass  were  common  in  Egypt  in 
Joseph's  time/  the  latter  was  used  by  Abra- 
ham to  ride  upon/  and  asses  are  enumerated 
amongst  his  possessions  when  he  went  up  from 
Egypt  fifty  years  before.* 

The  sole  organs  of  prehenuon  of  this  tribe  are 
their  mouth  and  upper  lip.  Every  one  knows 
how  adroit  the  horse  and  ass  often  become  in 
the  use  of  these  organs,  not  only  in  gathering 
their  food»  but  in  opening  gates  that  confine 
them  to  their  pastures. 

In  the  genuine  Pachyderms  the  foot  begins  to 
show  marks  of  division.  In  the  rhinoceros  there 
are  three  toes,  in  the  hippopotamus  four,  and  in 
the  Proboscidians  of  Cuvier,  including  the  ele- 
phant and  Mastodon^  or  fossil  elephant,  there 
are  five  toes,  three  of  the  nails  of  which  only 
appear  externally,  and  four  on  the  hind-foot  of 
the  Asiatic  species.^ 

The  Swine  family  divide  the  hoof  like  the  Ru- 
minants; it  consists  of  two  intermediate  toes, 
large,  and  armed  with  nails  or  hoofs,  and  two 
lateral  ones  much  shorter  and  not  touching  the 
ground ;  in  this  respect  also  resembling  many 
Ruminants.  In  hilly  and  mountainous  districts 
these  upper  toes  are  probably  useful  in  loco- 
motion. 

The  prehensory  organ  of  the  animals  here 

*  Genes.  xWiu  17.      <  xxii.  3.        '  xii.  16.      *  E.  indkus. 


200  LocoMonvB  and 

enumerated  is  usually  the  snout,  ynih  this  the 
hog '  turns  up  the  ground  in  search  of  roots  or 
grubs,  often  doing  great  injury  to  pastures.  The 
male  is  armed  with  a  defensive  and  oiensiTe 
weapon  in  his  tusks. 

That  hideous  animal  of  this  tribe,  the  Ethi- 
opian boar/  is  armed  with  four  tusks,  two  pro* 
ceeding  from  the  upper  jaw,  which  turn  upwards 
like  a  horn,  sometimes  nine  inches  long  and  five 
inches  in  circumference  at  the  base ;  the  other 
pair  issuing  from  the  lower  jaw,  projecting  not 
more  than  three  inches  from  the  mouth,  flat  on 
the  inside,  and  corresponding  with  another  plain 
surface  in  the  upper  tusks.  The  Boshies  men, 
Sparrman  relates,  say  of  this  animal,  ''  We  had 
rather  attack  a  lion  in  the  plain  than  an  African 
wild  boar ;  for  this,  though  much  smaller,  comes 
rushing  on  a  man  as  swift  as  an  arrow,  and 
throwing  him  down  snaps  his  legs  in  two,  and 
rips  up  his  belly  before  he  can  get  to  strike  at  it, 
and  kill  it  with  his  javelin."^  They  inhabit 
subterranean  recesses;  and  turn  up  the  earth 
very  dexterously,  probably  by  the  aid  of  their 
tusks,  in  search  of  roots,  which  form  their  food. 

The  Sabiroussa*  or  Babee  rooso,  a  name  which 
signifies  Hog-deery  given  to  this  animal  probably 
on  account  of  its  longer  legs  and  slender  form,  is 
distinguished  by  a  pair  of  long  tusks  from  the 

'  Sus  scrofa,  *  Pluucockomu  Africmnus. 

3  Voyage,  ii.  23.  *  Sus  bmhynusa. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  201 

Upper  jaw,  which  rising  above  the  head,  then 
taming  down,  form  a  semicircle,  and  have  the 
appearance  of  horns,  for  which  they  have  been 
mistaken.  They  are  only  found  in  the  male, 
which  is  stated  to  use  them  as  hooks  to  suspend 
himself  to  the  branches  of  trees,  thus  resting  his 
head,  so  as  to  sleep  upright.  As  the  animal 
feeds  upon  the  leaves  of  the  Banana  and  other 
trees,  it  is  not  improbable  that  these  tusks  may 
be  used  to  pull  down  the  branches. 

The  Rhinoceros  is  said  to  use  its  horn  for 
digging  up  the  roots  of  plants,  which  compose 
the  principal  portion  of  its  food.  I  am  speaking 
of  the  two*horned  rhinoceros  of  Sparrman .  The 
Hottentots  and  the  colonists  assert  that  this  ani- 
mal uses  only  its  second  or  shortest  horn  for 
digging  up  roots,  which  appeared  to  him  worn 
by  friction,  marks  of  which  the  anterior  one 
never  exhibited.  When  engaged  in  that  em- 
ployment it  was  stated  to  turn  that  horn  on  one 
side'  out  of  the  way. 

But  one  of  the  most  wonderful  compensating 
contrivances  and  structures  of  Divine  Wisdom, 
Power,  and  Goodness,  and  which  has  excited 
the  admiration  of  every  age,  is  the  proboscis  of 
the  el^kant.  The  weight  of  the  enormous  head 
o(  this  animal  is  such  as  to  preclude  its  being 
employed,  if  it  terminated  in  a  common  mouth, 

1  Spamnan.  Voyage,  ii.  98. 


202  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

either  to  break  the  boughs  of  trees,  or  to  crop  the 
grass,  for  it  could  not  easily  be  either  elevated  or 
depressed  for  these  purposes;  in  its  proboscis, 
however,  it  is  supplied  with  an  instrumoit  that 
amply  compensates  this  deficiency.  Almost  every 
one  is  aware  that  this  beautiful  organ,  beautiful  I 
mean  for  its  structure,*  answers  a  variety  of  pur- 
poses ;  that  it  is  given  by  its  Creator  to  this  mighty 
animal  to  be  to  it  an  instrument  almost  of  sight, 
of  most  delicate  touch,  of  scent  and  breathing,  of 
prehension  as  adroit  as  that  of  a  hand ;  added  to 
this,  that  by  the  extraordinary  flexibility  wilh 
which  he  has  endowed  it,  it  can  not  only  be 
inflected  inwards  to  carry  things  to  its  mouth, 
but  be  bent  upwards,  downwards,  or  laterally,  to 
lay  hold  of  things  above,  below,  or  on  each  side 
of  it,  and  that  by  the  assistance  of  a  single  finger 
at  its  extremity,  it  can  take  hold  of  any  thing  as 
readily  as  we  do  by  the  assistance  of  four  fingers 
and  a  thumb.  As  the  brain  of  these  gigantic 
animals,  compared  with  their  bulk,  is  very 
sniall,  it  is  thought,  by  modern  zoolc^ists,  that 
their  intellect  has  been  exaggerated,  and  that  it 
does  not  surpass  that  of  dogs,  and  many  other 
carnivorous  animals.  Others  have  imagined 
that  their  sagacity  is  whcdly  the  result  of  thdr 
being  provided  with  so  wonderfol  an  organ ;  but 
this  organ  would  be  of  very  little  use  without 

'  Roget,  B.  T.  i.  520. 


PRBHENSORY  ORGANS.  203 

the  ftetT&Us  apparatus  by  which  it  is  moved 
according  to  the  will  of  the  animal. 

Amongst  the  Rumiimnts^ — which  appear  to 
connect  with  the  Pachyderms  in  two  points,  by 
the  0w:ine  tribe  and  SoUpeds,  the  latter  possess^ 
ing  several  characters  in  common  with  the  Gnu^^ 
which  seems  between  them  and  the  bovine 
genus  ;^  and  the  former  approaching  them  by 
their  common  character  of  dividing  the  hoof, — 
there  is  another  animal,  which  may  be  considered 
as  the  horse  of  the  desert,  exhibiting  in  some 
degree  a  union  of  characters  not  foimd  in  the 
remainder  of  the  Order ;  it  chews  the  cud,  but 
does  not  actually  divide  the  hoof.  I  am  speaking 
of  the  Comely  but  though  not  actually,  the  hoof 
is  superficially  divided.  Considering  the  deserts 
of  loose  and  deep  sand  that  it  often  has  to 
traverse,  a  completely  divided  hoof  would  have 
suoJk  too  deep  in  the  sand;  while  one  entire 
below  would  present  a  broader  surface  not 
so  liable  to  this  inconvenience.  Boys,  when  they 
want  to  walk  upon  the  muddy  shores  of  an 
e^xiary  at  low  water,  fasten  broad  boards  to 
tl^eir  feet,  which  prevent  them  from  sinking  in 
the  mud ;  I  conceive  that  the  whole  sole  of  the 
eftmel's  iooi  answers  a  similar  purpose:  its 
superficial  division  probably  gives  a  degree  of 
pliancy  to  it,  enabling  it  to  move  with  more  ease 

*  Catoblepas  Gnu,  *  Bos, 


204  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

over  the  sands ;  upon  which  these  animals  often 
trot  with  great  rapidity,  travelling  sometimes 
twelve  miles  within  the  hour ;  its  common  amble, 
which  is  exceedingly  easy,  is  nearly  six ;  this 
pace,  if  properly  fed  every  evening,  or  in  cases 
of  emergence,  only  once  in  two  days,  the  camel 
will  continue  uninterruptedly  for  five  or  six 
days :  with  these  qualities,  so  suitable  to  barren 
and  sandy  deserts,  what  a  valuable  gift  of  Provi* 
dence  was  this,  especially  to  the  descendants  of 
Ishmael  ;  who,  according  to  the  prophecy, 
have  maintained  undisturbed  possession  of  their 
deserts  and  their  necessary  accompaniment,*  the 
camel,  from  the  time  of  their  progenitor  to  the 
present  day,  a  period  of  between  three  or  font 
thousand  years.  They  have  been  wild  men, 
always  assailing  and  assailed,  and  yet  maintain- 
ing their  ground.  But  the  time  will  assuredly 
come,  when  The  flocks  of  Kedar^  and  the  rams  of 
Nebaiothy^  shall  forsake  their  deeds  of  spoliation 
and  robbery  and  be  gathered  to  the  church. 

Though  the  Ruminants,  in  general,  by  the 
structure  and  division  of  their  hoof,  are  calcu- 
lated for  sure  footing,  so  as  to  enable  them  best 
to  exercise  their  several  ftinctions ;  as  the  camel, 
the  ox,  and  the  rein-deer  at  the  bidding  of  their 
master  man ;  and  others,  as  the  chamois  and 
the  goat,  for  the  ascent  of  mountains  and  pre- 

'  IsaL  Ix.  7. 


PR£UENSORY  ORGANS.  205 

cipices,  seemingly  inaccessible,  where  they  can 
laugh  at  their  pursuer ;  and  others  again,  as  the 
deer  and  antilope  tribes  for  speed  that  almost 
mocks  pursuit ;  yet  with  respect  to  prehension 
these  organs  are  of  no  use  to  them.  Their  mouth 
and  lips,  and  tongue,  are  the  only  means  by 
which  they  can  help  themselves  to  their  food ; 
they  have  no  tusk.s  like  the  Pachyderms  in 
general,  nor  nasal  horns  like  the  rhinoceros,  to 
cut  or  dig  with ;  but  as  their  food  is  most  com- 
monly the  herbage  that  covers  the  earth,  these 
are  fully  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  supply 
themselves  with  Food  convenient  for  them.  The 
camel  and  dromedary  differ  from  the  other 
Ruminants,  not  only  in  their  long  neck,  which 
probably  is  useful  to  them  in  gathering  their 
food,  but  also  in  having  a  cleft  lip,  which  doubt- 
less, adds  to  the  prehensory  powers  of  that 
organ.  The  lofty  neck  is  still  more  striking  in 
the  Camdopard,  the  long  tongue  of  which  is 
also  used  by  them  as  a  hand  to  pull  down  the 
branches  of  the  mimosa,  from  which  they  derive 
their  subsistence. 

2.  I  ^all  now  consider  those  Mammalians, 
whoBe  legs  are  more  or  less  prehensory,  next 
above  the  Pachyderms  and  Ruminants.     Cu 
vier's  sixth  Order  consists  of  a  tribe  of  animals 
which  he  denominates  Edentate^^  because  they 

« 

^  Edenth, 


200  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

have  no  fore- teeth.  The  Manotr ernes  form  the 
last  Faimily  of  the  Order,  and  precede  the  Pachy- 
derms. In  many  points  they  seem  connected 
with  the  birds ;  one  genus  ^  having  a  mouth 
resembling  the  bill  of  a  duck,  and  being  almost 
web-footed ;  it  has  also  been  stated  to  be  ovipa- 
rous ;*  the  male,  as  I  before  observed,^  is  armed 
with  a  sting,  like  a  serpent.  The  other  genus, 
Echidna^  approaches  nearer  the  pangolinsy^  and 
anteatersy^  having,  like  them,  an  extensile  viscid 
tongue,  by  means  of  which  they  entrap  and 
devour  the  ants.  The  other  animals  of  the 
Order  are  remarkable  for  their  great  naib, 
almost  approaching  to  hoofs;  in  the  Family 
which  precedes  the  Monotremes^  they  are  often 
used  for  burrowing. 

Next  above  the  Echidna  is  a  singular  animal, 
wearing  the  outward  aspect  and  scales  of  a 
Saurian,  the  pangolin,  which  rolls  itself  up  like 
an  armadillo,  and  is  the  ant-eater  of  the  old  world. 
It  is  singular  that  a  real  lizard,  the  chameleon, 
should  have  the  same  instmct  of  catching  its 
insect  prey  by  means  of  a  long  tongue  be- 
smeared with  slime.  In  the  new  world  the 
pangolin  is  replaced  by  the  ant-eaters,  which 
have  the  same  habits,  and  the  same  mode  of 

*  Omithorhynchus,  *  Cuv.  R^gtie  Anim.  i.  234,  note  2. 

*  See  above  p.  82.  *  Manis. 

*  Myrmecophaga,  ^  Edentis  ordifiaires,     Cuv. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  207 

procuring  their  food.  With  the  long  nails  of 
their  fore-feet  they  penetrate  the  nests  of  the 
white  ants  and  common  ants,  and  inserting  their 
long  tongue,  besmeared  with  a  viscid  saliva,  into 
these  nests,  retract  it  covered  with  game ;  and 
this  with  such  velocity,  that  the  eye  can  scarcely 
follow  them.  Their  nails,  which  require  to  be 
kept  sharp,  for  the  operation  just  mentioned, 
when  not  employed,  are  folded  inwards,  so  as  to 
{Movent  their  being  blunted.  In  one  species^  in 
the  fore-foot  there  are  only  two  nails. 

Amongst  the  animals  that  are  clothed  in 
annour,  in  this  Order,  the  most  remarkable  is 
the  Chlamyphorus^  whose  feet  are  armed  with 
five  long  and  sharp  nails,  especially  the  anterior 
ones,  which  must  enable  it  to  excavate  its  sub- 
ten^nean  abode  very  rapidly.  From  the  forma- 
tion of  its  foot  and  these  nails  it  does  not  appear 
to  dig  with  them  laterally,  but  in  a  line  with 
the  body;  its  singular  clubbed  tail  therefore 
would  be  a  very  useful  organ,  if,  as  Mr.  Yarrell 
supposes,  it  is  used  in  removing  backwards  the 
loose  earth  accumulated  under  its  belly  by  the 
action  of  the  fore-l^s.^  This  animal,  which  is  a 
native  of  Chili,  is  reputed  to  carry  its  young 
beneath  the  scaly  armour  attached  principally 
to  the  spine,  which  covers  it  loosely  like  a  cloak. 

'  M,  didactylas.       *  Plate  XVI.       *  ZooL  Joum,  iii.  551. 


208  LOCOMOTIVE  ANP 

The  last  family,  as  we  ascend,  in  the  present 
Order,  is  very  well  distinguished  by  the  name 
of  Tardigradesy  from  the  excessive  slowness  of 
their  motions.  Their  nails  are  enormously  long, 
compressed,  and  crooked,  and  exactly  calculated 
for  laying  strong  hold,  so  as  to  enable  them  to 
maintain  their  station  on  the  trees,  whose  leaves 
and  buds  form  their  food.  Their  English  appel- 
lation, the  Sloth j^  indicates  their  character ;  when 
they  have  satisfied  their  appetite,  like  most  of 
the  other  Edentates,  they  can  roll  themselves 
up  and  take  a  long  and  reckless  sleep.  But  I 
need  not  enlarge  further  upon  this  tribe,  since 
Dr.  Buckland  has  excellently — Justified  the  ivay$ 
of  God  to  many — and,  in  the  present  instance,  de- 
monstrated, by  most  convincing  argunieuts,  that 
these  animals,  instead  of  being  an  abortion,  im- 
perfect, misshapen,  and  monstrous,  are  exactly, 
and  in  every  respect,  adapted  for  the  station 
which  God  has  assigned  to  them,  and  for  the 
work  which  he  has  given  them  in  charge.* 

Next  above  the  Edentate  Mammalians  is  an 
Order,  the^M  of  Cuvier,  consisting  of  a  greater 
number  of  Genera  and  Subgenera  than  any 
other  in  the  Class,  which,  instead  of  having  no 
front  teeth  or  incisives,  have  very  conspicuous 
ones,  rendered  more  so  by  being  separated  by  a 

*  Bradypus.  *  Linn.  Trans,  xvii.  17. 


PREH£NSORY  ORGANS.  2011 

void  Space  from  the  grinders.  From  these  teeth, 
which  are  neither  calculated  to  seize  or  lacerate 
their  food,  but  merely  to  nibble  and  gnaw  it, 
they  have  received  their  name  of  Nibblers  or 
Gnawers.' 

The  great  majority  of  this  Order  are  grega* 
rious,  and  live  in  burrows,  or  common  habita- 
tions, which  they  excavate  or  fabricate  them- 
selves. Like  the  Hymenopterous  Class  of 
insects,  many  are  noted  for  the  sagacity  and 
skill  which  they  manifest  in  their  united  labours 
for  the  good  of  the  community,  and  also  for  the 
organs  by  which  they  are  enabled  to  answer  th^ 
bidding  of  instinct. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  these  is  the 
Beaver;*  this  animal  has  five  toes  on  all  its 
feet,  which  in  the  hind  pair  are  connected  by 
membrane ;  those  of  the  fore-leg,  which  it  uses 
as  a  hand  to  convey  its  food  to  its  mouth,  are 
very  distinct.  They  carry  also  with  these  hands 
the  mud  and  stones  which  they  mix  with  the 
wooden  part  of  their  buildings.  But  their  incisor 
teeth  are  their  principal  instruments,  with  these, 
as  Dr.  Richardson  states,  they  cut  down  trees  as 
big  or  bigger  than  a  man's  thigh ;  when  they 
undertake  this  operation  they  gnaw  it  all  round, 
cutting  it  sagaciously  on  one  side  higher  than 
on  the  other,  by  which  it  is  caused  to  fall  in  the 

*  Rodent ia.  *  Castor  Fiber, 

VOL.  II.  P 


210  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

direction  they  wish;  they  use  these  power&l 
organs  not  only  to  fell  the  trees  they  select,  but 
also  to  drag  them  to  the  place  where  they  waat 
them.  It  is  said,  that  a  beaver,  when  at  its  fuU 
strength,  can  at  one  stroke  bite  through  the  leg 
of  a  dog. 

It  has  been  affirmed  that  beavers  employ 
their  tail  both  as  a  trowel  to  plaster  their  houaeB^ 
and  as  a  sledge  to  carry  the  trees  that  they 
fell ;  but  both  these  assertions  seem  to  be  built 
upon  conjecture  rather  than  observaticHi,  and 
are  not  credited  by  those  who  have  had  the  best 
opportunities  of  observing  their  manners,  as 
Heame,  Cartwright,  and  Dr.  Richardson.  The 
faln-ics  they  are  taught  by  their  Creator  to  erect, 
and  impelled  by  the  instinct  he  has  implanted  in 
them,  are  sufficiently  wonderful  without  having 
recourse  to  fiction  to  exaggerate  it.  Their  taiU, 
probably,  are  useful  to  them  in  the  water  as 
natatory  organs. 

There  is  a  very  singular  animal  discovered  by 
M.  Sonnerat,  in  Madagascar,  called  the  Aye- 
Aye^^  which  seems,  in  some  degree,  to  approach 
the  Quadrumanes.  The  fore-feet  have  five  ex- 
cessively  long  fingers,  and  what  is  singular,  the 
middle  one  is  much  slenderer  than  the  rest.  In 
the  hind  feet  there  is  a  thumb  opposed  to  the 
other  fingers,  by  which  structure  it  is  enabled  to 

*  Cheiromys, 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  21  1 

take  firmer  hold  of  the  branches  of  trees.  It  is 
said  to  use  the  slender  finger  of  its  hand  for  the 
same  purpose  that  the  wood-pecker  uses  its 
barbed  tongue,  to  extract  the  grubs  from  the 
tiees. 

The  squirrels,  which  form  the  first  genus  in  this 
interesting  Order,  are  known  to  use  their  fore- 
legs for  prehension,  which  indeed  is  the  case 
widi  the  majority  of  animals  included  in  it. 
They  are  also,  at  least  a  large  proportion,  re- 
mafkable  for  sitting,  when  at  rest,  upon  their 
haunches,  and  also  for  their  ready  use  of  their 
fere-legs. 

Having  before  noticed  the  most  remarkable 
animal  in  Cuvier's^bierM  Order,  the  MarsupianSy 
which  suckle  their  young  in  a  pouch,  I  shall 
only  mention  one  other  animal  belonging  to  it, 
the  Koaloy^  a  New  Holland  quadruped,  in  some 
respects  resembling  the  bear ;  like  the  chame* 
leon,  it  has  the  five  toes  or  fingers  of  the  fore- 
foot divided  into  two  groups,  the  thumb  and 
ibie-finger  forming  one,  and  the  three  remaining 
fingers  the  other ;  the  object  of  this  structure  is 
evidently  to  enable  it  to  take  firm  hold  of  the 
branches  of  the  trees  on  which  it  passes  part  of 
lis  life ;  this  is  of  the  more  importance  to  it,  as 
it  carries  its  young  upon  its  back.    It  some- 

*   Li  punts. 


2 1 2  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

times,  probably  in  the  night,  retires  to  burrows 
which  it  excavates  at  the  foot  of  the  trees. 

We  have  now  arrived  at  the  foot  of  Baron 
Cuvier's  third  Order,  containing  the  predace(ms 
Mammalians,  which,  though  a  very  compre- 
hensive group,  will  not  detain  us  long,  as  the 
first  and  last  family,  the  Bats  and  Seals,  ha^e 
been  noticed  in  another  place.*  The  rest  of  the 
Order  consists  of  the  insectivorous  and  car- 
nivorous Mammalians ;  the  latter  is  further  sub- 
divided into  two  tribes,  which  are  denominated 
the  Plantigrades  and  the  Digitigrades. 

Those  last  mentioned  usually  walk  more  upon 
their  toes,  and  consist  of  the  feline,  canine,  and 
several  other  tribes,  all  swift  in  their  locomo- 
tions, and  making  use  of  their  paws  or  fore-foot, 
either  for  scratching  and  burrowing,  or  to  seize 
their  prey,  and  they  have  all,  I  believe,  five 
toes. 

The  Plantigrades  are  so  called  because  they 
walk,  like  man,  upon  the  whole  foot,  and  consist 
of  the  bear,^  the  glutton,'  and  similar  animals. 
This  structure  enables  the  former  to  rear  itself 
on  its  hind  feet,  and  walk  erect ;  and  their  fore- 
foot will  grasp  a  staff  like  a  hand ;  it  is  armed 
with  long  claws,  with  which  they  scratch  up 
roots  which  form  part  of  their  subsistence,  exca- 

»  See  above,  p.  137,  156.  »  Ursus.  *  Gulo, 


PR£H£NSORY  ORGANS.  2  13 

▼ate  burrows,  climb  the  trees,  and  seize  their 
prey. 

These  armed  paws  are  fearful  weapons,  both 
in  the  lion  and  the  bear,  to  which  few  would 
Kke  to  be  exposed ;  but  an  heroic  youth,  beloved 
of  God  and  man,  regarded  them  not  when,  as 
a  faithful  shepherd,  he  rescued  a  lamb  of  his 
father  8  flock  from  their  grasp  and  voracity. 

The  two  most  remarkable  animals  in  the 
insectivorous  tribe  of  predaceous  Mammalians  are 
the  mole,^  and  the  harmless,  though  persecuted 
hedgehog,*  but  they  are  both  too  well  known, 
the  former  for  its  piquants,  and  the  latter  for 
its  hand  turned  outwards  and  moved  by  an 
enormous  apparatus  of  muscles,  to  enable  it  to 
excavate  its  subterranean  habitation. 

We  are  now  arrived,  in  our  progress  up- 
wards, at  Cuvier^s  second  Order  of  Mamma- 
lians, which  he  names  Quadrumafiey  or  four- 
handed,  and  which  consists  of  apes,'  baboons/ 
and  monkeys,*  whose  hind  as  well  as  fore-foot 
is  usually  furnished  with  a  thumb  opposite  to 
the  fingers,  so  that  they  can  use  all  their  feet  for 
prehension :  the  object  of  Providence  by  this 
structure  is  to  enable  these  animals  to  move 
^bout  amongst  the  branches  of  the  trees,  which 
are  their  usual  habitations,  and  to  fix  themselves 

*  Talpa.  «  Erinaceus,  •'  Simia^  &c. 

♦  Cynocepkalus,  &c,  *  Lemur,  &c. 


214  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

securely  upon  them,  so  that  they  can  use  their 
hands  to  gather  fruit  or  any  other  purpose. 
Thus  also  they  can  perambulate  the  trees  with 
as  much  ease  and  safety  as  we  do  our  houses; 
and  run  up  and  down  the  branches  with  as 
much  celerity  as  we  do  our  staircases :  but  they 
cannot  make  equal  progress  on  the  earth,  or  a 
plane  surface,  whether  they  go  on  four  feet  or 
two. 

Even  man  himself,  though  he  ordinarily  can- 
not  use  his  toes  for  prehension,  yet  is  sometiines 
placed  in  such  circumstances,  as  to  acquire  the 
power  of  doing  so.  I  remember,  when  a  boy, 
going  to  see  a  girl  who  was  bom  without  armsi 
and  was  exhibited  by  her  parents  to  the  public. 
She  could  use  her  toes  as  fingers ;  could  hold 
scissors,  cut  out  watch-papers,  sew,  and  even 
write.  An  account  was  given  in  the  St.  James's 
Chronicle,  not  long  ago,  of  a  youth  similarly 
circumstanced,  who  being  cruelly  turned  out  by 
his  father,  but  patronized  by  his  sister,  leaned 
to  draw  with  his  toes.  In  India  they  are  used 
as  fingers,  and  are  sometimes  called  foot-fingars. 
The  Hindoo  tailor  twists  his  thread  ynth  thai, 
and  the  cook  holds  his  knife  while  he  cuts  fish, 
vegetables,  &c.,  the  join^,  weaver,  and  other 
mechanics  all  use  them  for  a  variety  of  pur* 
poses  ;  and  I  am  told  by  a  firiend,  who  has  c&iOi 
been  in  India,  that  they  can  even  pick  up  pins 
with  them. 


PREHENSOR Y  ORGANS.  2 1 5 

We  are  now  arrived  at  man  himself,  who,  as 
we  flee,  takes  his  paFticular  denomination  from 
the  band.     He  is  the  only  Bimane. 

The  physiology  and  anatomy  of  the  Human 
Hand^  that  wonderful  organ,  have  been  ex- 
fdained  and  reasoned  with  great  ability  in  a 
separate  treatise,  by  the  eminent  comparative 
anatomist  to  whom  that  subject  was  assigned ;  I 
shall  not,  therefore,  here  say  any  thing  on  its 
structure  and  its  uses :  but  as  it  has  not  been 
treated  of  as  a  m0ral  organ ;  as  being  in 
intimate  connection  with  the  heart  and  affec- 
tions;  as  their  principal  index  and  premon- 
strator ;  and  as  the  mighty  instrument  by  whioh 
a  great  part  of  the  physical  good  and  evil  which 
befidls  our  race  is  wrought,  I  may  be  permitted 
to  make  a  few  observations  upon  it  as  far  as 
these  are  concerned. 

God  made  the  body  in  general  a  fit  ma- 
chine, not  only  to  execute  the  purposes  of  its 
immaterial  inhabitant  the  soul;  but,  in  some 
SOTt,  he  made  it  a  mirror  to  reflect  all  its  bear- 
ings and  character ;  to  indicate  every  motion  of 
the  fluctuating  sea  within,  whether  its  surges  lift 
themselves  on  high  elevated  by  the  gusts  of 
passion;  or  all  is  calm,  and  tranquil,  and  sub- 
dued. None  of  the  bodily  organs,  by  its  struc- 
tue  and  station  in  the  body,  is  so  evidently 
formed  in  all  respects  for  these  functions  as  the 
Hand.    The  eye  indeed  is,  perhaps,  the  most 


2 1 0  LOCOMOTIVE  AND 

faithful  mirror  of  the  souFs  emotion ;  yet  though 
it  may  best  portray  and  render  visible  the  in* 
ternal  feelings  it  can  in  no  degree  execute  its 
biddings ;  but  the  hand  is  the  great  agent  and 
minister  of  the  soul^  which  not  only  reveals  her 
inmost  affection  and  feeling,  and,  in  conjunction 
with  the  tongue — and  these  two  in  connection 
are  either  the  most  beneficent  or  maleficent  of 
all  our  organs — declares  her  will  and  purpose ; 
but  is  also  employed  by  her  to  execute  them. 
Thus  Heart  and  Hand,  the  principle  and  the 
practice,  have  been  united^  in  common  parlance, 
from  ancient  ages.  The  earliest  dawn  of  reason 
in  the  innocent  infant  is  shown  by  the  signs  it 
makes  with  its  little  hands ;  by  them  it  prefen 
its  petitions  for  any  thing  it  desires,  and,  in 
imitation  of  this,  God's  children  are  instructed 
to  lift  up  holy  hands  in  prayer.^  Love,  friend* 
ship,  charity,  and  all  the  kindly  affections  of  our 
nature,  use  the  hands  as  their  symbol  and  oi^ ; 
the  fond  embrace,  the  hearty  shake,  the  liberal 
gift,  are  all  ministered  by  them.  Joy,  gladi^esSi^ 
applause,  welcome,  valediction,  all  use  theses 
organs  to  represent  them.  Penitence  smites  her 
breast  with  them ;  resignation  clasps  them ;  de* 
votion  and  the  love  of  God  stretches  iheaok  oat 
to  wards,  heaven. 

But  the  hands  are  not  employed  to  expMfl 

1  1  Tim.  il  I. 


PRfiHENSORY  ORGANS.  217 

ooly  the  kiAdly  affections  of  the  soul.  Those  of 
a  contrary  and  less  amiable  character  use  them 
as  their  index.  Anger  threatens,  and  more 
violent  and  hateful  passions  destroy  by  them* 
They  are  indeed  the  instruments  by  which  a 
great  portion  of  the  evil,  and  mischief,  and 
violence,  and  misery,  that  our  corrupt  nature 
has  introduced  into  the  world,  are  perpetrated. 

The  hand  also,  on  some  occasions,  becomes 
the  spokesman  instead  of  the  tongue.  The  fore- 
finger is  denominated  the  index^  because  we  use 
it  to  indicate  to  another  any  object  to  which  we 
wish  to  direct  his  attention.  By  it  the  deaf  and 
dumb  person  is  enabled  to  hold  converse  with 
o&ers  so  as  not  to  be  totally  cut  off  from  the 
enjoyment  of  society ;  and  by  it  we  can  like*- 
wise  mutually  communicate  our  thoughts  when 
separated  by  space  however  wide,  even  with  our 
Antipodes. 

ThB  Deity  himself,  also,  condescends  to  con- 
vey spiritual  benefits  to  his  people  by  means 
of  the  hands  of  authorized  persons,  as  in  Con* 
firmaCion  and  Ordination ;  and  the  Blessed 
Friend,  and  Patron,  and  Advocate  and  Deli- 
verer of  our  race,  when  he  was  upon  earth, 
appears  to  have  wrought  most  of  his  miracles  of 
healing  by  laying  on  his  hands  ;^  in  benediction 
abo,  when  children  were  brought  unto  him  he 

1  Mark,  viii.  23—25. 


818  LOCOMOTIVS  AND 

laid  his  hands  on  them ;  and  at  his  ascenskm 
he  lifted  up  his  hands  to  bless  his  disciples.^ 

To  enumerate  all  the  modes  by  which  the  in- 
ternal affection  of  the  soul  is  indicated  by  the 
hand  would  be  an  endless  task.  I  shall  there- 
fore only  further  observe,  that  the  greater  part  of 
the  instances  I  have  adduced  are  natural,  aad 
not  eonventional  or  casual  modes  of  exprassing 
feeling,  as  is  evident  from  their  being  employed, 
with  little  variation,  in  all  ages,  nations,  and 
states  of  society. 

How  grateful  then  ought  we  to  be  to  our 
Creator  for  enriching  us  with  these  admirable 
organs,  which  more  than  any  outward  one  that 
we  possess,  are  the  immediate  instruments  that 
enable  us  to  master  the  whole  globe  that  we 
inhabit,  not  merely  the  visible  and  tangiUe 
matter  that  we  tread  upon,  and  its  furniture  and 
population,  but  even  often  to  take  hold  as  it 
were  of  the  invisible  substances  that  float  around 
it,  and  to  bottle  up  the  lightning  and  the  wind, 
as  well  as  the  waters.  Thus  by  their  means  do 
we  add  daily  increments  to  our  knowledge  and 
science,  and  consequently  power ;  to  our  skill  in 
arts  and  every  allied  manufacture  and  manipa- 
lation ;  to  our  comforts,  pleasures,  and  every 
thing  desirable  in  life. 

If  now — having  arrived  at  the  most  perfect 

1  Mark,  X.  16.  Luke,  zxiv.  50. 


PREHENSORY  ORGANS.  3l9 

ittrtramentt  as  to  its  uses,  and  the  most  im-^ 
portant  to  the  happiness  and  wel&re  of  the 
Human  race,,  whether  it  be  considered  as  an 
instrument  of  good  or  eyil — we  turn  back  and 
review  this  long  train  of  organs  for  erery  kind  of 
motiim,  and  every  kind  of  operation,  and  con-* 
iider  moreover  the  animal  to  which  each  belongs 
with  respect  to  its  place  and  station,  connection , 
powers  of  multiplication,  relative  magnitude, 
form,  composition,  structure,  functions,  and  at 
the  same  time  take  into  further  consideration  the 
theatre  upon  which  each  is  destined  to  appear, 
the  medium  in  which  it  is  to  move  and  breathe, 
aad  the  beings,  whether  vegetable  or  animal, 
with  which  it  is  to  come  in  contact,  and  upon 
which  it  is  to  act. 

When,  I  say,  we  take  this  review,  what  an 
infinite  diversity  in  every  respect  bewilders  our 
thought,  and  we  are  unable  to  form  any  distinct 
idea  of  the  general  eflfect  and  harmony  that  we 
know  to  be  produced,  nor  how  all  these  inirtru- 
meat^  dovetail,  as  it  were,  so  as  to  form  the 
whole  into  one  great  fabric  or  sphere  of  agents, 
all  contributing  to  fulfil  the  purposes  of  the  Great 
Beis^  who  fabricated  it,  and  promoting  the 
general  health  and  welfare  of  the  whole  system. 
But  this  we  can  understand  that  the  Fabricator 
of  this  sphere  must  have  taken  a  simultaneous 
survey  of  all  the  circumstances  here  mentioned ; 
must  have  calculated  the  momentum  of  each 


220  INSTINCT. 

individual,  have  weighed  and  measured  it,  sotteit 
it  should  not  exceed  a  certain  standard ;  must 
have  seen  at  once  all  that  it  wanted  to  fit  it  for 
its  station ;  must,  before  he  made  it,  have  formed 
a  correct  estimate  of  all  the  requisite  materials, 
whether  gaseous,  aquiform,  or  solid,  so  as  to  put 
together  the  whole  harmonious  compages  with- 
out failing  in  a  single  atom ;  and  give  full 
accomplishment  to  his  will. 

He  who  could  effect  all  this  could  only  be 
one  whose  Understanding  is  infinite^  and  whose 
Power  and  Goodness  are  equally  without  bounds. 


Chapter  XVIIL 

On  Instincts 

There  is  no  department  of  Zoological  'Science 
that  furnishes  stronger  proofs  of  the  being  and 
attributes  of  the  Deity,  than  that  which  relates 
to  the  Instincts  of  animals,  and  the  more  so, 
because  where  reason  and  intellect  are  most 
powerful  and  sufficient  as  guides,  as  in  man, 
and  most  of  the  higher  grades  of  animals,  there 
usually  instinct  is  weakest  and  least  wonderful, 
while,  as  we  descend  in  the  scale,  we  come  to 
tribes  that  exhibit,  in  an   almost    miraculouB 


INSTINCT.  22 1 

maonar,  the  workings  c^  a  Divine  Power,  and 
perfwin  operations  that  the  intellect  and  skill  of 
man  would  in  vain  attempt  to  rival  or  to  imitate. 
Yet  there  is  no  question,  concerning  which  the 
Natural  Historian  and  Physiologist  seems  more 
at  a  loss  than  when  he  is  asked — what  is  In- 
stinct? So  much  has  been  ably  written  upon  the 
subject,  so  many  hypotheses  have  been  broached, 
that  it  seems  wonderful  so  thick  a  cloud  should 
skill  rest  upon  it.  It  must  not  be  expected,  where 
so  many  eminent  men  have  more  or  less  failed, 
that  one  of  less  powers  should  be  enabled  to 
throw  much  new  light  upon  this  palpable  obscure, 
or  dissipate  all  the  darkness  that  envelopes 
the  secondary  or  intermediate  cause  of  Instinct. 
Could  even  the  bee  or  the  ant  tell  us  what  it  is 
that  goads  them  to  their  several  labours,  and 
instructs  them  how  to  perform  them,  perhaps  we 
might  still  have  much  to  learn  before  we  should 
have  any  right  to  cry  with  the  Syracusan  Mathe* 
matician,  *Evpiffca,  I  have  unveiled  the  mystery. 
StiU,  however  unequal  to  the  task,  I  cannot  duly 
discharge  the  duty  incumbent  upon  me,  who 
may  be  said  to  be  officially  engaged  to  prove  the 
great  truths  of  Natural  Religion  from  the  InstineU 
of  the  animal  creation,  to  leave  the  subject  of 
Instinct,  considered  in  the  abstract,  exactly  as 
I  found  it ;  a  field,  in  which  whoever  peram- 
bulates, may  wander  "  in  endless  mazes  lost." 


322  INSTINCT. 

I  will,  therefore,  do  my  best  to  make  the  way, 
in  a  small  degree,  more  level,  and  less  intrieate, 
than  it  has  hitherto  been. 

But,  before  I  proceed,  lest  the  reader  should 
feel  disposed  to  accuse  me  of  contradicting  die 
opinions  on  this  subject  stated  in  the  Introdnctiou 
to  Entomology,  I  beg  to  direct  his  attention  to 
the  following  paragraph  in  the  adyertisem^t  to 
the  third  volume  of  that  work.  '^  It  will  not  be 
amiss  here  to  state,  in  order  to  obviate  any  chaiige 
of  inconsistency  in  the  possible  event  of  Mr. 
Kirby's  adverting  in  any  other  work  to  this 
subject,  that,  though  on  every  material  point, 
the  authors  have  agreed  in  opinion,  th^r  vieirs 
of  the  theory  of  Instinct  do  not  precisely  accord. 
That  given  in  the  second  and  fourth  volumes  is 
from  the  pen  of  Mr.  Spence." 

It  is  not  without  considerable  reluctance  that 
the  author  of  this  essay  takes  the  field,  is 
some  degree,  against  his  worthy  friend  and 
learned  coadjutor,  but  as  he  is  thus  left  at  liberty 
to  do  it,  and  the  nature  of  his  subject  requires 
it,  he  will  state  those  views,  which  seem  ta 
himself  most  consistent  with  nature  and  troth, 
and  most  accordant  with  the  general  plan  of 
creation.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  ancients 
had  any  distinct  idea  of  that  impulse  upon  ani- 
mals, urging  them  necessarily  to  certain  actions, 
which  modern  writers  have  denominated  instinct* 


INSTINCT.  223 

Arifltotle,  indeed,  in  a  passage  of  his  physics 
quoted  by  Bochart,^  alludes  to  certain  writers 
who  doubted  whether  spiders,  ants,  and  similar 
animals  were  directed  in  their  works  by  intellect, 
or  by  any  other  faculty.  The  Stagyrite  himself 
rescdves  the  causes  of  motion  into  intellect  and 
app^tte,'  bat  I  have  not  been  able  to  discoyer 
that  he  has  recorded  any  opinion  as  to  what  cause 
the,  now  called,  instincts  of  animals,  whether 
to  appetite  or  intellect,  are  to  be  attributed  :  he 
says  much  on  the  subject  of  the  hiye  bee,  but  it 
is  merely  a  history  of  its  proceedings,  unaccom- 
panied by  a  single  syllable  from  which  we 
might  conjecture  that  he  attributed  any  part  of 
these  proceedings,  wonderful  as  he  must  have 
thought  them,  to  any  faculty  distinct  from  intel- 
lect, and  what  seems  more  extraordinary,  without 
any  expression  of  admiration  at  the  expertness, 
and  art,  and  skill,  so  evident  in  all  that  this  little 
creature  almost  miraculously  accomplishes.  On 
another  occasion,  indeed,  he  observes,  that 
*'  Some  of  the  animals  that  have  no  blood,  have 
a  more  intelligent  soul  than  some  of  those  that 
hove  blood,  as  the  bee  and  the  ant  genus. "^  A 
much  later  Greek  writer  has  asked  the  question, 
^  Who  taught  the  hee,  that  wise  workman^  to  act 

'  Hierozoic,  ii.  599,  b. 

*  De  anima,  1.  iii.  c.  11. 

^  De  Part,  AnifnaL  1.  ii.  c.  4. 


224  *  INSTINCT. 

the  geometer^  and  to  effect  her  three-staried  Ium$cs 
ofhexagofial  structures  ?"^  And  this  is  the  ques- 
tion I  shall  now  endeavour  to  answer. 

When  we  consider  the  infinite  yariety  of  in- 
stinctSy  their  nice  and  striking  adaptation  to  the 
circumstances,  wants,  and  station  of  the  several 
animals  that  are  endowed  with  them,  of  which 
numerous  instances  will  be  given  hereafter,  we 
see  such  evident  marks  of  design,  and  such 
varied  attention  to  so  many  particulars,  such  a 
conformity  between  the  organs  and  instruments 
of  each  animal,  and  the  work  it  has  to  do,  that 
we  cannot  hesitate  a  moment  to  ascribe  it  to 
some  power  who  planned  the  machine  with  a 
view  to  accomplish  a  certain  purpose,  and  whea 
we  further  consider  that  all  the  different  animals 
combine  to  fulfil  one  great  end,  and  to  effect  a 
vast  purpose,  all  the  details  of  which  the  human 
intellect  cannot  embrace,  we  are  led  further  to 
acknowledge  that  the  whole  was  planned  and 
executed  by  a  Being  whose  essence  is  unfathom- 
able, and  whose  power  is  irresistible. 

I  must  here  previously  observe,  that  in  consi- 
dering this  mysterious  subject,  we  must  avoid,  as 
much  as  possible,  building  our  theories  upon 
facts  which,  if  properly  interpreted,  are  extra- 

*  Ttc  Ttiv  fuXiTTay,  rtfv  tro^tfy  rtjv  tpyariv 
Tewfitrpeiv  eviitn,  Kai  rpcdifio^ttc 
OiK&c  eyeipeiy  t^ayovitfy  KTiafiarwv, 

Pisidius,  D#  Mundi  Opificio,  quoted  by  Bochart. 


INSTINCT.  225 

neoas  to  the  subject,  and  wear  such  an  aspect  of 
die  marvellous^  as  to  appear  out  of  the  regular 
course  of  nature,  and  the  ordinary  proceedings 
to  which  its  instinct  urges  any  animal.  The 
cases  here  alluded  to,  if  true,  to  the  full  extent 
of  the  statements  concerning  them,  would  rather 
indicate  a  particular  interposition  of  Divine 
Providence,  either  to  prevent  some  calamity,  or 
to  produce  some  blessing  or  benefit  to  the  indi- 
viduals concerned.  Thus  the  account  of  Sir  H. 
Lee's  dog,  mentioned  by  Mr.  French,^  which 
saved  its  master's  life,  by  taking  and  maintaining 
its  station,  which  it  had  never  before  done,  under 
his  bed ;  and  that  given  by  Dr.  Beattie,  of  a  dog, 
who,  when  his  master  was  in  a  situation  of  the 
most  imminent  peril,  after  fruitlessly  attempting 
to  save  him,  ran  to  a  neighbouring  village,  and 
by  significant  gestures  at  last  prevailed  upon  a 
man  to  follow  him,  and  saved  his  master's  life. 
These  and  many  more  such  cases,  can  scarcely 
foe  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  ordinary  instinct 
of  the  species,  for  if  it  did,  more  murderers  would 
be  disappointed  of  their  intended  victim  by  the 
agency  of  his  or  her  dog.  I  knew  myself  an 
instance,  in  which  a  most  valuable  life  was  saved 
by  a  dc^,  which,  being  condemned  to  the  halter 
by  a  former  master,  and  escaping  from  those 

*  ZooL  Joum.  i.  7. 
VOL..  II.  Q 


226  INSTINCT, 

appointed  to  dispatoh  him^  at  last  efitabliflhed 
himself,  after  repeated  expulsion >  in  my  friend's 
family,  and  afterwards,  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe,  by  the  sacrifice  of  his  own  life,  prevrated 
his  master  from  being  dr<>wned.^  These  cases 
are  remarkable,  but  they  do  not  appear  to 
belong  to  instinct,  but  rather  to  the  doctrine  of 
a  particular  Providence. 

Some  cases  upon  record,  with  respect  to  dogs 
and  other  animals,  belong  to  intellect  and  me^ 
mory  rather  than  instinct.  M.  Dureau  de  la 
Motte,  in  a  memoir  on  the  influence  of  domes- 
ticity in  animals,  mentions  a  dog,  which  being 
shut  out,  would  use  the  knocker  of  the  door;* 
and  I  had  myself  a  cat,  which  indicated  its 
wish  to  come  in  or  go  out,  by  endeavouring 
with  its  fore  paws  to  move  the  hapdle  of  the 
door-latch  of  the  apartment ;  and  geed  every 
morning  to  call  me  by  making  the  same  indi- 
cation at  the  door  of  my  bed-room :  other  cats 
have  attempted  to  ring  the  bell.  But  the  most 
remarkable  instance,  is  one  related,  by  the  writ^ 
just  named,  of  a  very  intelligent  dog,  which  was 
employed  to  carry  letters  between  two  gentle- 
men, and  never  failed  punctually  to  execute  his 
commission — first  delivering  the  letter,  which 
was  fastened  to  his  collar,  and  then  going  to  the 
kitchen  to  be  fed.     After  this,  he  went  to  the 

'  AvnaL  des  Sb.  NatureL  xxi.  «  Ibid,  52. 


INSTINCT,  227 

pariour  window,  and  barked,  to  tell  the  gentle- 
man he  was  ready  to  cany  back  the  answer.* 

The  remarkable  case  of  the  ass  Valiante,^  and 
of  other  animals  that  find  their  way  to  their  old 
quarters  from  a  great  distance,  may  be  attributed^ 
I  think,  rather  to  natural  sagacity  and  memory, 
than  to  any  instinctive  impulse.  The  animal 
just  alluded  to  might  have  sagacity  enough  to 
keep  near  the  sea,  or  a  concurrence  of  accidental 
circumstances  might  befriend  her. 

Divine  Providence  has  at  its  disposal  the 
wh<de  animal  creation,  and  can  employ  all  their 
instincts  and  their  faculties  to  bring  about  its  own 
purposes,  both  with  respect  to  individuals  and 
mankind  in  general.  Man,  who  may  be  called, 
under  God,  the  king  of  the  visible  creation, 
makes  a  similar  use  of  the  creatures  that  are 
placed  at  his  disposal ;  of  some,  as  the  horse  and 
the  ox,  he  employs  the  physical  powers;  of 
others,  as  the  bee  and  the  dog,  he  avails  himself 
of  the  instinct.  Some  he  inrtructs  how  they  are 
to  do  his  work  ;  others,  he  takes  as  he  finds  them. 
So  the  Deity,  it  may  be  presumed,  with  a  secret 
hand,  guides  some  to  fulfill  his  will,  instructing 
them,  as  it  were,  because  their  unaided  instinct 
would  not  alone  avail,  in  the  decree  they  are  to 
execute,  while  others,  merely  by  following  the 
bent  of  their  nature,  do  the  same.     In  many 

'  Annal.  des  Sc.  Naturel.  66. 
^  Introd.  to  Ent.  ii.  496,  Note  a. 


238  INSTINCT. 

cases,  also,  he  may  he  supposed  merely  to  direct 
them  to  the  field  in  which  he  means  they  should 
labour,  and  then  leave  them  to  their  instincts  to 
accomplish  his  purposes.  In  the  case  of  tho 
dog  who  saved  his  master  from  intended  assas- 
sination, a  supernatural  impulse  might  carry 
him  to  his  chamber  and  cause  him  to  maintain 
his  station  there,  and  when  the  hour  of  danger 
arrived,  his  natural  instinct  would  suffice  fot 
the  defence  and  liberation  of  his  master  ftom 
the  threatened  danger. 

When  we  consider  the  work  that  animals  have 
to  do  in  this  globe  of  ours,  each,  in  a  particular 
department,  and  to  a  certain  extent,  it  seema 
absolutely  necessary  that,  on  many  occasions, 
the  interference  of  a  Supreme  Power  should  take 
place,  to  say  to  each,  ^*  Hitherto  shcdt  thou  com 
and  no  further^''  and  only  an  Omnipresent  Being, 
infinite  in  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  could 
check  the  further  progress  of  any  body  of  his 
workmen  when  he  foresaw  it  would  be  noi^ious, 
exceed  his  intentions,  and  derange  his  plans. 

**  Nee  Deu8  intersit,  nisi  dignus  vindice  nodus 
Indderity*  * 

was  the  dictum  of  a  poet,  who  had  as  mnch 
judgment,  and  good  sense,  as  he  had  genius; 
and  it  is  only  where  ordinary  means  are  evi- 
dently insufficient  to  account  for  any  fact,  that 
we  are  at  liberty  to  ascribe  it  to  the  extraordinary 
interposition  of  the  Deity  ;  or  to  any  intermedial 


INSTINCT.  229 

fiupematural  agency  employed  by  him  to  pro- 
duce it:  and  no  class  of  facts  so  loudly  pro- 
claim their  Great  Author  as  those  which  are 
Ae  result  of  the  nice  balancing  of  conflicting 
enei^es  and  operations  observable  in  the  dif- 
ferent departments  of  the  animal  kingdom. 

We  may  observe,  however,  that  when  our 
Saviour  says  to  his  disciples  concerning  spar- 
rows— One  of  them  shall  not  fall  to  the  ground 
mthout  your  Father.  But  the  very  hairs  of  your 
head  are  all  numbered ; ' — the  observation  implies 
that  nothing  escapes  the  notice,  or  is  too  mean, 
or  insignificant,  to  be  below  the  attention  and 
care  of  Him  who  is  all  eye,  all  ear,  all  intellect ; 
who  directeth  all  things  to  answer  his  purposes, 
according-  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  tvillf*  which 
is  the  universal  good  of  his  creatures. 

Having  premised  these  general  observations, 
I  shall  now  proceed  to  inquire  into  the  proxi- 
mate cause  of  instinct;  admitting,  as  proved, 
that  every  kind  of  instinct  has  its  origin  in  the 
will  of  the  Deity,  and  that  the  animal  exhibiting 
it,  was  expressly  organized  by  Him  for  it  at  its 
creation. 

The  proximate  cause  of  instinct  must  be  either 
metaphysical  or  physical,  or  a  compound  of  both 
characters. 

1.  If  metaphysical^  it  must  either  be  the  tm- 

1  Matth.  X.  29,  30.  <  Ephes.  i.  5. 


230  INSTINCT* 

mediate  action  of  the  Deity,  or  the  action  of 
some  intef^mediate  intelligence  employed  by  lmn» 
or  the  intellect  of  the  animal  exhibiting  it« 

2.  If  physical,  it  must  be  the  action  or  stimulus 
of  some  physical  power  or  agent  employed  by 
the  Deity,  and  under  his  guidance,  so  as  to  work 
His  will  upon  the  organization  of  the  animal, 
which  must  be  so  constructed  as  to  respond  to 
that  action  in  a  certain  way ;  or  by  the  exhibi- 
tion of  certain  phenomena  peculiar  to  the  indi-* 
vidual  genus  or  species. 

3«  If  compound  or  mixed^  it  will  be  subject 
occasionally  to  variations  from  the  general  law, 
when  the  intelligent  agent  sees  fit. 

• 

1 .  With  respect  to  the^r^*  Hypothesis,  one  of 
the  principal  promulgators  and  patrons  of  which 
1^  Addison,^  it  nearly  amounts  to  this,  as  that 
amiable  writer  confesses,  that  '*  God  is  the  soul 
of  brutes."  It  is  contrary,  however,  to  the 
general  plan  of  Divine  Providence,  which  usually 
produces  effects  indirectly,  and  by  the  interven- 
tion and  action  of  means  or  secondary  causes^ 
to  suppose  that  it  acts  immediately  upon  insects 
cind  other  animals,  and  is  so  intimately  con- 
nected with  them  as  to  direct  their  instinctive 
operations ;  such  an  action,  it  should  seem, 
would  be  infallible,  aud  never  at  fault,  whereas 

*  See  Spectator,  H.  p.  121. 


JJJSTINCT.  231 

obseiration  has  proved  that  animals  are  some- 
times mistaken,  where  their  instinct  should 
direct  them.  For,  if  God  were  their  immediate 
instructor,  would  it  be  possible  for  the  flesh-fly, 
ad  I  have  seen  that  she  does,  to  mistake  the 
blossom  of  the  carrion -plant*  for  a  piece  of  flesh, 
and  lay  her  eggs  in  it ;  or  for  a  hen  to  sit  upon 
a  jriece  of  chalk,  as  they  are  stated  to  do,*  in- 
stead of  an  egg?  Still  all  instincts  are  from 
God,  He  decreed  them,  and  organized  animals 
to  act  according  to  that  decree,  and  employed 
means  to  impel  them  to  do  so. 

Other  arguments  might  be  adduced  proving 
that  this  Hypothesis  does  not  rest  upon  a  sound 
foundation ;  but  as  I  shall  hereafter  advert  to 
some  of  these,  I  shall  now  proceed  to  consider 
whether  instinct  be  the  action  of  some  inter- 
mediate  intelligence,  employed  by  the  Deity, 
upon  the  animal  e:ihibiting  it. 

An  ingenious  and  acute  writer,  Mr.  French, 
is  the  author  of  this  Hypothesis,  which  appeared 
in  the  first  number  of  the  Zoological  JournaL 
He  infers,  "That  the  Divine  Energy  does  in 
reality  act,  not  immediately^  but  mediately^  or 
through  the  medium  of  moral  and  intellectual 
influences,  upon  the  nature  or  consciousness  of 
the  creature,  in  the  production  of  the  various, 
and  in  many  instances,  truly  wonderful  actions 

^  Stapclia  hirsuta,  ^  Spectator,  ii.  n.  120. 


232  INSTINCT. 

which  they  perform ;  that  brutee  are  goi^emdd 
by  sach  agencies,  good  and  eviU  but  under  the 
control  of  Providence;  and  that  such  agencies 
act  by  impressions  upon  their  conscious  nature, 
but  unperceived  by  it  in  a  moral  or  intellectual 
sense." ^  He  thus  opens  the  way  to  his  the<»ry. 
'*  If  it  be  asked  by  what  intermediate  agency 
the  operations  of  brutes  are  thus  directed ;— I 
reply  that  it  is  generally  admitted  by  a  large 
class  of  mankind,  at  least,  that  superior  (yet 
intermediate)  powers  of  some  kind,  are  in  actual 
connection  with  the  human  mind.*^^ 

From  the  passages  here  quoted,  it  seems 
evident  (though  the  author  declares  that  he  will 
not  even  ''  venture  a  suggestion  as  to  the  nature 
of  the  superior  powers  here  alluded  to,")^  that 
he  had  in  his  mind  those  good  and  evil  intelli- 
gencies  that  are  generally  acknowledged  to  be 
in  actual  connection  with  the  human  mind ;  or, 
to  use  the  common  phraseology.  Angels  and  De- 
mons. The  former  being  the  cause  of  the  bene- 
Jicent^  and  the  latter  of  the  ferocious  instincts  of 
animals. 

When  he  further  observes — "Upon  these 
principles  the  mixed  natures  of  some  animals 
are  satisfactorily  explained ; — as  in  the  instance 
oi  the  Phoca  ursina^  the  males  of  which  species 
manifest  the  most  singular  tenderness  towards 

1  Zool  Jour.  i.  5,  6.  «  Ibid.  «  Ibid.  6, 


INSTINCT*  233 

theii^  young  progeny ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  a 
saTage  and  persecuting  disposition  towards  their 
finnales."^ 

From  this  passage  it  would  seem  that  the 
author  was  of  opinion  that  the  same  animal  was 
subject  to  the  agency  both  of  good  and  evil 
int^mediate  intelligences,  the  one  producing  its 
affection,  and  the  other  its  ferocity. 

When  our  Saviour  denominates  serpents  and 
scorpions  the  power  of  the  eiumy^  it  may  per* 
haps  be  thought  that  he  affords  some  counte- 
nance to  this  opinion,  especially  as  the  evil 
spirit  actually  made  use  of  the  serpent,  as  his 
oi^n  and  instrument,  when  he  accomplished 
the  fatal  lapse  of  our  first  parents  from  the 
original  rectitude  of  their  nature.  But,  if  we 
pay  due  attention  to  the  context,  we  shall  find 
that,  in  this  passage,  as  often  in  other  parts  of 
scripture,  the  symbol  is  put  for  the  thing  sym- 
Ixdized.  ^'  I  beheld  Satan^  as  lightning j  fall 
from  Hea/ven^'  says  our  Lord.  "  Behold^  I  give 
unto  you  power  to  tread  on  seipents  and  scotpi^ 
ons^  and  upon  all  the  power  of  the  enemy. -^ 
Nevertheless  in  this  refoice  fiot  that  the  spirits 
are  subject  to  you''^  The  treading  therefore 
on  serpents  and  scorpions  was  treading  upon  the 
spirits  of  which  they  were  figures. 

If  we  duly  reflect  upon  the  incongruity  of  an 

i  ZooL  Jaurn.  i.  7.        «  Luke,  x.  19.        «  /^,  18—20. 


234  INSTINCT. 

angel  and  a  demon  influencing  the  same  animal^ 
in  so  far  as  it  exhibits  instincts  partly  benevolent 
and  partly  ferocious,  we  shall  be  convinced  that 
this  hypothesis,  pursued  to  all  its  consequences, 
cannot  stand.  Intermediate  agents  between  the 
Deity  and  the  brute  are  as  much  in  the  place  of 
a  soul  to  the  latter,  as  the  Supreme  Intelligence 
would  be  if  his  action  upon  them  were  imme- 
diate, so  that  the  same  irrational  animal  would 
be  alternately  a  machinie  impelled  by  a  good  or 
evil  intelligence.  According  to  this  hypothesis 
the  bee,  that  symbol  of  wisdom,  when  she  sets 
out  upon  her  beneficent  errand  of  collecting 
honey  and  pollen,  is  acted  upon  by  the  good 
angel;  but,  if  she  meets  with  any  thing  that 
excites  her  fear  or  her  anger,  she  is  stimulated 
to  take  vengeance  upon  the  object  of  her  dis- 
pleasure, and  to  make  him  feel  the  puncture  of 
her  poisoned  dart,  by  the  evil  one. 

This  can  never  be  admitted.  The  same  ob- 
jection too  lies  against  this  hypothesis  as  against 
the  last,  that  it  does  not  account  for  the  mistakes 
sometimes  made  by  the  animal  when  endeavonr^ 
ing  to  accomplish  its  instinct.  It  cannot  be 
supposed  that,  in  the  case  before  mentioned,  the 
intelligent  intermediate  agent  would  stimulate 
the  flesh-fly  to  deposit  her  eggs  upon  the  blos- 
soms of  the  carrion  plant,  where  the  young  must 
inevitably  perish  from  hunger,  instead  of  upon 
real  flesh. 


INSTINCT.  235 

I  am  n^xt  to  consider  whether  instinct  be 
the  result  of  the  intellectual  powers  of  the 
animal  itself  that  exhibits  it.  If  we  survey 
tiie  different  tribes  of  the  animal  kingdom, 
we  shall  find  a  vast  difference  between  them 
with  respect  to  intellect.  That  wondarful  pulp, 
which  of  all  substances  is  alone  able  to  respond 
to  incorporeal  agq^cy :  to  receive  and  store 
up  the  information  collected  by  the  organs  of 
sensation,  that  it  may  be  ready  for  future  use^ 
and  which  is  the  seat  of  the  intellectual  faculties, 
that  wonderful  pulp  appears  under  very  dif- 
ferent circumstances  in  the  different  Classes  of 
animals  ;  but  it  has  not  been  made  evident  that 
the  acuteness  of  the  intellect,  though  in  some 
instances  it  seems  to  do  so,^  depends  altogether 
upon  the  comparative  volume  of  the  brain ;  for 
that  of  the  mouse,  compared  with  its  size,  is 
greater  than  that  of  the  half-reasoning  elephant' 
Man  indeed,  generally  speaking,  has  the  largest 
brain  of  all  animals,  but  it  seems  a  singular 
anomaly  that  persons  of  very  weak  intellects 
have  often  disproportionately  large  heads,  indi- 
cating a  great  volume  of  brain.  When  we  leave 
the  vertelMrated  animals,  we  find  the  nervous 

^  The  brain  of  the  elephant  is  Bve  times  the  size  of  that  of  the 
ibinoceroSf  being  as  182  to  35.  The  space  for  the  brain  is 
smaller  in  the  parrot  than  in  any  other  bird.  Lit,  Gaz,  May  28, 
1831.     Philos.  Trans.  1822.  42. 

*  Cuv.  Anat.  Cotnp.  ii.  148. 


236  INSTINCT. 

system,  in  most,  materially  altered  and  de- 
graded, so  that  more  power  is  given  apparently 
to  instinct  and  less  to  intellect.  In  other  ani- 
mals, as  we  descend,  the  nervous  system  be- 
comes more  and  more  dispersed,  so  that  in  those 
at  the  foot  of  the  scale  we  discern  no  traces  <^ 
intellect,  and  very  few  of  instinct ;  and  only  so 
much  apparent  sensation  as  is  necessary  for  the 
purposes  of  nutrition  and  reproduction.  I  have 
made  the  above  observations  because  they  bear 
in  some  degree  on  the  question  now  before  ns. 
For  if  we  pay  due  attention  to  the  proceedings  of 
animals,  we  shall  find  that  those  whose  nervous 
system  is  cerebral  usually  exhibit  the  most 
striking  proofs  of  intellectual  action,  are  most 
capable  of  instruction,  and  are  less  remarkable 
for  the  complexity  and  intenseness  of  their  in- 
stincts ;  while  those  of  the  next  grade,  whose 
nervous  system  is  ganglionic,  as  far  as  we  know 
them,  though  not  devoid  of  intellect,  are  endued 
with  a  much  smaller  portion  of  it,  while  their 
instinctive  operations  are  all  but  miraculous,  and 
that  where  the  nervous  system  is  still  less  con- 
centrated both  are  greatly  weakened,  till  at  the 
bottom  of  the  scale  they  almost  disappear. 
From  hence  it  seems  to  follow  that  extraordi- 
nary instinctive  powers  are  not  the  result  of 
extraordinary  intellectual  ones. 

But  when  we  reflect  further,  that  even  in 
cases  where  the  instincts  are  most  complex  and 


INSTINCT.  237 

wonderful,  the  animal  practises  them  infaUihly^ 
without  guide  or  direction,  and  is  as  expert  at 
them  when  it  first  emerges  into  life,  as  when  it 
has  been  long  engaged  in  the  practice  of  them ; 
it  follows  that  it  must  be  instructed  in  them 
from  the  first  moment  of  its  existence  in  the 
state  in  which  it  exercises  them,  by  an  infallible 
teacher.  The  bee,  the  moment  it  emeiges  from 
the  pupa,  begins  to  collect  honey  and  pollen, 
and  to  perform  all  the  other  manipulations  that 
belong  to  her  instincts. 

In  the  higher  animals  the  case  is  somewhat 
different.  When  they  emeige  into  life,  from 
the  womb,  or  from  the  egg,  it  is  usually  in  a 
state  of  helplessness,  in  which  at  first  they  can 
do  little  or  nothing  for  themselves  but  suck,  or 
receiye  food  from,  their  dam.  As  their  organiza- 
tion developes  they  gradually  gain  new  powers, 
till  they  arrive  at  their  acme,  or  age  of  puberty. 

The  young  beaver  generally  remains  with  its 
parents  till  it  is  three  years  old,  when  they 
couple,  and  build  a  cabin  for  themselves  and 
ofispring.  The  unfledged  bird  remains  quietly 
in  its  nest,  and  is  content  to  receive  its  food  and 
warmth  from  its  parents,  but  no  sooner  are  its 
feathers  grown,  and  its  beaked  prow  and  plumy 
oars  and  rudder  fit  it  to  win  its  way,  in  the 
ocean  of  air,  than,  incited  by  parental  exhorta- 
Uon^f  it  makes  the  attempt,  and  henceforth  is 
equal  to  support  itself,  and  to  fulfill  the  biddings 


238  INSTINCT. 

of  instinct  as  well  as  of  intellect  and  appetite. 
This  storge  stimulates  the  parent  animal  while 
its  care  of  its  youQg  is  necessary  to  them  and 
then  ceases.  This  is  therefore  chiefly  instioo 
tive ;  but  in  the  most  intellectual  of  all  animals, 
where  instinctive  love  ceases,  rational  love  be- 
gins ;  and  care  and  anxiety  for  the  welfare  of 
oar  offspring,  and  afiectionate  regard  for  their 
persons,  continues  after  they  cease  to  have  any 
need  of  our  help  and  attention. 

It  is  not  always  easy  in  this  tribe  of  animals 
to  distinguish  those  actions  that  are  purely  in- 
stinctive from  those  that  are  not  so,  and  writers 
on  this  subject,  as  was  before  observed,  often 
ascribe  to  instinct  actions  that  are  produced  by 
other  causes.  Animals  of  the  higher  grades,  by 
means  of  their  oi^ans  of  sensation,  acquire  ideas 
xipon  which  they  in  some  sort  reason,  by  com- 
paring one  with  another;  thus  they  get  ex- 
perience, and  as  they  grow  older  literally  grow 
wiser.  Hence  we  see  old  ones  often  very 
cunning  and  expert  in  removing  obstacles,  find- 
ing their  way,  and  the  like. 

With  regard  to  truly  instinctive  actions,  they 
invariably  follow  the  developement  of  the  or- 
ganization ;  are  neither  the  result  of  instruction, 
nor  of  observation  and  experience,  but  the  action 
of  some  external  agency  upon  the  organization, 
which  is  fitted  by  the  Omniscient  Creator  to 
respond  to  its  action. 


INSTINCT*  239 

Indeed »  if  intellect  was  the  sole  fountain  of 
those  operations  usually  dencMninated  instinctive, 
animals,  though  they  sought  the  same  end, 
would  vary  more  or  less  in  the  path  they  seve- 
raUy  took  to  arrive  at  it;  they  would . require 
some  instruction  and  practice  before  they  could 
be  perfect  in  their  operations;  the  new  bom 
bee  would  not  immediately  be  able  to  rear  a  cell, 
nor  know  where  to  go  for  the  materials,  till  some 
one  of  riper  experience  had  directed  her.  But 
experience  and  observation  have  nothing  to  do 
with  her  proceedings.  She  feels  an  indomitable 
appetite  which  compels  her  to  take  her  flight 
from  the  hive  when  the  state  of  the  atmosphere 
is  favourable  to  her  purpose.  Her  oi^ans  of 
sight — ^which  though  not  gifted  with  any  power 
of  motion,  are  so  situated  as  to  enable  her  to  see 
whatever  passes  above,  below,  and  on  each  side 
of  her — enable  her  to  avoid  any  obstacles,  and  to 
thread  her  devious  way  through  the  numerous 
and  intertwining  branches  of  shrubs  and  flowers ; 
some  other  sense  directs  her  to  those  which  con- 
tain the  precious  articles  she  is  in  quest  of. 
Bat  though  her  senses  guide  her  in  her  flight, 
and  indicate  to  her  where  she  may  most 
profitably  exercise  her  talent,  they  must  then 
yidd  her  to  the  impulse  and  direction  of 
her  instincts,  which  this  happy  and  industri- 
ous little  creature  plies  with  indefatigable  dili- 
gence and  energy,  till  having  completed  her 


240  INSTINCT. 

lading  of  nectar  and  ambrosia,  she  returns  to  the 
common  habitation  of  her  people,  with  whom 
she  unites  in  labours  before  described/  for  the 
general  benefit  of  the  community  to  which  she 
belongs. 

More  reasons  might  be  adduced  to  prove  that 
intellect  is  not  the  great  principle  of  instinct,  but 
enough  seems  to  have  been  said  to  establish 
that  point.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  however, 
that  though  intellect  is  not  the  great  principle, 
yet  it  must  be  admitted  that  all  animals  gifted 
with  the  ordinary  organs  of  sensation,  more  or 
less  employ  their  intellect  in  the  whole  routine 
of  their  instinctive  operations,  as  I  shall  show 
under  another  head. 

2.  But  if  no  metaphysical  power  can  be  satis- 
factorily demonstrated  to  be  the  immediate  cause 
of  instinct,  then  it  seems  to  follow  that  it  must 
be  either  a  physical  one,  or  one  partly  physical 
and  partly  metaphysical. 

In  the  former  case,  it  must  be  the  action  of 
some  physical  power  or  agent,  employed  by  the 
Deity,  and  under  his  guidance  so  as  to  work  his 
will,  upon  the  organization  of  the  animal ;  which 
must  be  so  constructed  as  to  respond  to  that 
action  in  a  certain  way,  or  by  the  exhibition  of 
certain  phenomena  peculiar  to  the  individual 
genus  or  species. 

i  See  above,  p.  187,  and  Introd.  to  EnU  ii.  173. 


INSTINCT.  241 

Mr.  Addison  has  observed — "  There  is  not,  in 
my  opinion,  any  thing  more  mysterious  in  na- 
ture than  this  instinct  in  animals,  which  thus 
rises  above  reason,  and  falls  infinitely  short  of 
it.  It  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  any  properties 
in  matter,  and  at  the  same  time  works  after  so 
odd  a  manner,  that  one  cannot  think  it  the 
faculty  of  an  intelligent  being.  For  my  own 
part,  I  look  upon  it  as  upon  the  principle  of 
Gravitation  in  bodies,  which  is  not  to  be  ex- 
{dained  by  any  known  qualities  inherent  in  the 
bodies  themselves,  nor  from  any  laws  of  me- 
chanism, but  according  to  the  best  notions  of 
the  greatest  philosophers,  is  an  immediate  im- 
pression from  the  First  Mover,  and  the  Divine 
Energy  acting  in  the  creatures."* 

I  have  quoted  this  passage  not  as  if  Addison 
intended  to  patronize  the  hypothesis  now  before 
me,  but  to  refer  to  his  illustration  of  instinct  by 
comparing  it  with  Gravity.  If  Gravity  be  the 
result  of  physical  agency,  and  not  an  immediate 
impression  of  the  First  Mover,  so  may  Instinct 
be  likewise.  Reasoning  from  analogy  it  seems 
inconsistent  with  the  customary  method  of  the 
Divine  proceedings  with  regard  to  man,  and  this 
visible  system  of  which  he  is  the  most  important 
part — for  a  being  that  combines  in  himself 
matter  and  spirit,  must  be  more  important  than 

*  Spectator,  ii.  n.  120. 
VOL.  II.  R 


242  INSTINCT. 

a  whole  world  that  does  not  combine  spirit  with 
matter — to  act  immediately  upon  any  thing  but 
spirit,  except  by  the  intermediate  agency  of 
some  physical  though  subtile  substance,  em- 
powered by  him  to  act  as  his  vicegerent  io 
nature,  and  to  execute  the  law  that  has  received 
his  sanction. 

If  we  consider  the  effects  produced  by  the 
great  physical  powers  of  the  heavens,  by  what* 
ever  name  we  distinguish  them :  that  they  form 
the  instrument  by  which  Grod  maintains  the 
whole  universe  in  order  and  beauty;  produces 
the  cohesion  of  bodies;  regulates  and  supports 
the  motions,  annual  and  diurnal,  of  the  earth 
and  other  planets ;  prescribes  to  some  an  ec* 
centric  orbit,  extending,  probably,  into  other 
systems ;  ^  causes  satellites  to  attend  upon  and 
revolve  round  their  primary  planets;  and  not 
only  this,  but  by  a  kind  of  conservative  energy 
empowers  them  to  prevent  any  dislocatioius  in 
the  vast  machine;  and  any  destructive  abena* 
tions  arising  from  the  action  of  these  mighty 
orbs  upon  each  other.  If  we  consider  further 
what  God  effects  both  upon  and  within  every 
individual  sphere  and  system,  throughout  the 
whole  universe,  by  the  constant  action  of  those 
viceregal  powers,  if  I  may  so  call  them,  that 
rule  under  him,  whatever  name  we  give  thera ; 

1  Za  P/ace.  E.  T.  11.  337.  341. 


INSTINCT.  243 

I  8ay«  if  we  duly  consider  what  these  powers 
actually  eflfect,  it  will  require  no  great  stretch  of 
taith  to  believe  that  they  may  be  the  inter-agents 
by  which  the  Deity  acts  upon  animal  organiza- 
tions and  structures  to  produce  all  their  varied 
instincts. 

An  eminent  French  zoologist^  has  illustrated 
the  change  of  instincts^  resulting  from  the  modi- 
fication of  the  nervous  system,  which  takes 
place  in  a  butterfly ,  in  the  transit  to  its  perfect 
or  imago  state  from  the  caterpillar^  by  a  novel 
and  striking  simile.  He  compares  the  animal 
to  a  portable  or  hand  organ ,  in  which,  on  a 
cylinder  that  can  be  made  to  revolve,  several 
tunes  are  noted ;  turn  the  cylinder  and  the  tune 
ibr  which  it  is  set  is  played ;  draw  it  out  a  notch 
and  it  gives  a  second ;  and  so  you  may  go  on 
till  the  whole  number  of  tunes  noted  on  it  have 
had  their  turn.  This,  happily  enough,  represents 
the  chai^  which  appears  to  take  place  in  the 
vertebral  chord  and  its  ganglions  on  the  meta- 
morphosis of  the  caterpillar  into  the  butterfly, 
and  the  sequence  of  new  instincts  which  result 
£pom  the  change.  But  if  we  extend  the  com- 
parison, we  may  illustrate  by  it  the  two  spheres  of 
organized  beings  that  we  find  on  our  globe,  and 
their  several  instinctive  changes  and  operations. 
We  may  suppose  each  kingdom  of  nature  to  be 

'  Dr.  Virey. 


244  .    INSTINCT. 

represented  by  a  separate  cylinder,  having 
noted  upon  it  as  many  tunes  as  there  are  species 
differing  in  their  respective  instincts— for  plants 
may  be  regarded,  in  some  sense,  as  having  their 
instincts  as  well  as  animals — and  that  the  eon* 
stant  impulse  of  an  invisible  agent  causes  each 
cylinder  to  play  in  a  certain  order  all  the  tunes 
noted  upon  it :  this  will  represent,  not  unaptly, 
what  takes  place,  with  regard  to  the  develope- 
ment  of  instincts,  in  the  vegetable  and  animal 
kingdoms ;  and  our  simile  will  terminate  in  the 
enquiry,  whose  may  be  that  invisible  hand  that 
thus  shakes  the  sistrum  of  Isis,^  and  produces 
that  universal  harmony  of  action,  resulting  from 
that  due  intermixture  of  concords  and  discords, 
according  to  the  will  of  its  Almighty  Author,  in 
that  infinitely  diversified  and  ever  moving  sphere 
of  beings  which  we  call  nature.^ 

What,  if  the  powers  lately  mentioned,  and 
which,  in  the  Introduction  to  the  present  work, 
I  hope  I  have  made  it  appear,  are  synonymous 
with  the  physical  Cherubim  of  the  Holy  Scrq)- 
tures,  or  the  heavens  in  action  which  under  God 
govern  the  universe ;  what,  if  these  powera— 
employed  as  they  are  by  the  Deity  so  universally 
to  effect  his  Almighty  will  in  the  upholding  of 
the  worlds  in  their  stated  motions,  and  prevent- 


"  The  Sistrum  of  Isis  symbolized  the  elements. 

2  Ovffcc  tcayaioKr}, 


INSTINCT.  245 

log  their  aberrations, — should  also  be  the  inter- 
mediate agents,  which  by  their  action  on  plants 
and  animals  produce  every  physical  develope- 
ment  and  instinctive  operation,  unless  where 
God  himself  decrees  a  departure  that  circum- 
stances may.  render  necessary  from  any  law 
that  he  has  established  ? 

With  regard  to  the  vegetable  kingdom,  con- 
sisting of  organized  beings  without  sense  or 
voluntary  motion,  few  would  deny  that  they  are 
subject  to  the  dominion  of  the  elements,  and 
irespond  to  the  action  of  those  mysterious  powers 
that  rule,  under  God,  in  nature.  But  when  the 
query  is  concerning  the  animal  kingdom,  most 
of  the  members  of  which  to  organization  and  life 
add  a  will  and  powers  of  voluntary  motion,  and 
many  have  a  degree  of  intelligence  residing 
within  them  which  governs  many  of  their  actions, 
ve  hesitate  as  to  the  answer  we  shall  return  to  it. 

It  will  furnish  a  presumptive  proof  that  those 
actions  which  are  instinctive  in  animals  are  the 
results  of  the  action  of  those  intermediate  powers 
to  which  I  have  just  alluded,  if  it  can  be  shewn, 
that  there  is  any  thing  in  plants  at  all  analogous 
to  the  instincts  of  animals,  for  if  there  be,  one 
can  scarcely  suppose  that  they  are  produced 
by  a  different  cause.  Let  us,  therefore,  now 
leaving  the  animal  kingdom, — which  to  us 
perhaps  appears  the  sole  theatre  in  which  in- 
stmcts  manifest  themselves, — and  turning  our 


246  INSTINCT. 

attention  to  the  vegetable,  inquire  whether  any 
thing  analogous  to  these  springs  of  action  is 
discoverable  there. 

One  remarkable  distinction,  between  the  ani- 
mal and  the  vegetable  is  in  the  difference  of  the 
principles  that  form  their  pabulum.  The  former 
does  not  become  the  nutriment  of  the  latter  till 
it  is  chemically  decomposed ;  whereas  the  latter 
becomes  the  food  of  the  former,  either  in  its 
green,  or  ripe  state,  and  is  not  decomposed  and 
turned  to  nutriment  till  it  is  passed  into  its 
stomach,  and  is  subject  to  various  actions  of 
various  organs,  or  their  products,  so  that,  though 
the  food  of  both  is  decomposed  in  order  to  be 
assimilated,  yet  with  regard  to  the  v^etable 
this  happens  before  it  enters  it,  but  to  the  animal 
after  it  enters  it,  the  decomposing  powers  being 
without  the  plant  and  within  the  animal.  In 
the  former  case  it  is  the  action  of  the  atmosphere 
unassisted  by  the  organization  of  the  plant— in 
the  latter  it  is  the  same  action  assisted  by  the 
organization  of  the  animal. 

Another  thing  may  be  here  observed — ^that  as 
the  most  remarkable  instincts  of  animals  are 
those  connected  with  the  propagation  of  the 
species,  so  the  analogue  of  these  instincts  in 
plants  is  the  developement  of  these  parts  pecu- 
liarly connected  with  the  production  of  the  seed 
—so  that  the  expanded  flower  and  the  operatioDd 


INSTINCT.  247 

going  on  in  it  is  the  analogue  of  the  reproduce 
tiye  instinct  of  the  animal :  this  is  all  produced 
by  physical  action  upon  the  organization  of  the 
plant.  Now  if  we  consider  the  infinite  variety 
of  plants,  and  the  wonderful  diversity  of  their 
parts  of  fructification,  and  that  these  are  all 
produced  in  their  several  seasons  and  stations 
by  the  action  of  some  physical  powers  upon 
their  varied  organization,  and  by  means  of  the 
soil  in  which  they  are  planted,  we  shall  think 
it  nearly  as  wonderful  and  unaccountable  as  the 
instinctive  operations  of  the  various  creatures 
that  feed  upon  them.  That  the  same  action 
should  unfold  such  an  infinite  variety  of  forms 
in  one  case  and  instincts  in  the  other  is  equally 
astounding  and  equally  difficult  to  explain. — 
Compare  the  sunflower  and  the  hive-bee,  the 
compound  flowers  of  the  one,  and  the  aggregate 
of  combs  of  the  other — the  receptacle  with  its 
seeds,  and  the  combs  with  the  grubs. 

Again,  as  all  plants  have  their  appropriate 
fractification,  so  they  have  other  peculiarities 
connected  with  their  situation,  nutriment,  and 
mode  of  life,  corresponding  in  some  measure 
with  these  instincts  that  belong  to  other  parts  of 
an  animal's  economy.  Some  with  a  climbing  or 
v<^uble  stem,  constantly  turn  one  way,  and  some 
as  constantly  turn  another.  Thus  the  hop 
twines  from  the  left  to  the  right,  while  the  bind- 


248  INSTINCT. 

weed  goes  from  right  to  left ;  ^  others  close  their 
leaves  in  the  night,  and  seem  to  go  to  sleep; 
others  shew  a  remarkable  degree  of  irritability 
when  touched;  the  blossoms  of  many,  as  the 
sunflower,  follow  the  sun  from  his  rising  to  his 
setting;  some  blossoms  shut  up,  as  in  the 
anemone,  till  the  sun  shines  upon  them ;  others 
close  at  a  certain  hour  of  the  day,  as  the  goats* 
beard  ;^  another,  Hedysarum  gyrans^  slowly  re- 
volves. The  same  physical  action  upon  a  pecu- 
liar organization  produces  all  these  effects. 

We  may  further  observe  that  the  great  majority 
of  plants  send  forth  radicles  which  presenting 
their  points  to  the  sources  of  vegetable  life  and 
nutrition  on  all  sides,  absorb  each  its  portion, 
and  convey  it  to  the  stem  from  which  they 
issue ;  analogous,  in  this  respect,  to  the  polypes, 
which  unfold  and  expand  their  tentacles  for  a 
similar  purpose.  Ivy  planted  against  a  wall  or 
trunk  of  a  tree  supports  itself  by  innumerable 
radicles,  but  I  once  saw  a  plant  reared  as  a 
standard  which  sent  forth  none.  This  seems 
analogous  to  some  animal  instincts,  which,  de« 
pending  upon  circumstances,  may  be  called 
conditional;  as  when,  in  the  case  of  a  sterile 
queen,  the  bees  do  not,  as  usual,  massacre  the 
drones.^ 

'  See  Willd.  Princip.  of  Botany,  §  18.  n.  51.  a.  A.  Plate  il. 
'  Tragopogon.  '  Introd.  to  EnL  ii.  Lett.  xx. 


INSTINCT.  249 

There  is  another  parallelism  between  the  plant 
and  the  animal,  especially  the  insect,  which 
appears  to  prove  that  their  instincts  are  ruled  by 
the  same  physical  agent,  I  mean  their  hyher- 
nation.  In  extratropical  countries,  or  a  great 
proportion  of  them,  as  the  year  declines,  and  the 
amount  of  heat,  received  from  its  great  fountain, 
is  diminished  by  the  shortening  of  the  days,  the 
deciduous  ti:ees  and  shrubs  cast  their  leaves, 
plants  of  every  description  cease  more  or  less 
their  growth,  and  all  vegetable  nature  seems  to 
become  torpid.  At  the  same  period,  and  under 
the  influence  of  the  same  cause,  the  decrease  of 
the  amount  of  caloric,  several  of  the  higher  ani- 
mals, all  the  reptiles,  as  well  as  nearly  the  whole 
world  of  insects,  retire  from  the  exercise  of  their 
wonted  instincts,  and  conceal  themselves,  some 
under  the  earth,  and  others  under  bark,  under 
stones,  in  crevices,  moss,  and  similar  hiding 
|4aces,  where  they  take  their  winter's  sleep,  till 
a  more  genial  temperature  whispers  to  them — 
Awake — and  they  return  to  their  several  employ- 
ments. This  effect  in  both  the  plant  and  the 
animal,  seems  to  spring  from  the  same  physical 
cause — the  periodical  lowering  of  the  tempo* 
ratnre ;  so  that  heat  appears  to  be  the  plectrum, 
and  the  organization  of  the  animal,  the  strings 
it  touches,  which  cause  it  to  exhibit  the  pre- 
scribed sequence  of  its  instincts.  Whoever  has 
been  in  the  habit  of  attending  to  the  motions  of 


250  INSTINCT. 

insects  will  find  them  most  alert  in  sultry  weath^, 
especially  in  an  electric  state  of  the  atmosphere 
before  a  thunder  storm.  Heat  and  electricity 
also  accelerate  the  growth  o{ plants,  if  duly  Bup* 
plied  with  moisture. 

It  is  remarkable,   and  worthy  of  particular 
observation  9  verifying  the  old  adage  that  extremes 
meet,  that  an  approach  towards  the  maximum 
of  heat  produces  sometimes  the  same  effects 
upon  organized  nature  that  an  approach  towards 
the  minimum  does.     In  tropical  countries  they 
do  not  divide  the  year  into  winter  and  summer, 
but  into  the  rainy  and  dry  seasons ;  as  to  tempe- 
rature, the  former  would,  perhaps,  be  judged  to 
correspond  with  our  winter,  and  the  latter  with 
our  summer,  but  with  respect  to  the  state  of 
animals  and  vegetables,  the  reverse  would  ap- 
pear to  be  most  consistent   with   facts.     The 
great  rains,  according  to  M.  Lacordaire,'  "  begin 
to  fall  in  Brazil  about  the  middle  of  September, 
when  all  nature  seems  to  awake  from  its  peri- 
odical repose ;  vegetation  resumes  a  more  lively 
tint,  and  the  greater  part  of  plants  renew  their 
leaves ;  the  insects  begin  to  reappear :  in  Oc- 
tober the  rains  are  rather  more  frequent,  and 
with  them  the  insects ;  but  it  is  not  till  towards 
the  middle  of  November,  when  the  rainy  season 
is  definitively  set  in,  that  all  the  families  a^iear 

>  AnnaL  desSa,  Natur.  xx.  Juin.  1830.  193. 


INSTINCT.  251 


roddenly  to  develope  themsebres;  and 
general  impulse  that  all  nature  seems  to  receiye 
continues  augmenting  till  the  middle  of  January, 
when  it  attains  its  acme.  The  forests  present 
then  an  aspect  of  movement  and  life  of  which 
our  woods  in  Europe  can  give  no  idea.  During 
part  of  the  day  we  hear  a  vast  and  uninterrupted 
bum,  in  which  the  deafening  cry  of  the  tree- 
hopper^  prevails ;  and  you  cannot  take  a  step,  or 
touch  a  leaf,  without  putting  insects  to  flight. 
At  11  a.  m.  the  heat  is  become  insupportable, 
and  all  animated  nature  becomes  torpid — ^the 
noise  diminishes — ^the  insects,  and  other  animals 
disappear — and  are  seen  no  more  till  the  evening* 
Then,  when  the  atmosphere  is  again  cool,  to  the 
matin  species  succeed  others  whose  office  it  is  to 
embellish  the  nights  of  the  torrid  zone.  I  am 
speaking  of  the  glow-worms^  and  fire-flies;' 
whilst  the  former,  issuing  by  myriads  from  their 
retreats,  overspread  the  plants  and  shrubs ;  the 
latter  crossing  each  other  in  all  directions,  weave 
in  the  air,  as  it  were,  a  luminous  web,  the  light 
of  which  they  diminish  or  augment  at  pleasure. 
This  brilliant  illumination  only  ceases  when  the 
night  gives  place  to  the  day. 

As  during  our  winters,  some  part  of  the  insect 
p<^ukttion  occasionally  appear  and  dance  in  the 
sunbeam,  so  in  Brazil,  according  to  M.  Lacor- 

>   Tettxgonia.    Cicada,  &c.         ^  Lampyris.   Pygolampis.  K. 
3  ElaternoctUucuSt &c. 


252  INSTINCT. 

daire,  during  the  months  of  May,  June,  July, 
and  August,  the  season  of  great  drought,  when 
all  nature  is  embrowned,  and  consequently 
affording  no  proper  food  for  perfect  insects ;  the 
caterpillars  of  Lepidoptera  are  those  mostly  to 
be  met  with,  while  in  the  rainy  season  those  only 
that  live  in  society  occur. 

The  great  object  of  the  Creator  appears  to  lie 
the  employment  of  the  various  tribes  of  animals^ 
to  do  the  work  for  which  he  created  them  at  its 
proper  season;  and  where  the  object  is  parti- 
cularly to  keep  within  due  limits  the  growth  of 
plants,  or  to  remove  dead  or  putrescent  substances 
before  they  generate  miasmata^  we  may  conjec- 
ture, that  when  their  services  are  not  wanted, 
they  would  be  allowed  a  season  of  repose,  so 
that  during  winter  with  us,  when  there  is  little 
or  no  vegetation  of  the  plant,  and  a  hot  sun  does 
not  cause  putrescent  substances  to  exale  un- 
wholesome effluvia,  the  great  body  of  labourers 
in  these  departments,  we  may  say,  are  sent  to 
bed  for  a  time,  till  their  labours  are  again  ne- 
cessary. So  also  in  tropical  countries,  where 
drought  and  heat  united  are  sufficient  to  do  the 
work  of  nature's  pruners  and  scavengers,  by 
stopping  vegetation,  and  immediately  drying  up 
animal  and  other  substances,  before  putridity 
takes  place,  they  then  abstract  themselves,  and 
retreat  to  their  winter  quarters;  but  when  the 
rainy  season  revives  the  face  of  nature,  they 


INSTINCT.  253 

return »  each  to  exercise  his  appointed  function, 
at  the  bidding  of  his  Creator. 

All  these  circumstances  indicate  an  analogy 
between  certain  phenomena  observable  in  the 
history  of  plants^  and  some  of  the  instincts  of 
animals:  and  tend  to  prove  that  the  proximate 
cause  of  both  may  be  very  nearly  related ;  and 
that  as  the  immediate  cause  of  the  vegetable 
instinct  is  clearly  physical^  so  may  be  that  of  the 
ammal.  With  regard  to  all  actions,  in  the 
latter,  which  are  the  result  of  intellect,  they,  of 
coarse,  are  produced  by  some  principle  residing 
vitbin,  as  when  the  senses  guide  it,  or  it  exer- 
cises its  memory ;  and  these  aid  it  in  following 
the  impulse  of  instinct.  The  greatest  of  modern 
chemists  has  observed,  with  respect  to  some 
such  agent,  ''  that  the  immediate  connection 
between  the  sentient  principle  and  the  body 
may  be  established  by  kinds  of  etherial  matter, 
which  can  never  be  evident  to  the  senses,  and 
which  may  bear  the  same  relation  to  heat,  light, 
aad  electricity,  that  these  refined  forms  or  modes 
of  existence  bear  to  the  gases."  ^  I  may  observe 
upon  this  passage,  that  the  farther  any  matter  is 
removed  from  our  knowledge  and  coercion,  the 
more  powerful  it  really  is.  Thus  liquids  are 
more  powerful  than  solids,  gases  than  liquids, 
imponderable  fluids  than  gases,  and  so  we  may 

*  Consolations  in  Travel ,  214. 


254  INSTINCT. 

keep  ascending  till  we  approach  the  confines  of 
spirit,  which  will  lead  us  to  the  foot  of  the  throne 
of  the  Deity  himself,  the  Spirit  of  spirits,  the 
only  Almighty,  the  only  All-wise,  and  the  only 
All-good. 

Dr.  Henry  More,  a  very  eminent  philoscqpher 
and  divine  of  the  seventeenth  century,  under  the 
name  of  the  Spirit  of  Nature,  speaks  of  a  power 
between  matter  and  spirit,  which  he  describes 
as — ''  A  substance  incorporeal,  but  without  sense 
and  animadversion,  pervading  the  whole  matter 
of  the  universe,  and  exercising  a  plastical  power 
therein,  according  to  the  sundry  predispositions 
and  occasions  in  the  parts  it  works  upon,  raising 
such  phenomena  in  the  world,  by  directing  the 
parts  of  matter  and  their  motion,  as  cannot  be 
resolved  into  mere  mechanical  powers — ^which 
goes  through  and  assists  all  corporeal  beings, 
and  is  the  vicarious  power  of  God  npoa  the 
universal  matter  of  the  world.  This  suggests  to 
the  spider  the  fancy  of  spinning  and  weaving 
her  web ;  and  to  the  bee  of  the  framing  of  her 
honey-comb  ;  and  especially  to  the  silk-worm  of 
conglomerating  her  both  funeral  and  natal  chie ; 
and  to  the  birds  of  building  their  nests,  and  of 
their  so  diligent  hatching  their  eggs."^ 

This  Spirit  of  Nature  of  Dr.  More  seems  not 
very  difierent  from  the  Etherial  Matter  of  Sir 

'  On  the  hnmortality  of  the  Saul,  B.  iii.  c.  12,  13. 


INSTINCT.  255 

H.  Dary ;  and  it  is  singular,  that  Dr.  Paris,  in 
kis  interesting  life  of  our  great  chemist — speak-* 
iog  of  a  monument  to  be  erected  to  his  memory 
at  Penzance — should  thus  express  himself.  ''  It 
was  to  be  erected  on  one  of  those  elevated  spots 
of  silence  and  solitude  where  he  delighted,  in 
his  boyish  days,  to  commune  with  the  elements^ 
aod  where  the  Spirit  of  Natm^e  moulded  his 
genius  in  one  of  her  wildest  moods.  "^ 

But — to  return  from  this  digres^on  to  Sir  H. 
Davy's  etherial  matter  bearing  the  same  relation 
to  heat,  light,  and  electricity,  that  they  do  to  the 
gases — I  would  ask,  if  such  may  be  the  powers 
by  which  the  soul  moves  the  body,  and  produces 
those  actions  that  are  in  our  own  power  to  do  or 
not  to  do,  depending  upon  the  will,  does  it  seem 
incongruous  that  light,  heat,  and  air,  or  any 
modification  of  them,  upon  which  every  animal 
depends  for  life  and  breath,  and  nutrition  and 
growth,  and  all  things,  should  be  employed  by 
the  Deity  to  excite  and  direct  them,  where  their 
intellect  cantiot,  in  their  instinctive  operations? 
That  their  organization,  as  to  their  instruments 
of  manducation,  motion,  manipulation,  &c.  has  a 
Inference  to  their  instincts  every  one  owns ;  can 
we  not,  therefore,  conceive  that  the  organization 
of  the  brain  and  nervous  system  may  be  so 
varied  and  formed  by  the  Creator,  as  to  respond » 

>  Life  of  Sir  H.  Davy,  4to»  edit.  61 7. 


256  INSTINCT. 

in  the  way  that  he  wills,  to  pulses  upon  them 
from  the  physical  powers  of  nature ;  so  as  to 
excite  animals  to  certain  operations  for  which 
they  were  evidently  constructed,  in  a  way  ana- 
logous to  the  excitement  of  appetite  ?  The  new- 
born babe  has  no  other  teacher  to  tell  it  that  its 
mother's  breast  will  supply  it  with  its  proper 
nutriment ;  it  cries  for  it ;  it  spontaneously  ap- 
plies its  mouth  to  it ;  and  presses  it  under  the 
bidding  of  appetite  resulting  from  its  organi- 
zation. When  it  arrives  at  the  age  of  dentition, 
it  as  naturally  uses  its  teeth  for  mastication ;  it 
wants  no  instructor  to  inform  it  how  they  are  to 
be  employed  to  effect  that  purpose ;  and  so  with 
respect  to  other  appetites  which  the  further 
developement  of  its  organs  produces. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  urged,  in  the  case  lately 
alluded  to,  of  the  infant  growing  up  to  puberty, 
that  the  instinctive  operations  that  take  place 
under  the  bidding  of  appetite  fall  under  the 
general  law  of  instinct ;  but  it  must  be  admitted 
that  the  gradual  developement  of  the  organi- 
zation is  the  consequence  of  the  action  of  phy- 
sical powers  in  the  processes  going  on  in  the 
body.  Or,  as  a  learned  writer  on  the  subject 
asks, — "  In  effect  is  instinct  any  thing  else,  but 
the  manifestation  without  of  that  same  wisdom 
which  directs,  in  the  interior  of  our  body,  all  our 
vital  functions."^ 

1  Dr.  Virey.  AT.  D.  D'Hist.  Nut,  xvi.  293. 


INSTINCT.  267 

Having  rendered  it  probable  that  those  ia- 
stincts,  which  result  evidently  from  what  are 
called  bodily  appetites,  are  the  consequences 
merely  of  physical  action  upon  an  organization 
adapted  to  respond  to  it,  I  shall  next  inquire 
whether  this  may  not  be  the  case  in  instances 
which  are  not  to  be  regarded  in  that  light. 

We  may  divide  instincts  into  three  general 
beads : — 

a.  Those  relating  to  the  multiplication  of  the 
species,  especially  the  care  of  animals  for  their 
young  both  before  and  after  birth. 

/3.  Those  relating  to  their  food. 

y.  Those  relating  to  their  Hybernation. 

a.  The  pairing  of  animals  usually  begins  to 
take  place  in  the  spring,  when  the  winter  is 
passed,  the  earth  is  covered  with  verdure  and 
adorned  by  the  various  flowers  that  now  expand 
their  blossoms,  in  proportion  as  the  great  centre 
of  light  and  heat  more  and  more  manifests  his 
power  over  the  earth ;  the  birds  sing  their 
love^songs;  the  nightingale  is  now— '«  Most 
musical,  most  melancholy ;" — the  cuckoo  repeats 
his  monotonous  note;  and  every  other  animal 
seems  to  partake  of  the  universal  joy.  All  this 
appears  the  result  of  a  physical  rather  than  a 
iMtaphysical  excitement. 

As  to  their  care  of  their  future  progeny,  a 
great  variety  of  circumstances  take  place.    Vivi- 

VOL.  II.  s 


358  iNSTmcT. 

parous  animals  have  generally  to  give  sock  to 
their  young  for  a  time ;  oviparous  (mes  either  to 
construct  a  nest  to  receive  their  ^gs»  and,  after 
hatching,  to  provide  them  with  appropriate  food 
during  a  certain  period,  or  to  deposit  their  eggs 
where  their  young  progeny,  as  soon  as  hatched, 
may  infallibly  find  it.     But  first,  I  must  say 
something  of  that  Storge^  or  instinctive  affection, 
which  is  almost  universally  exhibited  by  females 
for  their  progeny  both  before  and  after  par* 
turition;    a  feeling  of   afifection  not  generally 
common  to  the  males,  or  rather  only  in  a  few 
instances,  as  where  the  male  bird  assists  the 
female  in  incubation.    Yet  this  instinctive  fond- 
ness,  as  soon  as  it  ceases    to    be    necessary, 
vanishes ;  except,  as  was  before  observed,^  in  the 
human  species ;  a  fiact  that  seems  to  prove  that 
it  is  not  the  result  of  the  association  of  ideas, 
but  of  an  impress  of  the  Creator  interwoven  with 
the  frame.    But  that  this  impress  is  by  means 
of  a  physical  interagent,  seems  to  fi>llow  from 
this  circumstance — that  the  hen  shows  the  same 
instinctive  attachment  to  the  young  dmelUings 
that  have  been  hatched  under  her,  that  she 
would  do  to  chickens,  the  produce  of  her  owa 
^ggs;    ^i^d  if  the  new-born  offiipring  c£  any 
mammiferous  animal  is  abstracted  from  her,  and 
another  substituted,  even  of  a  different  kiod, 

1  See  above,  p.  238. 


INSTINCT.  269 

the  same  affectionate  tenderness  is  manifested 
towards  it,  as  its  own  real  offspring  would  haye 
experienced.  Now  was  it  a  metaphysical,  and 
not  a  physical,  impulse,  surely  this  wonld  not  be 
the  case.  This  is  only  one  of  many  instances, 
which  pro?e  that  instinct  is  not  infallible :  and, 
in  truth,  with  regard  to  the  higher  animals,  many 
associations  may  take  place  between  the  child 
aad  parent  that  help  to  endear  the  former  to  the 
latter.  In  the  first  place,  the  rery  circumstance 
of  its  being  the  fruit  of  her  own  bowels^  and 
fed  with  milk  from  her  own  breast  must  bind 
it  to  her  by  the  tenderest  of  ties ;  especially  as, 
at  the  same  time,  it  relieves  her  from  what  is 
troublesome.  There  is  something  also  in  infant 
helplessness,  and  infant  gambols,  calculated  to 
win  upon  the  doting  mother.  The  subsequent 
alienation  and  estrangement  of  the  female  from 
her  young,  which  takes  place  in  all  animals 
except  man,  appears,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be 
produced  by  their  becoming  troublesome  and 
annoying  to  her;  which,  in  some  degree,  may 
account  for  her  desire  to  cast  them  off.  Exa- 
auning  the  subject,  therefore,  on  all  sides,  in  the 
highest  grades  of  animals,  and  those  in  whom 
mtemal  affection  appears  most  intense,  intellect 
and  associations  may  be  a  good  deal  mixed  with 
instinct  in  producing  it.  As  we  descend  in  the 
scale,  the  intensity  of  the  feeling  seems  much 
reduced;  and,  in  numerous  tribes,  is  confined 


260  INSTINCT. 

solely  to  the  circumstances  of  parturition.  So 
that  the  Storge^  and  its  cessation,  do  not  appear 
altogether  so  extraordinary  and  unaccountable 
as  a  cursory  view  might  tend  to  persuade  us. 

The  MammaUa7is^  in  general,  appear,  to  have 
recourse  to  very  few  striking  preparatory  actions 
previously  to  bringing  forth  their  young,  since 
they  have  usually  no  nest  to  prepare  for  their 
reception.  Cats,  however,  it  may  be  observed, 
search  about  v^ry  inquisitively  for  a  snug 
and  concealed  station ;  and  burrowing  animals 
naturally  retire  to  the  bottom  of  their  burrows, 
when  their  feelings  tell  them  their  hour  is  come, 
and  there  are  relieved  of  their  precious  burthen. 
Several  others  of  the  Radentia,  or  gnawers,  as 
the  dormouse,  make  beds  of  their  own  hair  to 
receive  their  young.  In  most  cases  that  fall 
under  our  daily  observation,  the  young  are 
dropped  where  the  mother  happens  to  be  when 
the  pains  of  labour  overtake  her.  The  animals 
we  are  speaking  of  have  at  hand  immediately  a 
plentiful  supply  of  food  for  the  nutriment  of 
their  new-born  offspring;    they  have  not,  like 

the  birds,  to  search  for  provision  for  them,  but, 

« 

from  their  own  bodies,  furnish  them  with  a 
delicious  fluid  suited  to  their  state,  which,  forais 
their  support  till  they  are  able  to  crop  and  digest 
the  herbage,  when  they  are  left  to  shift  for 
themselves.  Some  are  born  more  independent 
of  maternal  care  than  others ;   thus 


INSTINCT.  201 

animate,  as  the  cal£  the  Iamb,  and  the  young 
e<rft,  can  move  about  almost  as  soon  as  they  are 
born,  and  can  immediately  use  their  organs  of 
sight;  whereas  the  progeny  of  beasts  of  prey 
waally  come  into  the  world  blind,  and  some 
time  elapses  before  they  can  run  about,  so  that 
the  dam,  if  she  wishes  to  remove  them,  must 
carry  them  herself,  which  she  genarally  does,  in 
her  mouth. 

As  the  proper  food  of  herbivorous  quadrupeds 
is  almost  every  where  abundant,  they  are  soon 
tempted,  without  the  intervention  of  the  mother, 
to  browse  upon  the  herbage  :  but  the  pre« 
daceous  beast  whose  food  must  be  pursued  and 
captured,  takes  more  pains  to  instruct  her 
ycmng  how  to  maintain  themselves;  thus  the 
cat  lays  the  mouse  or  bird,  that  she  has  caught, 
before  her  kittens;  and  it  is  laughable  to 
observe  how  they  are  excited,  and  with  what 
resolution  and  ferocity  the  little  furies  endeavour 
to  keep  possession  of  the  prey  their  dam. has 
brought  to  them. 

But  of  all  classes  of  animals  the  birds  are  the 
most  remarkable  for  the  labours  they  undergo 
preparatory  to  laying  their  eggs.  In  those  that 
nMgrate  a  long  aerial  voyage  is  previously  to  be 
undertaken,  the  stimulus  to  which,  in  the  swal* 
low,  s^ppears  to  be  altogether  physical,^  and  is 

*  Vol.  1.  p.  102.    See  Jenner,  Philos,  Trans.  1824,  20. 


362  INSTINCT* 

probably  so  in  other  migrators.    But  what  is  it 
that  directs  them  in  their  flight,  and  enables 
them  to  return  to   the  countries  from  which 
th^  had  migrated  ?    Did  the  swallow  ^  steer  her 
course  within  sight  of  land,  it  might,  perhaps, 
be  supposed  that  her  memofy  was  her  director : 
but  these  birds  are  often  found  at  sea,  hundreds 
of  miles  fh>m  any  shore,^  where,   one  would 
think,  there  could  be  no  index  either  in  the 
clouds  or  the  ocean  to  instruct  her  which  way  to 
steer  her  adventurous  course.    The  only  atmos* 
pheric  phenomenon  affecting  her  would  be  the 
change  of  temperature  as  she  went  northward. 
But  we  can  only  conjecture  in  this  case— oba^^ 
Tation,  as  well  as  scripture,  tells  us,  indeed, 
The  stark  in  the  heaven  knoweth  her  appaintei 
times;  and  the  turtle^   and  the  erane^  and  tii 
swallow  obsei^e  the  time  of  their  comingy^  but, 
God,  who  decrees  the  end,  appoints  the  me^ms^ 
which  often  remain  amongst  his  Secret  Things. 
Yet,  though  the  immediate  agent  that  guides 
the  swallow  over  the  expanse  of  water,  from  the 
torrid  to  the  temperate  zone  is  latent,  we  may 
still  inquire,  when  she  has  made  the  shores  of 
Britain,  what  is  it  that  urges  her  to  seek  her  old 
vicinity,  and  to  build  her  nest  in  the  very  spot 
where  she  herself  first  drew  breath,  as  Dr.  Jen* 
ner's  experiments   prove    that   swallows   dol^ 

1  Hirundo  rustica.  ^  P kilos.  Trans,  ubi  Bupr.  13. 

^  Jersm,  viiL  7.  ^  Pkilos.  Trans,  ubi  supr.  16. 


IK3TINCT. 


isi 


Here  may  we  not  conjecture  that  her  intellect 
and  memory  become  her  guides?  She  recog- 
nizes the  spot  in  which  she  committed  herself 
to  the  sea  breeze;  and  there»  probably,  again 
flies  inland,  and  will  have  no  great  difficulty  in 
pnrsuii)^  the  line  of  country  which  leads  to  her 
native  village,  and  to  the  very  roof  under  the 
eaves  of  which  she  was  bom. 

But  of  all  the  instincts  of  the  feathered  part 
of  the  creation,  there  is  none  more  remarkable^ 
more  varied,  and  more  worthy  of  admiration 
than  that  which  directs  them  in  the  situation 
and  structure  of  their  nests. — One  nidificates 
upon  the  ground  ;^  another  under  ground,  or  in 
the  sand  ;^  some  select  the  chimney  or  eaves  of 
houses  for  their  clay-built  structures;^  those 
gdlatinous  nests,  which  the  Chinese  epicures 
and  orators  so  highly  prize,  are  formed  in 
carems  and  dark  places  by  the  little  bird^  whose 
work  they  are.  The  great  nugority,  however, 
nidificate  in  trees  and  bushes,  and  where  they 
are  within  reach  their  nests  are  carefully  coa- 
cealed. 

The  structure  and  materials  of  nests  are  also 
infinitely  various,  and  may  be  considered  to 
result,  as  well  as  aU  the  proceedings  of  animals 
with  reganl  to  their  young,  firom  an  excitem^it 
analogous  to  that  which  Dr.  Jenner  first  noticed 

1  Motacilla  Troglodytes.  <  Hirundo  riparia. 

3  H.  ruBtka  et  urlnca,  ^  H.  escuUnia. 


264  INSTINCT. 

in  the  swallow;^  upon  which  he  observes-* 
'*  The  economy  of  the  animal  seems  to  be  regu- 
lated by  some  external  impulse  which  leads  to 
a  train  of  consequences/'^  and  which  does  not 
cease  its  action  till  it  has  accomplished  the  «id 
for  which  it  was  given ;  namely,  the  procreation ; 
oviposition  preceded  by  nidifi cation ;  incubation; 
hatching,  or  birth ;  nutrition  and  education  of 
the  young  progeny  of  each  individual  kind, 
according  to  the  general  law  of  the  Creator. 

We  know  very  little  of  the  proceedings  of  the 
remaining  Classes  of  Vertebrates — which  are 
distinguished  by  having  cold  blood — the  Rep- 
tiles^ namely,  and  the  Fishes ;  except  that  they 
do  not  feel  that  instinctive  love  for  their  young, 
after  birth,  exhibited  by  the  quadrupeds  and 
birds.  They,  however,  are  invariably  instructed 
by  the  Creator  to  select  a  proper  place  in  which 
to  deposit  their  eggs  where  they  can  be  hatched 
either  by  artificial  or  solar  heat.  Those  of  some 
OphidianSj  as  snakes,  are  buried  in  sand,  and 
not  seldom  even  in  heaps  of  fermenting  manure; 
while  those  of  venomous  ones  are  hatched  in  the 
womb  of  the  dani,  and  come  forth  in  the  ser- 
pentine form.  The  Saurians  also  select  a  pro* 
per  place  for  their  eggs,  and  then  desert  them ; 
the  crocodile  buries  hers  in  the  sands  near  the 
river ;  where  many,  however,  are  devoured  by 

'  Philos.  Trans.  1824.  20.  *  IM.  25. 


INSTINCT.  265 

the  ieimeumon,  and  its  other  enemies,  and  are 
even  relished  by  man.  In  the  Batrachian  Order 
one  species  of  salamander^  commits  a  single  egg 
to  a  leaf  of  the  Persicaria^  which  it  protects  by 
carefully  doubling  the  leaf,  and  then,  proceeding 
to  another,  repeats  the  same  manceuvre,  till  her 
ovipoMtion  is  finished  :  *  the  toads  and  frogs  lay 
their  eggs  in  the  water,  the  former  producing 
two  long  strings  resembling  necklaces,  formed, 
as  it  were,  of  beads  of  jet,  inclosed  in  crystal ; 
while  those  of  the  latter  consist  of  irregular 
masses  of  similar  beads.  This  gelatinous  or 
transparent  envelope  forms  the  first  nutriment 
of  the  embryo.  The  nuptial  song  of  the  Reptiles 
is  not,  like  that  of  birds,  the  delight  of  every 
heart,  but  is  rath^  calculated  to  disturb  and 
horrify  than  to  still  the  soul.  The  hiss  of  ser-^ 
pents;  the  croaking  of  frogs  and  toads;  the 
mofilning  of  turtles ;  the  bellowing  of  crocodiles 
ami  alligators,'  form  their  gamut  of  discords. 

With  regard  to  the  Class  of  Fishes^  the  general 
object  of  those  that  migrate  appears  to  be  the 
casting  of  their  spawn ;  this  it  is  that  causes  the 
different  species  of  the  salmon  genus  to  leave  the 
sea  for  the  rivers;  for  this  the  herring  travels 
southward,  and  the  fnackarel  seeks  the  north; 
1^  of  them  guided  by  the  law  of  the  Most  High, 
shewing  itself  by   an  indomitable  instinct,  to 

1  Salamandra  platy  Cauda* 

»  Edinh;  Pkil.  Jaum.  ix.  110.  »  See  Vol.  I.  p.  32. 


266  INSTINCT. 

seek  those  Btations  for  oTiposition  that  are  best 
suited  to  the  aeration,  hatching,  and  rearing  of 
their  spawn ;— but  as  no  Tery  striking  traits  aie 
upon  record  with  regard  to  the  oviposition  of 
fishes,  I  shall  merely  refer  the  reader,  with 
respect  to  the  instinct  of  the  migrators,  to  a 
former  part  of  the  present  woric,  where  that 
subject  is  discussed  more  at  large«^ 

Under  this  head  I  shall  only  further  notice 
the  numerous  tribes  of  the  insect  world,  which 
have  all  their  seasons,  varying  according  to  their 
several  destinies,  for  fulfilling  the  great  law  of 
nature,  and  to  which  the  organizatim  of  each 
species  is  adapted:  and  when  the  period  for 
laying  their  ^gs  is  arrived  each  is  directed  to 
place  them  where  their  young,  when  disclosed, 
may  find  their  appropriate  nutriment.  From 
the  instance  of  the  flesh-fly,  above  related,'  we 
learn  that  it  is  their  scent  that  directs  insects  to 
a  proper  station  for  their  eggs.  When  we  re- 
collect that  every  plant,  almost,  is  the  destined 
food  of  some  peculiar  insect,  we  may  conjecture 
that  the  sense  of  smelling  must,  in  them,  be  &r 
more  nice  than  in  the  higher  animals,  so  as  to 
enable  them  to  distinguish  from  all  others  the 
appropriate  nutriment  of  their  own  descendents. 
Where  the  parent,  as  is  sometimes  the  case^ 
feeds  upon  the  same  plant  with  the  childrafi^ 

*  See  Vol.  I.  p.  107.  <  See  above,  p.  231. 


INSTINCT.  267 

she  reqniroB  do  such  guide,  but  with  respect  to 
the  majcnrity  of  insects^  especially  the  infinite 
boat  of  Lepidaptera, — which,  after  they  arrive 
at  tbeir  perfect  state,  never  touch  what  forms 
their  nutriment  while  they  are  larves, — some 
such  guide  is  absolutely  necessary. 

^.  Another  Class  of  Instincts  relates  to  the 
different  modes  by  which  animals  procure  their 
/4»d.  Nothing  affords  a  more  striking  proof  of 
Creative  Wisdom,  and  of  the  most  wonderful 
adaptation  of  means  to.  an  end,  than  the  diver- 
sities of  structure  with  a  view  to  this  particular 
function.  If  we  consider  the  infinite  variety  of 
substances,  animal  and  vegetable,  produced  fix>m 
the  earth,  which  form  the  nutriment  of  its  in- 
habitants— some  solid  and  not  easily  penetrable ; 
others  soft  and  readily  severed  and  comminuted ; 
others  again  fluid,  or  semi-fluid ; — we  may  con- 
ceive what  a  vast  diversity  of  organs  is  necessary 
to  effect  this  purpose.  To  render  solid  food,  of 
any  kind,  fit  for  deglutition  and  digestion,  the 
same  mouth  must  be  furnished  with  several 
kinds  of  teeth^  some  for  incision,  others  for 
laceration,  others  again  for  grinding  and  mas- 
tication— ^while  those  that  only  absorb  liquids 
mexeky  require  an  organ  adapted  for  suction, 
though  often,  at  the  same  time,  fitted  to  pierce  the 
substance  from  which  the  nutritive  fluid  is  to  be 
derived.    How  various,  also,  must  be  the  organs 


268  INSTINCT. 

for  swallowing,  and  digesting  the  food  according 
to  its  nature;  others  for  elaborating  it,  and 
abstracting  from  it  all  those  substances  that  aie 
required  by  the  several  systems  at  work  in  the 
body,  and  conveying  them  to  their  proper  sta- 
tions ;  and  the  means  also  for  rejecting  from  the 
body  the  residuum  after  the  secernment  for  the 
above  purposes  of  the  finer  life-supporting  pro- 
ducts. Here  are  a  variety  of  organs,  admirable 
in  their  structure,  and  fitted  for  action  in  an 
infinity  of  ways  ;  some  at  the  bidding  of  the  will 
stimulated  by  the  appetite ;  others  independent 
of  the  will,  such  are  the  distillations,  percola- 
tions, chemical  and  electrical  processes,  con-^ 
stantly  going  on  in  the  body  of  every  animal, 
to  separate  all  the  products  that  its  nature  and 
functions  require,  all  speak  of  a  mechanical 
agency  at  work  within,  not  independent  in  its 
operation,  but  fulfilling  a  law  which  must  be 
obeyed.^  It  has  been  found  that  Galvanic  action 
will  supply  the  place  of  the  tvill  upon  the  nerves 
and  muscles,  for  by  it  the  eyes  can  be  opened, 
and  other  muscular  movements  be  produced  in 
a  dead  body.*  Sir  H.  Davy  was  of  opinion  that 
the  air  inspired  carries  with  it  into  the  blood  a 
subtile  or  ethereal  part  probably  producing 
animal  heat,  since  those  animals  that  possess 

1  See  Dr.  Roget*s  excellent  statements  on  these  subjects, 
B.  T,  ii.  chap.  Hi. — ix. 
<  See  Dr.  Wilson  PhUip  in  Phihs.  Trans.  1829.  271,  278. 


INSTINCT.  269 

the  highest  temperature  consume  the  greatest 
quantity  of  air,  and  those,  that  consume  the 
SBudlest  quantity,  are  cold  blooded.^ 

The  herbivorous  Mammalians  are  generally 
not  remarkable  for  any  artificial  means  of  pro* 
ciuiiig  their  food.  Providence  has  spread  a 
table  before  them,  and  invites  them  to  partake 
of  it,  without  any  other  trouble,  than  bending 
their  necks  to  eat  it ;  but  the  carnivorous  ones, 
— as  their  destined  pabulum  is  endued  with 
locomotive  powers,  which  enable  it  often  to 
escape  from  them,  and  disappoint  their  expec- 
tations^-T-must  have  recourse  to  stratagems,  and 
lie  in  wait  for  their  prey ;  these,  however,  consist 
chiefly  in  concealing  themselves  and  springing 
suddenly  upon  it.  The  fox,  of  all  quadrupeds, 
is  the  most  celebrated  for  his  stratagems  and 
finesse  in  entrapping  his  game,  and  his  patience 
is  equal  to  his  craft.  Some  have  doubted 
whether  this  animal  can  fascinate  poultry,  as 
has  been  often  asserted,  but  I  know  one  in- 
stance which  fully  confirms  it.  A  friend  of 
mine  one  night  hearing  a  noise,  upon  looking 
oat  in  its  direction,  saw  a  fox  under  the  hen- 
roost, peering  up  at  the  hens,  which  both  he 
and  his  wife,  who  told  me  the  story,  saw,  as  they 
did  also  the  fox  running  away,  in  spite  of  their 
shouting,  with  one  in  his  mouth.     Indeed,  on 

1  Consolations  in  Travel,  196,  197. 


270  INSTINCT. 

any  other  principle  we  cannot  account  for  his 
depopulating  the  hen-roosts  in  the  night. 

The  birds  are  less  noted,  than  even  the  quad- 
rupeds, for  their  stratagems,  or  any  remariiable 
means  of  proyiding  food  for  themselyes  or  tbcir 
young.  Those  of  prey  boldly  attack  and  soae 
their  destined  food  whererer  they  find  it;  the 
owls,  indeed,  like  the  cats,  their  analogues, 
seem  to  use  artifice  as  much  as  strength  to 
attract  the  mice.  The  carrion-feeders,  as  the 
vultures  and  crows,  soon  discover  the  carcaaees 
of  dead  animals/  Some  of  the  sea-birds,  espe^ 
cially  the  gulls,  indicate  the  approach  of  bad 
weather,  by  leaving  the  coast,  and  seeking  the 
interior;  and,  during  the  intense  frosts  of  a 
severe  winter,  the  web-footed  birds  and  waders, 
quitting  their  summer  stations  in  the  more 
northern  regions,  fly  to  the  south  and  seek  the 
unfrozen  springs  and  waters  of  the  inland  dis- 
tricts, where  th^  find  a  supply  of  food.  All 
these  physical  actions  seem  to  arise  firom  a  phy- 
sical cause,  and  easily  to  be  accounted  for,  with- 
out having  recourse  to  any  other. 

With  regard  to  the  cold-blooded  animals,  the 
fishes  and  reptiles,  we  know  but  little  of  their 
habits  in  this  respect,  ot  of  any  particnhyr 
stratagems  to  which  they  have  recourse  to  pro- 
cure their  food.  Some  of  the  predaceous  fishes^ 
as  the  pike  and  perch,  appear  to  lie-in  wait  in 

1  Rogct,  B.  T.  \\.  407. 


INSTINCT.  271 

deep  water,  and  eo  dart  upon  their  prey ;  others, 
as  the  shark,  with  open  mouth  pursue  and  devour 
them ;  the  fly-catehing  ones,  as  the  several 
species  of  the  carp  and  salmon  genus/  are 
equally  upon  the  watch,  but  nearer  the  surfiace, 
to  B&ze  a  may-fly*  or  ephemera;  the  fishings 
firog'  hangs  out  its  lines  in  the  sea  to  catch 
other  fishes ;  the  serpents  are  said  to  fascinate 
die  birds ;  the  enormous  boa  lies  in  wait  for  the 
antelopes  and  other  quadrupeds,  and  coiling 
itself  round  them  in  mighty  folds,  crushes  them 
to  render  them  more  fit  Jfor  deglutition ;  the 
Batrachians,  Chelonians,  and  numerous  Saurians 
are  on  the  alert  after  insects  and  small  game ; 
while  the  vast  and  ferocious  crocodiles  and  alli- 
gators, looking  like  trunks  of  trees,  lie  basking 
near  the  sur£eu;e  of  the  water,  ready  to  spring 
upon  any  large  fish,  or  even  man,  that  may 
efaance  to  come  within  reach. 

Of  all  animals,  insects  afford  the  most  nume- 
nras  instances  of  instinctive  proceedings  with 
this  sole  end  in  view ;  the  pit*falls  of  the  ant- 
lion  ;^  the  webs  and  nets  of  the  various  sorts  of 
spiders  spread  over  the  face  of  nature;  and 
many  more,  furnish  instances  of  stratagems  to 
secure  their  daily  food;  while  an  infinity  of 
others  acquire  it,  aided  only  by  their  senses  and 
Btttoral  weapons.     Let  any  one  look  at  the  pro- 

1  Cyprinus  and  Salmo.  *  Phryganea, 

*  Lophius.  *  Myrmeleon. 


272  INSTINCT. 

luinent  eyes»  tremendous  jaws,  and  legs  and 
wings  formed  for  rapid  motion  on  the  earth  or  in 
the  air  of  the  tiger-beetles/  and  he  will  readily 
see  that  they  want  no  other  aid  to  enable  tbem 
to  seize  their  less  gifted  prey:  and  numerous 
other  tribes  both  on  the  earth  and  in  the  water 
emulate  them  in  these  respects.  The  pacific  ot 
herbivorous  insects  also  are  mostly  fitted  with 
an  extraordinary  acuteness  of  certain  senses  to 
direct  them  to  their  appropriate  pabulum.  The 
sight  of  the  butterfly  and  moth  intariably  leads 
them  to  the  flowers,  to  suck  whose  nectar 
their  multivalve  tubes  are  given  them.  The 
scent  of  the  dung-beetles  and  the  carrion-flies 
allures  them  to  their  respective  useful,  though 
disgusting,  repasts.  A  very  numerous  tribe  of 
those  that  derive  their  nutriment  from  other 
animals,  neither  entrap  them  by  stratagem,  nor 
assail  them  by  violence;  but,  as  the  butterfly 
and  the  moth  deposit  their  eggs  upon  their 
appropriate  vegetable,  so  do  these  upon  their 
appropriate  ammal  food.  Every  bird  almost 
that  darts  through  the  air,  every  beast  that 
walks  the  earth,  every  fish  that  swims  in  its 
waters,  and  almost  all  the  lower  animals,  and 
even^man  himself,  the  lord  of  all,  are  infested  in 
this  way. 

Upon  the  food  of  the  Crustaceans,  MolhMaMj 
and  all  the  lower  grades  of  animals,  I  hare 

^  Cicindela. 


INSTINCT.  273 

before  sufficiently  enlarged ;  I  need  not,  there* 
fore,  here  resume  the  subject. 

Thus  we  see  the  Almighty  and  All-wise  mani* 
fests  his  goodness^  as  well  as  his  wisdom  and 
power,  in  providing  for  the  wants  of  all  the 
creatures  that  he  has  made;  fitting  each  with 
peculiar  organs  adapted  to  its  assigned  kind  of 
food,  both  for  procuring  it,  preparing  it,  digest-^ 
ing  it,  assimilating  it,  and  for  rejecting  the 
residuum  of  all  these  operations.  A  physical 
action  upon  each  of  these  organs  and  systems, 
fitted  by  him  to  receive  and  respond  to  it,  is  all 
that  the  case  seems  to  require  in  the  inajority  of 
instances :  in  those,  however,  that  depend  upon 
artifice  and  stratagem  for  their  food,  the  exciting 
cause  is  less  obvious*  These,  indeed,  belong  to 
the  higher  instincts  considered  under  the  Jirst 
head. 

Y«  That  class  of  Instincts  which  relates  to  the 
hjfbematian  of  animals  having  been  considered 
in  another  place,^  I  shall  only  observe  here,  that 
the  action  of  a  physical  cause  is  in  no  de- 
partment of  the  history  of  animals  more  evi- 
dently made  out. 

My  learned  friend  and  coadjutor,  Mr.  Spence, 
has»  in  the  Introduction  to  Entomology^  pro* 
duced  several  facts,  as  not  easily  reconcilable 
to  the  hypothesis  with  respect  to  the  cause  of 

1  See  above,  p.  248. 

VOL.  II.  T 


274  INSTINCT. 

Instinct  which  I  am  now  considering ;  and  pro* 
bably  a  great  many  more  might  be  brought  for- 
ward ;  but  my  object  here  is  mwely  to  consider 
the  general  principle ;  it  would,  indeed,  be  need* 
less  and  endless  to  discuss  particular  cases,  and 
fully  to  account  for  all  aberrations,  which,  in  the 
present  state  of  our  knowledge,  it  would  not 
be  possible  to  do. 

But  there  is  one  circumstance  of  a  less  con* 
fined  nature,  and  upon  which  a  good  deal  of  the 
questi<m  hinges,  to  which  it  will  be  proper  to 
advert.  I  mean  the  change  that  has  been  ob- 
served in  the  nervous  system  of  some  insects  in 
their  passage  from  one  state  to  another.  It  is 
contended  that  this  change  has  nothing  to  do 
with  any  alterations  that  then  take  place  in  their 
instincts,  but  only  with  those  in  their  organs  of 
sense  or  motion.^  In  confirmation  of  this  opinion 
it  is  further  affirmed,  that  in  three  whole  Ordos,* 
the  structure  of  the  nervous  chord  is  not  altered, 
and  yet  they  acquire  new  instincts. 

But  though  no  change  has  been  noticed  to 
take  place  in  the  number  of  ganglions  of  these 
Orders,  there  must  necessarily  be  a  develope- 
ment  in  those  that  reoder  nerves  to  the  wings 
and  reproductive  organs ;  so  that,  though  some 
ganglions  may  not  become  confluent,  as  in 
the  Lqindoptera^  yet  the  range  of  their  nerves 

«  Introd,  to  Ent.  iv.  27,  28. 

«  Viz.  Orthoptera,  Hemiptera,  and  Neuroptera. 


INSTINCT,  276 

18  increased.  In  this  respect,  they  are  in 
much  the  same  situation  with  the  higher 
animals,  though  their  nervous  system,  as  to  its 
oi^nization,  undei^oes  no  material  change,  yet 
from  the  period  of  their  birth,  it  is  gradually 
more  and  more  developed  till  they  arrive  at  the 
age  of  puberty,  when  new  appetites  are  expe^ 
rieneed  and  new  powers  acquired,  not  by  meta- 
pkgsictdy  but  by  physical^  action  upon  their 
several  systems.  In  the  three  Orders  referred 
to  by  Mr.  Spence,  there  is  not  that  difference 
between  the  different  states  of  the  insects  that 
compose  the  majority  of  them,  that  there  is 
between  those  whose  pupes  are  not  locomotive. 
The  larves  of  the  locust,  for  instance,  are  stated 
to  emigrate,  as  well  as  the  perfect  insect,  and 
liTe  upon  the  same  food ;  the  only  difference 
is  in  the  locomotive  and  reproductive  powers  of 
the  latter,  both  of  which,  as  I  have  just  said» 
must  be  connected  with  some  change  in  their 
nervous  system,  operated  gradually  by  a  phy-f 
sical  agent* 

From  what  has  been  stated,  with  respect  to 
these  several  classes  of  instincts,  it  appears,  that, 
as  far  as  can  be  judged  from  circumstanceS| 
tliey  have  their  beginning  in  consequence  of 
the  action  of  an  intermediate  physical  cause 
upon  the  organization  of  the  animal,  which  cerr 
tainly  renders  it  extremely  probable  that  such 
is  the  general  proximate  cause  of  the  phenomena 


276  INSTINCT, 

in  question.  I  -would,  however,  by  no  means, 
be  understood  to  assert  this  dogmatically,  but 
merely  that  it  appears  to  me  the  most  probable 
hypothesis,  and  most  consistent  with  the  analogy 
of  the  Divine  proceedings  in  this  globe  of  ours, 
as  well  as  with  his  general  government  of  the 
heavenly  bodies ;  and  though  I  have  mentioned 
heat,  electricity,  and  other  elements  as  con- 
cerned in  the  production  of  these  phenomena, 
yet  I  do  not  assert  that  other  physical  principles 
may  not  be  commissioned  to  have  a  share  in  it. 
This  field  is  open  both  to  the  speculatist  and 
experimenter;  they  may  each  assist  the  other 
in  traversing  and  exploring  it,  and  the  well 
known  adage.  Dies  diem  docety  be  verified  more 
and  more  by  their  united  efforts. 

Some  may  still  feel  disposed  to  ask, — Is  it 
within  the  sphere  of  probability,  or  even  pos- 
sibility, that  by  the  mere  action  of  physical 
powers,  however  subtile,  upon  the  brain  and 
nerves  of  an  animal  there  should  be  produced 
such  a  wonderful  sequence  of  actions,  and  mani- 
pulations as  we  know  to  be  exhibited  by  the 
beaver y  the  hee^  the  spider^  and  the  ant  ?  Actions 
confessedly  above  the  range  of  their  intellect* 
But  to  this  I  would  answer,  we  know  that  with 
God  all  things  are  possible  that  do  not  imply  a 
contradiction;  and  His  Wisdom,  Power,  and 
Goodness,  may  be  as  evidently,  an4  more 
evidently,  manifiested,  by  the  infinite  varieties 


INSTIKCT.  277 

in  the  organization  necessary  to  excite  the 
appetite  for  such  and  such  instinctive  employ- 
ments and  operations ;  and  to  stimulate  animals 
always  to  run  the  same  prescribed  routine  of 
action  from  day  to  day,  and  year  to  year ;  than 
if  be  did  it  by  his  own  immediate  action  upon 
them,  or  that  of  his  ministering^  or  others  spints. 
When  we  examine  a  time-piece  contrived  by 
a  skilful  artist,  containing  within  it  various 
wheels  and  other  movements,  all  acted  upon  by 
one  main  spring  or  pendulum ;  by  means  of 
which,  influencing  all,  seconds,  minutes,  and 
hours  are  indicated  as  they  pass;  and  the 
latter  are  struck  successively,  and  repeated  if 
required :  we  admire  the  work,  but  more  the 
art  and  hand  that  contrived  and  executed  it; 
but  our  admiration  would  be  much  diminished^ 
if,  instead  of  these  effects  being  produced  by 
the  action  of  a  main  spring  or  pendulum  upon 
its  organization,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  it  was 
necessary  that  the  maker  of  the  machine,  or 
one  of  his  operatives,  should  always  be  present 
to  move  the  hands  or  strike  the  hours.  So  it 
seems  most  to  magnify  the  Power  and  Wisdom 
of  the  Creator,  if  we  suppose  him  to  act  by 
physical  means  in  all  cases  above  the  intellect 
of  the  animal.  If  he  governs  the  physical  uni« 
verse  by  such  means,  is  it  much  to  suppose, 
that  by  the  same  he  moves  a  bird^  or  a  bee,  to 
gloHiy  him  by  their  admirable  instincts  ?  Where 


278  INSTINCT. 

action  is  indeed  from  the  Deity  upon  spirit,  as 
upon  the  soul  of  man,  in  a  certain  sense,  it  is 
by  spirit;  either  immediately  as  by  the  Holy 
spirit ;  or  mediately  as  by  an  angelic  nature ; 
but  below  spirit,  it  is  surely  most  c<m8onant  to 
every  thing  that  we  see  and  know,  that  it  should 
be  by  an  agent  below  spirit. 

3.  I  am  now  arrived  at  the  last  supposition 
or  hypothesis — that  the  cause  instinct  may  be 
compound  or  mixed — in  some  respects  physical, 
in  others  metaphysical.  In  this  case  it  will  be 
subject  occasionally  to  variations  from  the  gene- 
ral law  when  the  intelligent  agent  sees  fit. 

But  upon  this  head  I  shall  not  be  very  long, 
and  I  only  introduce  it  here,  to  shew  that  the 
Deity  sometimes  dispenses  with  the  general  law 
of  instinct,  or  permits  it  occasionally  to  be  in- 
terfered with  by  the  will  of  the  animal,  or  other 
agency.  All  animals  that  exercise  instinctive 
operations,  have  in  their  several  oi^ns  of  sen- 
sation, certain  guides  given  to  enable  them  to 
fulfil  those  instincts  so  as  to  bring  about  the 
purposes  of  Providence. 

Sight,  hearing,  scent,  taste,  touch,  perception, 
influence  the  will,  and  direct  each  animal  to  the 
points  in  which  its  instinctive  actions  are  to 
commence;  and  so  far  instinct  is,  as  it  w^e, 
mixed  with  intellect.  I  have  seen  it  somewhere 
observed — that  instinct  in  conjunction   with  a 


INSTINCT.  279 

principle  of  limitation, — tlie  intellectual  facuUieSy 
—rules  the  actions  of  all  sentient  and  organised 
beings;  just  as  gravity  with  the  principle  of 
counteraction — repulsion — determines  the  place 
and  composition  of  all  inorganic  bodies. 

With  regard  to  the  Deity,  he  retains  in  his 
hands  the  power  of  suspending  or  altering  the 
action  of  the  laws  that  have  received  his  sane* 
tion;  and  permits  other  metaphysical  essences 
to  do  the  same.  When  females  overcome  that 
storge  or  instinctive  love  for  their  offspring, 
either  from  the  dread  of  shame,  or  worse  motives, 
and  destroy  them,  in  common  parlance,  we  say 
that  they  were  tempted  by  an  evil  spirit  to  com- 
mit the  crime.  Mr.  Bennet,  in  his  interesting 
Wanderings  in  New  South  Wales,  ^c,  relates 
that  it  is  common  for  the  females  of  the  abo- 
riginal tribes,  if  they  experience  much  suffering 
in  their  labour,  to  threaten  the  life  of  the  poor 
infant,  which  when  born  they  barbarously  de- 
stroy.^ This  is  a  fearful  counteraction  of  instinct 
flowing  from  an  evil  source. 

The  Deity  himself,  doubtless  when  there  is 
^^Dignus  vindice  nodus — sometimes  suspends  the 
action  of  an  instinct.  It  is  related  in  the  Holy 
Scripture,  that  when  the  ark  of  God  was  taken 
by  the  Philistines,  in  order  to  ascertain  whether 
the  plagues  that  were  sent  upon  them  were  from 

1  I.  122. 


280  INSTINCT. 

God,  they  yoked  two  milch  kine  that  had  calves 
to  the  cart  in  which  it  was  sent  to  Bethshemesh^ 
and  the  kine  went  straight  to  that  place»  their 
instinct  being  mastered  by  a  strong  hand,  though 
they  went  lowing  after  their  calves  all  the  way.' 
Here  the  Deity  ruled  the  instinct4  God  inter- 
feres with  the  instincts  of  animals  also  when  he 
prescribes  their  course  and  sends  them  in  any 
particular  direction  to  answer  his  purpose :  as  in 
the  case  of  the  prophet  Jonah .^  Properly  speak* 
ing,  those  interpositions  of  the  Deity  by  which 
the  law  of  instinct  is  suspended,  to  answer  a 
particular  purpose  of  his  Providence,  like  that 
just  related,  must  be  regarded  as  miraculous ; 
but  yet,  though  unrecorded,  they  may  happen 
oftener  than  we  are  aware  in  the  course  of  his 
moral  government ;  sometimes  perhaps  also  to 
remedy  some  physical  evil.  This  appeared  there* 
fore  a  proper  place  to  advert  to  them. 

1  1  Sam,  vu  7.  12.  «  Vol.  I.  p.  263. 


281 


Chapter  XIX. 

Functions  and  Instincts.     Arachnidan^  Pseuda- 
rachnidan^  and  Acaridan  Condylapes. 

Having  wandered  long  enough,  perhaps  too  long, 
in  a  wide  and  mazy  field,  but  fertile  everywhere 
in  proofs  of  the  Power,  Wisdom,  and  Goodness 
of  the  Creator,  it  is  time  to  return  to  the  high 
road  from  which  we  diverged. 

The  Class  of  animals  which  led  me  into  this 
digression  were  the  Myriapods,  concerning  which 
I  observed,  when  I  commenced  my  account  of 
them,  that  on  quitting  the  Crustaceans,  the  way 
seemed  to  branch  off  from  the  long-tailed  Deca^ 
pods  by  them,  and  from  the  short-tailed  ones 
by  the  Arachnidans.  We  are  now  then  to  give 
a  history  of  the  latter  Class. 

LatreiDe,  in  which  he  has  been  followed  by 
most  modem  Arachnologists,  in  his  work  in  aid 
of  Cuvier^s  last  edition  of  the  Rhgne  Animal,^ 
diTides  his  Arachnidans  into  two  Orders,  Pul- 
numarieSf  or  those  that  breathe  by  gills,  and 
Trachearies,  or  those  that  breathe  by  spiracles  in 
connection  with  trachece.     In  his  latest  wofk,^ 

*  Le$  Crustaces,  les  ArachnideSf  et  les  Insectes, 

*  Caurs  D'Entomologie, 


282  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

which  he  did  not  live  to  finish,  he  added  a  third 
Order,  including  some  parasites,  infesting  marine 
animals,  such  as  the  whale  louse/  These,  from 
their  having  no  apparent  respiratory  apparatus, 
he  named,  Aporobranchians. 

As  the  pulmonary  Arachnidans  of  Latreille 
difier  from  the  Trachearies,  &c.,  not  only  in 
having  their  body  divided  into  two  sections,  but 
likewise  both  in  their  respiratory  organs  and 
those  of  circulation,  I  have  always  regarded 
them  as  forming  a  distinct  Class.' 

The    following    characters    distinguish    this 

Class : 

Body  covered  by  a  coriaceous  or  homy  in- 
tegument, divided  into  two  segments.  Head 
and  trunk  confluent  so  as  to  form  a  sin^ 
segment,  denominated  the  Cephcdotharax. 
EyeSyQ — 8.  Legs^Q.  Spinal  chord,  knotty .  A 
heart  and  vessels  for  circulation.  Respiration  by 
gills.     Seamal  organs,  double. 

This  Class  consists  of  two  Orders. 
1.  Araneidans.  Integument  coviaceoias.  Maat* 
diblesy  also  called  cheliceres,  consisting  of  a 
single  joint,  armed  with  a  claw,  perforatod 
near  the  apex  for  the  transmission  of  venom, 
and  when  unemployed  folding  upon  the  end 
of  the  mandible.  .  Gills,  2—4.     Abdomen 

'  Nymphan  grossipes.  *  Inirod,  to  Emt.  iii.  19.  24. 


ARACUNIDANS.  283 

united  to  the  trunk  by  a  foot-stalk.  Anus 
furnished  mrith  4 — 6  spinning  organs. 
2.  Pedipulps.^  Integument  horny.  Feelers 
extended  before  the  head,  armed  with  a 
forceps  or  didactyle  claw.  Abdomen  sesflile. 
Gills,  4--8. 

1.  Araneidans,  or  spiders. 

No  animals  fall  more  uniyersally  under  ob* 
serration  than  the  spiders ;  we  see  them  every- 
where^  &bricating  their  snares  or  lying  in  wait 
for  their  prey,  in  our  houses,  in  the  fields^  on 
the  trees,  shrubs,  flowers,  grass,  and  in  the  earth ; 
and,  if  we  watch  their  proceedings,  we  may 
sometimes  see  them,  without  the  aid  of  wings^ 
ascend  into  the  air,  where,  carried  by  their  web 
as  by  an  air-balloon,  they  can  elevate  themselves 
to  a  great  height.  The  webs  they  spin  and 
weave  are  also  equally  dispersed;  they  often 
fill  the  air,  so  as  to  be  troublesome  to  us,  and 
cover  the  earth.  M.  Mendo  Trigozo^  relates^ 
that  at  Lisbon,  on  the  6th  of  November,  18 U^ 
the  Tagus  was  covered,  for  more  than  half  an 
hour,  by  these  webs,  and  that  innumerable 
spiders  accompanied  them  which  swam  on  the 
sifffoce  of  the  water.     I  have  in  another  place' 

I  Manipalps  would  be  a  more  proper  term,  as  the  feelers  are 
used  for  prehension,  not  for  walkmg. 

•  Latr.  Caurs.  D'  JSnt.  i.  497.  *  Sec  above,  p.  183. 


284  PUNCtlOKS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

given  an  account  of  the  instruments  by  which 
they  weave  them ;  and  shall  now  say  a  few  words 
upon  those  by  which  their  Creator  has  enabled 
them  to  produce  the  material  of  which  they  are 
formed. 

At  the  posterior  extremity  of  the  abdomen, 
formed  usually  by  a  prominence,  is  the  anus, 
immediately  below  which,  planted  in  a  roundish 
depressed  space,  are  four  or  six  jointed  teat-like 
organs,  of  a  rather  conical  or  cylindrical  shape* 
The  exterior  pair  is  the  longest,  consisting  ci 
three  joints ;  but  these  have  no  orifices  at  their 
extremity  for  the  transmission  of  threads:  the 
other  four^  consist  each  of  two  joints,  and  are 
pierced  at  their  extremity  with  innumerable 
little  orifices,  in  some  species  amounting  to  a 
thousand  from  each,  from  which  their  web  issues 
at  their  will»  or  bristled  with  an  army  of  in* 
finitely  minute  biarticulate  spinnerets,^  each 
furnishing  a  thread  at  their  extremity.  These 
teats  are  connected  with  internal  reservoirs^ 
which  yield  the  fluid  matter  forming  the  thread 
or  web.  These  reservoirs  in  some  species 
consist  o{/ouf\  and  in  others  of  six  vessels  folded 
several  times,  and  communicating  with  oth» 
vessels  in  which  the  material  that  forma  their 
web  is  first  elaborated.' 


*  MammuUs,  Inirod.  to  Ent.  iii.  391.  *  Ftu»,  ibid.  392. 

""  Latr.  Ckmrs  D'Ent.  i.  496. 


ARACHNIDANS«  285 

Such  are  the  organs  which  furnish  the  ma* 
terial  of  those  wonderful  and  diversified  toils 
which  the  spiders  weave  to  entrap  the  animals 
that  form  their  food. 

The  threads,  after  they  issue  from  these 
organs,  are  united,  or  kept  separate,  according 
to  the  will  or  wants  of  the  animal ;  and  it  is 
stated,  that  from  them  certain  spiders  can  spin 
three  kinds  of  silkJ  Their  ordinary  thread  is 
so  fine,  that  it  would  require  twenty-four  united 
to  equal  the  thickness  of  that  of  the  silkworm. 
These  threads,  fine  as  they  are,  will  bear, 
without  breaking,  a  weight  sextuple  that  of  the 
spider  that  spins  them.  -They  employ  their  web, 
graerally,  for  three  different  purposes ;  in  the 
construction  of  their  snares,  of  their  own  habi- 
tations, and  of  a  cocoon  to  contain  their  eggs. 

Spiders  were  divided  by  the  older  Arach- 
nologists,  after  Lister,  into  families  according  to 
the  mode  in  which  they  entrap  or  seize  their 
prey.  More  modern  writers*  on  the  subject, 
have  taken  their  respiratory  organs  as  regulating 
the  primary  division  of  the  Order :  upon  this 
{mnciple,  the  spiders  are  formed  into  two  tribes» 
those  that  have  two  pairs  of  gills ;'  and  those 
that  have  only  one  pair.^    M.  Walckenaer,  who 

»  Blackwall,  in  Linn.  Trans,  xvi.  479. 

*  L.  Du  Four.  Latreille. 

*  Tgtreqmeunumes.  Latr.     Theraphasa,  &c.  Walck. 

*  Dipneumones,  Latr.     Aranea.  Walck.  excluding;  Dysdera. 


286  FUNCTIOKS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

has  studied  the  Order  more  than  any  man  in 
Europe,  has  not  only  divided  the  above  two 
tribes  into  genera,  &c.,  from  characters  taken 
from  their  form  and  organization ;  but  has  also 
considered  them  with  respect  to  their  habits, 
and  under  this  head,  divides  them  into  four 
sections: 

1.  Hunters^  wandering  incessantly  to  entrap 
their  prey, 

2.  Vagrants f  watching  their  pvey,  concealed 
or  inclosed  in  a  nest,  but  often  running 
with  agility. 

3.  Sedentaries^  forming  a  web  in  which  they 
remain  immoveable*. 

4.  Swimmers,  swimming  in  the  water  to  catck 
their  prey,  and  there  forming  a  web. 

To  the  first  tribe,  those,  namely,  with  ftmr 
gills,  some  spiders  belong,  the  instincts  of  which 
are  very  remarkable.  One  of  the  largest,  and 
most  celebrated,  is  the  bird*spider.^  It  forms 
the  tube  which  it  inhabits  of  a  white  silk  like 
muslin,  which  it  fixes  amongst  leaves,  and  in 
any  cavities,  and  there  watches  its  prey ;  it  is 
accused  by  some  of  destroying  even  birds,  whence 
its  name,  especially  the  humming-bird:^  but 
this  rests  upon  questionable  authority ;  and 
writers  are  not  agreed  as  to  its  general  habits. 
Probably  several  species  are  confounded  under 

*  My  gale  aincularia.  '  Trochilus. 


ARACBNIDANS*  287 

the  flame  name*  I  shall  not  therefore  enlarge 
further  on  its  history ;  I  mention  it  merely  aft 
the  largest  spider  known. 

The  proceedings  of  those  called  the  trap-door 
spiders'  are  better  authenticated,  as  those  of  the 
mason-spider  by  the  Abb6  Sauvages,^  and  those 
of  another  species  very  recently,  in  the  annals 
of  the  French  Entomological  Society,  by  M.  V, 
Audoin,  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  modem 
eDtomol(^ists,  under  the  name  of  the  pioneer  ,*^ 
of  his  interesting  memoir,  I  shall  here  give  a 
brief  abstract. 

Some  species  of  spiders,  M.  Audoin  remarks, 
are  gifted  with  a  particular  talent  for  building : 
they  h(dlow  out  dens ;  they  bore  galleries ;  they 
elevate  vaults;  they  build,  as  it  were,  subter- 
ranean bridges :  they  construct  also  entrances  to 
their  habitations,  and  adapt  doors  to  them,  which 
want  nothing  but  bolts,  for  without  any  ex- 
aggeration, they  work  upon  a  hinge,  and  are 
fitted  to  a  frame.* 

The  interior  of  these  habitations,  he  continues, 
is  not  less  remarkable  for  the  extreme  neatness 
which  reigns  there;  whatever  be  the  humidity 
of  the  soil  in  which  they  are  constructed,  water 
never  penetrates  them ;    the  walls  are  nicely 

*  Cteniza,  •  Ct.  Sauvagesii,  '  Ct.  fodiens. 

*  The  French  word  is  feyure,  which  I  cannot  find  in  the 
dictionaries,  bwt  it  means,  the  circular  frame  of  the  mouth  of  the 
tube  which  receires  the  door. 


988  FUNCTIONS  AMP  INSTINCTS. 

covered  with  a  tapestry  of  silk,  having  usu^ty 
the  lustre  of  satin,  and  almost  always  of  a 
dazzling  whiteness.  He  mentions  only  four 
species  of  the  genus  as  at  present  known.  Ooe 
which  was  found  in  the  Island  of  Naxos ;-  anoth^ 
in  Jamaica  f  a  third  in  Montpellier ;'  and  a 
fourth,  that  which  is  the  subject  of  his  Memoir, 
in  Corsica ;  to  which  I  may  add  a  fifth  speiQieg, 
found  frequently  by  Mr.  Bennett,  in  diffeieQt 
parts  of  New  South  Wales.* 

The  habitations  of  the  species  in  question 
are  found  in  an  argillaceous  kind .  of  red  earth, 
in  which  they  bore  tubes  about  three  inches  in 
depth,  and  ten  lines  in  width.  The  walls  of 
these  tubes  are  not  left  just  as  they  are  bored, 
but  they  are  covered  with  a  kind  of  mortar, 
sufficiently  solid  to  be  easily  separated  from  the 
mass  that  surrounds  it.  If  the  tube  is  divided 
longitudinally,  besides  this  rough  cast,  it  appears 
to  be  covered  with  a  coat  of  fine  mortar,  which 
is  as  smooth  and  regular  as  if  a  trowel  had  been 
passed  over  it ;  this  coat  is  very  thin,  and  soft  to 
the  touch ;  but  before  this  adroit  workman  lajfs 
it,  she  covers  the  coarser  earthy  plaster-work 
with  some  coarse  web,  upon  which  she  glues  her 
silken  tapestry. 

All  this  shews  that  she  was  directed  in  her 

>  Cteniza  ariana.        *  Ct,  nidulans.         '  C/.  ccemeiUdna, 

*  Wanderings  m  N.  S.  Wales y  ^c.  u  328. 


ARACHNIDANS.  289 

work  by  a  Wise  Master;   but  the  door  that 
closes  her  apartment  is  still  more  remarkable 
in  its  structure.    If  her  well  was  always  left 
open,  she  would  be  subject  to  the  intrusion  of 
guests  that  would  not,  at  all  times,  be  welcome 
or  safe;   Providence,  therefore,  has  instructed 
her  to  fabricate  a  very  secure  trap-door,  which 
closes  the  mouth  of  it.    To  judge  of  this  door  by 
its  outward  appearance,  we  should  think  it  was 
fonned  of  a  mass  of  earth  coarsely  worked,  and 
covered  internally  by  a  solid  web ;  which  would 
appear  sufficiently  wonderful  for  an  animal  that 
seems  to  have  no  special  organ  for  constructing  it : 
but  if  it  is  divided  vertically,  it  will  be  found  a 
nmch  more  complicated  fabric  than  its  outward 
aspect  indicates,  for  it  is  formed  of  more  than 
thirty  alternate  layers  of  eartb  and  web,  em- 
boxed,  as  it  were,  in  each  other,  like  a  set  of 
weights  for  small  scales. 

If  these  layers  of  web  are  examined,  it  will 
be  seen  that  they  all  terminate  in  the  hinge,  so 
that  the  greater  the  volume  of  the  door,  the 
more  powerful  is  the  hinge.  The  frame  in  which 
the  tube  terminates  above,  and  to  which  the  door 
18  adapted,  is  thick,  and  its  thickness  arises  from 
the  number  of  layers  of  which  it  consists,  and 
which  seem  to  correspond  with  those  of  the 
door;  hence,  the  formation  of  the  door,  the 
ht^e,  and  the  frame,  seem  to  be  a  simul- 
taneous operation;    except  that  in  fabricating 

VOL.  II.  u 


290  FUNCTIONS  ANto  INSTINCTS. 

the  first,  the  animal  has  to  knead  the  earth,  as 
well  as  to  spin  the  layers  of  web.  By  this 
admirable  arrangement,  these  parts  always  cor- 
respond with  each  other,  and  the  strength  of  the 
hinge,  and  the  thickness  of  the  frame,  will 
always  be  proportioned  to  the  weight  of  the 
door. 

The  more  carefully  we  study  the  arrangement 
of  these  parts,  the  more  perfect  does  the  work 
appear.  If  we  examine  the  circular  margin  of 
the  door,  we  shall  find  that  it  slopes  inwards^  so 
that  it  is  not  a  transverse  section  of  a  cylind^, 
but  of  a  cone,  and  on  the  other  side,  that  the 
frame  slopes  outwards,  so  that  the  door  exactly 
applies  to  it.  By  thia  structure,  when  the  door 
is  closed,  the  tube  is  not  distinguishable  from 
the  rest  of  the  soil,  and  this  appears  to  be  the 
reason  that  the  door  is  formed  with  earth. 
Besides,  by  this  structure  also,  the  animal  can 
more  readily  open  and  shut  the  door  ;  by  its  co- 
nical shape  it  is  much  lighter  than  it  would  have 
been  if  cylindrical,  and  so  more  easily  opened, 
and  by  its  external  inequalities,  and  mixture  of 
web,  the  q>ider  can  more  easily  lay  hold  of  it  with 
its  claws.  Whether  she  enters  her  tube»  or  goes 
out,  the  door  will  shut  of  itsdf.  This  was  proved 
by  experiment,  for  though  resistance,  more  or 
less,  was  experienced  when  it  was  opened,  when 
left  to  itself,  it  always  fell  down,  and  closed  the 
aperture.     The  advantage  of  this  structure  to 


ARACHNIDANS.  291 

the  spider  is  evident,  for  whether  it  darts  out 
upon  its  prey,  or  retreats  from  an  enemy,  it  is 
not  delayed  by  having  to  shut  its  door. 

The  interior  surface  of  this  cover  to  its  tube 
is  not  rough  and  uneven  like  its  exterior,  but 
perfectly  smooth  and  even,  like  the  walls  of  the 
tube,  being  covered  with  a  coating  of  white  silk, 
bnt  much  more  firm,  and  resembling  parchment, 
and  remarkable  for  a  series  of  minute  orifices,^ 
placed  in  the  side  opposed  to  the  hinge,  and 
arranged  in  a  semicircle ;  there  are  about  thirty 
of  these  orifices,  the  object  of  which,  M.  Audoin 
conjectures,  is  to  enable  the  animal  to  hold  her 
door  down,  in  any  case  of  emergency,  against 
external  force,  by  the  insertion  of  her  claws  into 
some  of  them. 

The  principal  instruments  by  which  this 
little  animal  performs  her  various  operations, 
are  her  mandibles  or  cheliceres,  and  her  spinners. 
The  former,  besides  the  two  rows  of  tubercles, 
between  which,  when  unemployed,  her  claw,  or 
sting,  is  folded,  has  at  the  apex,  on  their  inner 
side  a  aumber  of  strong  spines.^  As  no  one  has 
ever  seen  her  at  work  upon  her  habitation,  it 
cannot  be  known  exactly  how  these  organs,  and 

^  Plats  XI.  b.  Fig.  2.  a. 

^  Observations  sur  le  nid  d*une  Arcagnee  lu  d  VAcad.  des 
Sc.  le  21  Juin,  1830,  par  M.  Victor  Audoin;  and  Ann.  de 
la  Soc.  JEwt.  de  France,  ii.  69. 


293  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

probably  her  anterior  legs,  are  employed  in  her 
various  manipulations. 

I  have,  in  my  collection,  a  tube  or  nest  of  the 
Jamaica  trap-door  spider,^  consisting  merely  of 
the  web,  which  is  much  larger  than  that  just 
described,  being  more  than  six  inches  long,  and 
three  quarters  of  an  inch  in  diameter  in  the 
narrowest  part,  but  near  the  mouth  more  than 
an  inch.  In  this  species  the  trap-door  is  semi- 
circular, having  a  sloping  margin ;  it  is  lined, 
as  well  as  the  upper  part  of  the  tube,  with  a 
strong  close  web,  resembling  parchment.  I  can 
detect  in  it  no  series  of  orifices,  but  I  see  here 
and  there  little  holes  where  the  claws  appear 
to  have  been  inserted.  This  door  is  entirely 
formed  of  layers  of  web,  without  any  inter- 
mixture of  earth. 

Mr.  Bennett,  in  his  Wanderings^  ^.*  gives 
some  interesting  particulars  of  the  species  dis* 
covered  by  him  in  New  South  Wales.  He 
describes  the  tube,  as  about  an  inch  in  diameter 
at  the  mouth,  and  the  lid  as  formed  of  web 
incorporated  with  earth,  and  exactly  fitting  the 
mouth  of  the  tube,  in  this  resembling  the  pioneer. 
He  heard  of  a  person  who  used  to  amuse  himself 
with  feeding  one  of  these  insects:  when  its 
meal  was  finished,  it  would  re-enter  its  habi- 
tation, and  pull  down  the  lid  with  one  of  its 

'  Plate  XL  b.  Fio.  4.  «  i.  328. 


ARACHNIDANS.  293 

claws.  He  further  observes,  that  to  discover 
their  habitations  when  the  lid  is  down;  from  its 
bei^g  so  accnrately  fitted^  to  the  aperture,  was 
very  difficult. 

Though  the  particulars  I  have  here  stated, 
of  the  history  and  habits  of  these  subterranean 
spiders,  demonstrate,  in  every  respect,  as  far 
as  we  know  them,  the  adaptation  of  means  to 
an  end,  far  above  the  intelligence  of  the  animal 
that  exhibits  them  ;  yet  folly  to  appreciate  the 
Wisdom,  and  Power,  and  Goodness,  that  fabri- 
cated her,  and  instigated  her  to  exercise  these 
various  arts,  and  to  employ  her  power  of  spinning 
webs,  in  building  the  structures  necessary  for 
her  security,  as  well  as  for  the  capture  of  her 
prey,  we  ought  to  be  witnesses  to  all  her  pro* 
ceedings,  which  would  probably  instruct  us 
more  fiiUy  why  she  forms  so  deep  a  tube,  and 
one  so  nicely  covered  with  a  peculiar  tapestry 
fipom  the  mouth  to  the  bottom.  One  of  these 
endsy  is,  doubtless,  to  keep  her  tube  dry. 

2.  Various  are  the  modes  of  capturing  their 
prey,  exercised  by  the  second  Tribe  of  spiders, 
which  have  only  two  gills,  some  fabricating 
webs  of  various  kinds  for  that  purpose,  and 
others  lying  in  wait  for  them,  and  catching 
them  by  mere  agility.  The  first  of  these  are 
called  weavers,^  and  the  last,  hunters,^ 

Some  of  the  formw  construct  silken  tubes  of 

'  AraneuUe  Uxtorice,  *  A,  venatoria. 


294  FUNCTIONS  AND  INmNCTS. 

an  irregular  texture,  open  at  both  ends,  in  which 
they  conceal  themselves.  Of  this  description  is 
one,  remarkable  for  having  only  six  eyes/ 
which  sits  at  the  mouth  of  her  tube,  with  her 
four  anterior  legs  out  of  if,  reposing  by  their 
extremity  upon  as  many  fine  threads,  which 
diverge  from  the  mouth  of  the  tube  as  firom  a 
centre,  and  probably  contribute  to  form  the 
toils,  or  are  connected  with  them,  which  De 
Geer  observed  her  to  construct  in  front  of  her 
den,^  and  in  which  large  flies  are  taken,  which, 
by  means  of  her  stout  mandibles,  she  soon  kiUs, 
and  then  sucks  their  juices.^ 

Another  species,^  which  spins  a  similar  web 
with  diverging  threads,  forming  so  many  snares, 
is  remarkable  for  the  pertinacity  with  which 
it  clings  to  its  tube.  The  most  effectual  way  to 
expel  it,  is  to  put  in  a  live  ant ;  scarcely  has 
it  entered,  when  the  spider,  in  a  violent  agitation, 
uses  its  utmost  efforts  to  frighten  the  intruder; 
if  the  ant  disregards  its  menaces,  it  rushes  out 
precipitately,  and  does  not  stop  till  it  is  two  or 
three  inches  distant,  when  it  halts  to  watch  the 
motions  of  the  ant,  which,  usually,  when  dis- 
engaged from  the  web,  falls  to  the  ground; 
upon  this  taking  place,  the  former  reenters  its 
tube  backwards.    TThis  species,  though  driven 

1  Segestria  senoculata,  '  vii.  261. 

^  Walck.  Araneid.  de  France,  195.  ^  Segestria perjidu. 


ARACHNIDAMS.  295 

flwn  its  habitatioQ  by  so  small  an  insect,  will 
fearlessly  attack  the  largest  flies»  and  it  has 
been  seen  even  to  seize  a  very  active  wasp/ 

The  webs  of  the  retiary  or  geometric  spiders, 
which  bdong  to  another  division  of  the  weavers, 
are  so  well  known  that  it  is  not  necessary  to 
give  a  very  detailed  account  of  their  proceedings ; 
but  as  Mr.  Black  wall,  in  a  very  interesting 
Memoir  in  the  Zoological  Journal^^  has  added 
much  to  our  previous  knowledge  on  this  head, 
especially  with  respect  to  the  spiral  circum-* 
volutions  that  distinguish  the  webs  of  the  tribe 
in  question,  I  shall  abstract,  as  briefly  as  I  can, 
the  main  features  of  his  account.  Having 
formed  the  foundation  of  her  net,  and  drawn 
the  skdeton  of  it,  by  spinning  a  number  of  rays 
converging  to  the  centre,  she  next  proceeds, 
setting  out  from  that  point,  to  spin  a  spiral  line 
of  unadhesive  web,  like  that  of  the  rays,  which 
it  intersects,  and  to  which  she  attaches  it,  and 
after  numerous  circtumvolutions,  finishes  it  at  the 
circumference.  This  line,  in  conjunction  with 
the  rays,  serves  as  a  scaffolding  for  her  to  walk 
over,  and  it  also  keeps  the  rays  properly 
stretched.  Her  next  labour  is  to  spin  a  spiral 
or  labyrinthiform  line  from  tlie  circumference 
towards  the  centre,  but  which  stops  somewhat 
short  of  it ;  this  line  is  the  most  important  part 

*  Walck.  Araneid.  de  France,  202,  '  v.  181. 


296  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

of  the  snare.  It  consists  of  a  fine  thxead; 
studded  with  minute  viscid  globules,  like  deir, 
which  by  their  adhesive  quality  retain  the 
insects  that  fly  into  the  net.  The  snare  being 
thus  finished,  the  little  geometridan  selects 
some  concealed  spot  in  its  vicinity,  where  she 
constructs  a  cell,  in  which  she  may  hide  her- 
self, and  watch  for  game;  of  the  capture  of 
which,  she  is  informed  by  the  vibrations  of 
a  line  of  communication  between  her  cell  and 
the  centre  of  her  snare. 

The  insects  that  frequent  the  waters  require 
predaceous  animals  to  keep  them  within  due 
limits,  as  well  as  those  that  inhabit  the  earth, 
and  the  water- spider^  is  one  of  the  most  re* 
markable  upon  whom  that  office  is  devolved 
by  her  Creator.  To  this  end  her  instinct 
instructs  her  to  fabricate  a  kind  of  diving-bdl  in 
the  bosom  of  that  element.  She  usually  selects 
still  waters  for  this  purpose.  Her  house  is  an 
oval  cocoon,  filled  with  air,  and  lined  with  silk, 
from  which  threads  issue  in  every  direction, 
and  are  fastened  to  the  surrounding  plants; 
in  this  cocoon,  which  is  open  below»  she  watches 
for  her  prey,  and  even  appears  to  pass  the 
winter,  when  she  closes  the  opening.  It  ia  most 
commonly,  yet  not  always,  entirely  under  water ; 
but  its  inhabitant  has  filled  it  with  air  for  her 

^  Argyroneta  aquatka^ 


ARACUNIDANS.  297 

rp^ration,  which   enables  her  to  live    in   it* 
Sha  conveys   the  air   to   it   in   the  following 
manner:    she  usually  swims  upon  her  back, 
when  her  abdomen  is  enveloped  in  a  bubble  of 
air,  and  appears  like  a  globe  of  quicksilver; 
with  this  she  enters  her  cocoon,  and  displacing 
an  equal  mass  of  water,  again  ascends  for  a 
second  lading,  till  she  has  sufficiently  filled  her 
hoase  with  it,  so  as  to  expel  all  the  water.    The 
males  construct  similar  habitations,  by  the  same 
manoeuvres.    How  these  little  animals  can  en* 
velope  their  abdomen  with  an  air-bubble,  and 
r^ain  it  till  they  enter  their  cells,  is  still  one  of 
Nature's  mysteries  that  have  not  been  explained. 
We  cannot  help,  however,  admiring  and  adoring 
the  Wisdom,  Power,  and  Goodness  manifested 
in  this  singular  provision,  enabling  an  animal 
that  breathes  the  atmospheric  air,  to  fill  her 
house  with  it  under  the  water ;  and  which  has 
instructed  her  in  a  secret  art,  by  which  she  can 
clothe  part  of  het  body  with  air,  as  with  a 
garment,  which  she  can  put  off  when  it  answers 
her  purpose.    This  is  a  kind  of  attraction  and 
repulsion  that  mocks  all  our  inquiries. 

Amongst  the  spiders  called  the  hunters^  and 
the  vagrants,  some  seize  their  prey  like  the  lion 
or  the  tiger,  with  the  aid  of  few  or  no  toils, 
by  jumping  upon  them,  when  they  come  within 
their  reach.     I   have  often  observed  a  white 


2d8  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

or  yellowish  specioB  of  crab-8pider^~a  tribe 
so  called  because  their  motions  resemble  those 
of  crabs — ^which  lies  in  wait  for  her  prey  in 
the  blossoms  of  umbelliferous  and  other  white- 
blossomed  plants,  and  can  scarcely  be  distin- 
guished from  them,  which  when  a  fly  or  other 
insect  alights  upon  the  flower,  darts  upon  it 
before  she  is  perceived. 

There  is  a  very  common  black  and  white 
spider/  amongst  the  vagrants^  which  may  always 
be  seen  in  summer,  on  sunny  rails,  window- 
sills,  &c. :  when  one  of  these  spiders,  which  are 
always  upon  the  watch,  spies  a  fly  or  a  gnat 
at  a  distance,  he  approaches  softly,  step  by 
step,  and  seems  to  measure  the  interval  that 
separates  him  from  it  with  his  eye;  and,  if 
he  judges  that  he  is  within  reach,  first  fixing 
a  thread  to  the  spot  on  which  he  is  stationed, 
by  means  of  his  fore  feet,  which  are  much 
longer  and  larger  than  the  others,  he  darts  upon 
his  victim  with  such  rapidity,  and  so  true  an 
aim,  that  he  seldom  misses  it.  Whethar  his 
station  is  vertical  or  horizontal  is  of  little  coii- 
sequence,  he  can  leap  equally  well  from  either, 
and  in  ail  directions.  He  is  prevented  from 
falling,  by  the  thread  just  mentioned,  which  acts 

'  Related  probably  to  Thomisus  citreus, 
*  SalticHs  scenicus. 


ARACHNIDANS.  299 

tiB  a  kind  of  anchor,  and  enables  him  .to  recover 
his  station,  when  without  such  a  help  he  would 
be,  BB  it  were,  driven  out  to  sea. 

We  see  in  these  latter  instances,  that  though 
the  art  and  means  of  weaving  snares  to  entrap 
their  prey  have  not  been  granted  to  these 
hunters  and  vagrants,  yet  that  their  Creator 
has  endowed  them  with  increase  of  agility,  and 
the  power  of  moving,  without  turning  round, 
in  all  directions,  which  fiilly  make  up  to  them 
for  that  want. 

Before  I  conclude  this  history  of  spiders,  I 
must  mention  a  very  remarkable  one,  described 
and  figured  by  Freycinet,  under  the  name  of 
Aranea  notacanthay^  but  which  appears  to  belong 
to  no  known  genus  of  the  Order.  It  is  stated  to 
have  at  its  postmor  extremity  a  long  cylindrical 
tube,  terminated  by  two  eyes  I  !  But  this, 
surely,  must  be  a  mistake.  At  the  anterior  part 
of  the  thorax  are  four  eyes,  in  a  square,  and  one 
on  each  side.  The  form  of  the  abdomei^  and  its 
tube  are  very  remarkable.  This  spider  was 
found  in  a  small  island  near  Port  Jackson,  in  an 
irregular  web  attached  to  the  shrubs. 

2.  The  Pedipalpsy  forming  the  second  Order 
of  Arachnidans,  will  not  detain  us  long.  The 
principal  animals  belonging  to  it,  are  the  scar- 

1  Plate  XI.  Fig.  2. 


300  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

pionsy  which  are  not  only  remarkable  for  the 
powerful  organs  by  which  they  are  enabled 
to  seize  their  prey,  but  also  for  their  jointed 
tail  terminating  in  a  deadly  sting.    Theif  usped 
alone,  when  they  are  moying  with  their  open 
forceps  advanced  before  their  head,  and  their 
tail  turned  over  it,    is   enough    to  create   no 
little  alarm  in  the  beholder;    and  if  he  were 
told  that  one  genus  of  the  tribe  goes  by  the 
name  of  man^kUler^  and  should  read  in  Aristotle, 
that  though  some  were  harmless,  the  sting  of 
others  was  fatal  both  to  man  and  beast,*  the 
degree  of  his  alarm  would  not  be  diminished. 
But  though  the  venom  of  these  creatures,  when 
provoked  and  put  upon  self-defence,  may  some- 
times prove  fatal  to  man  and  the  higher  animals, 
yet  this  is  not  the  main  purpose  for  which  their 
Creator  has  given  them  such  means  of  annoy  anca 
Their  food  consists  of  various  beetles  and  otha 
insects,  arachnidans,  and  wood-lice;    many  of 
which  they  could  not  easily  master  and  devour, 
after  they  have  seized  them  with  their  forceps, 
without  the  aid  of  their  tail  and  its  sting;'  this 
they  can  turn  over  their  head,  and  moving  'A 
in  any  direction,  immediately  kill  their  prey, 

1  Androctonui. 

•  Hist,  Animal.  I.  viii.  c.  39.  Comp.  N.  D.  D'Hist.  Nat. 
XXX.  431. 

•  See  above,  p.  233. 


ARACHNIDAN8.  301 

lioweyer  strofig  and  active,  by  the  fatal  venom 
it  instills. 

Qur  Saviour  alludes  to  the  scorpion  as  one 
of  the  gymbols  of  the  evil  i^irit:  and  as  a 
zodiacal  sign  with  the  Egyptians,  it  represented 
Typhon»  which  seems  to  prove  that  our  Saviour's 
application  of  it  was  in  conformity  with  a 
canent  opinion. 

The  other  Pedipalps,^  though  one  of  them 
has  a  jointed  tail  like  the  scorpions,*  are  not 
armed  with  a  sting.  Probably  the  animals 
that  they  feed  upon  offer  less  resistance  than 
the.  prey  of  the  latter. 

With  regard  to  the  Arachnidans  in  general, 
the  object  of  their  creation  appears  to  have  been 
to  assist  in  keeping  within  due  bounds  the 
insect  population  of  the  globe.  The  members 
of  this  great  and  interesting  Class  are  so  given 
to  multiply  beyond  all  bounds,  that  were  it 
not  for  the  various  animab  that  are  directed 
by  the  law  of  their  Creator  to  make  them  their 
food,  the  whole  Creation,  at  least  the  organized 
members  of  it,  would  suffer  great  injury,  if  not 
total  destruction,  from  the  myriad  forms  that 
would  invest  the  face  of  universal  nature  with  a 
living  veil  of  animal  and  plant  devourers.  To 
prevent  this  sad  catastrophe,  it  was  given  in 

>  Phrynus^  SfC.  *  Thtlyplumus. 


302  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

charge  to  the  spiders,  to  set  traps  everywhere^ 
and  to  weave  their  pensile  toils,  from  branch 
to  branch,  and  froin  tree  to  tree,  and  even  to 
dive  under  the  waters.  And,  more  particularly, 
to  them  we  are  mainly  indebted  for  onr  de- 
liverance from  a  plague  oi  flies  of  every  de* 
scription,  which,  if  the  spiders  were  remoyed, 
of  which  they  form  the  principal  food,  would 
subject  us  to  incredible  annoyance.^ 

The  scorpions,  and  other  Pedipidps,  are 
found  only  in  warm  climates,  where  they  are 
often  very  numerous,  and,  like  the  c^itipedes, 
creep  into  beds.^  Insects  multiply,  bey<md 
conception,  in  such  climates,  and  unless  Provi- 
dence had  reinforced  his  army  of  insectiyorous 
animals,  it  would  haye  been  impossible  to  exist 
in  tropical  regions.  The  animals  we  are  speak- 
ing of,  not  only  dertroy  all  kinds  of  beedes, 
grass-hoppers,  and  other  insects,  but  also  their 
larves,  and  even  eggs. 

Pseudarachnidan  CondyJapes. 

This  Class,  which  is  formed  from  the  Tra€heanf 
Aracknidans  of  Latreille,  differs  from  the  pre- 
ceding principally  in  the  organs  of  Respirathm 
and  Cireulation. 

Body    coriaceous,  or  crustaceous.    Spiracles 

^  See  above,  p.  68. 


ARACHNIDAMS.  303 

connecting  with  tracheiB  for  respiration.  Circu^ 
latian  obacnre.  JEyes  2 — 4.  Legs  6 — 8.  Seamal 
organs  single. 

The  ^lass  consists  of  two  Orders,  perfectly 
analogous  to  those  of  the  Arachnidahs,  which 
may  be  denominated.  Pseudo-scorpions  and 
Phcdangidans. 

1.  Pseudo-scorpions.  Body  oblong,  divided 
into  several  s^ments.    Eyes  2 — 4.     Legs  6 — 8. 

2.  Pkaiangidans.  Body  consisting  of  one 
segment,  with  the  analogue  of  the  abdomen 
ccmsisting  of  folds.     Eyes  2.     Legs  8,  dongated. 

1.  I  have  already  given  an  account  of  the 
most  interesting  genus  of  this  Order,  the  Sol-^ 
pugOy  on  a  former  occasi<Mi  ;^  and  there  is  little 
known  of  the  history  of  the  hook-crabsy^  except 
that  they  are  often  found  in  books ;  I  have  also 
occasionally  met  with  them  in  the  drawers  of 
my  insect  cabinets,  moving  slowly  on,  with 
their  arms  expanded,  probably  they  were  in 
search  of  the  mite  that  is  so  injurious  to 
specimens  of  insects ;  they  are  also  often  found 
upon  flies.  One  genus,'  in  this  tribe,  has  ^bur 
eyes,  all  the  rest  of  the  Class  have  only  two. 

2.  The  most  remarkable  genus^  of  the  second 
Order  of  Pseudamchnidans  is  one  described  in 
the  Linnean  Transactions;^  in  which  the  posterior 


*  See  above,  p.  85,  •  Chelifer  '  Obisium. 

*  Oonyleptet.    K.  ^  xii.  450.  /.  xxii./.  16. 


304  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

legs  exhibit  a  raptorious  character,  and  eeem 
fitted  either  to  seize  or  retain  their  prey.  The 
common  Phalangidans,  or  harvest-men,  have 
been  treated  of  in  another  place.^ 

The  animals  of  this  class  seem  to  be  univer- 
sally insectivorous,  though  fabricating  no  snares. 

• 

AcaHdan  Condyhpes. 

We  are  now  arrived  at  a  Class  of  Condylopes, 
that,  with  respect  to  their  food^  have  a  much 
more  extensive  commission  than  those  which 
we  have  lately   considered,   the  Arachnidans, 
and  Pseudarachnidans.     Under   the   name  of 
mites  they  are  universally  known,  and  when 
some  of  our  most  essential  articles  of  food,  as 
cheese  and  flour,  get  old,  or  in   any  d^ree 
musty,  they  soon  swarm    with    these   minute 
animals,  which,  wherever  they  are  established, 
multiply  beyond  conception;  mites  also  attack 
not  only  decaying  substances,  but  also  living 
ones;    in  man  they  are  the  cause  of  a  most 
revolting  distemper;'  under  the  name  of  ticks 
they  attack  dogs  and  other  animals,  and  few 
insects  altogether  escape  from  their  annoyance ; 
and  they  not  only  infest  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  and  air,  but  are  also  found  swimming  in 
every  pool ;  so  that  their  field  of  action  seems 
to  be  the  whole  creation  of  organize  beings. 

1  See  above,  p.  90.  ^  See  The  Lancet y  i.  1834-5.  59. 


ARACHNIDANS.  305 

The  Class  may  be  thus  characterized  : 
Body  without  any  insection  or  impression 
marking  out  its  parts,   consisting  of  a  single 
s^ment,  and  without  folds.     Mouth  and  organs 
various.     Eyes  2.     Legs  6 — 8,  short. 

Latreille  has  divided  this  Class,  including  in 
it  the  preceding  one,  into  seven  Families ;  but 
perhaps  it  would  be  better  to  consider  it  as 
divided  into  two  Orders,  mites^  and  tkks^'^ 
or  those  that  do  not  suck  their  food,  and  those 
that  are  fitted  with  an  organ  adapted  to  suction. 
I  shall  select  an  instance  or  two  from  animals 
of  this  Class,  which  shew  the  care  of  the 
Creator,  for  these  little  beings  apparently  so 
low  in  the  scale  of  Creation ;  His  foresight  of 
every  circumstance  in  which  they  would  be 
placed ;  and  His  adaptation  of  their  structure 
to  th^ir  assigned  station. 

This  is  particularly  conspicuous  in  the  case 
of  a  Species  of  bat-mite,^  which  was  first  noticed 
by  one  of  our  most  celebrated  microscopical 
observers,  Mr.  Baker,  and  has  since  fallen  under 
the  notice  of  M.  V.  Audoin,  well  known  for  his 
acute  investigation  of  the  external  parts  of 
Insects,  who  kindly  sent  me  a  memoir  of  his 
on  this  and  other  Acaridans,  extracted  from  the 
Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles  for  the  year 
1832.     If  we  consider  the  animal  that  this  mite 

*  Acari.  ^  Ricini.  *  Pteroptes. 

VOL.  n.  X 


306  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

inhabits,  the  bat,  and  that  it  affords  much  less 
shelter  tlian  the  birds,  to  any  parasite  that  may 
be  attached  to  it,  especially  as  the  species  that 
I  am  speaking  of  is  stated  usually  to  fix  itself 
to  the  membrane  of  the  wings,  which  being  a 
naked  membrane,  would  seem  to  expose  it  to  be 
easily  shaken  off  when  the  animal  is  flying: 
we  easily  comprehend  that  it  stands  in  need  of 
some  particular  provision  to  counteract  this  cir- 
cumstance. 

Like  those  of  many  other  mites,  its  feet  are 
furnished  with  a  vesicle  which  is  capable  of 
contraction  and  dilatation,  and  which  the  animal 
can  probably  use  as  a  sucker  to  fix  itself;  but 
if  by  any  sudden  jerk  it  is  unfixed,  to  prevent  its 
falling,  it  is  gifted  with  the  power  of  turning 
upwards,  in  an  instant,  two,  four,  six,  or  even  all 
its  legs,  according  to  circumstances,  sufficiently 
to  support  itself,  and  can  walk  in  this  position*, 
as  it  were  upon  its  back,  as  well  as  it  does  in  the 
ordinary  way  with  that  part  upwards ;  it  may  be 
often  seen  with  four  turned  upwards  while  it 
walks  upon  the  other  four,*  so  that  it  is  ready, 
upon  any  accident,  instantaneously  to  use  them, 
and  to  lay  hold  of  the  wing. 

The  bat  is  infested  by  another  parasite,  placed 
by  Dr.  Leach  at  the  end  of  the  Acaridans,  and  by 
Latreille,  but  not  without  hesitation,  after  the 

*  Baker  on  Micr,  iu  407.  /.  xv./.  b.  f.  o. 


ARACHNIDANS.  307 

Diptera.  I  may  therefore  be  justified  in  intro- 
ducing the  animal  in  question  here,  since,  in- 
habiting the  same  subject,  their  proceedings  will 
serve  to  illustrate  each  other,  and  to  demonstrate 
the  agency  and  design  of  the  Supreme  Cause  in 
the  concurring  structure  of  these  parasites.  The 
one  I  here  allude  to  may  be  called  the  hat- 
louse}  Latreille,  who  has  described  very  mi- 
nutely a  species  of  this  genus,'  informs  us  that 
their  head  is  implanted  in  a  singular  situation, 
the  back  of  the  thorax,  between  the  middle  and 
the  anterior  extremity,'  immediately  behind  the 
part  to  which  the  anterior  legs  are  attache^. 
The  middle  of  the  back,  in  the  common  species, 
presents  a  cavity,  which  terminates  posteriorly 
in  a  kind  of  pouch  ,^  so  that  the  head  can  be 
thrown  back  and  its  extremity  received  by  it. 
From  this  situation,  it  is  evident  that  the  animal 
cannot  take  its  nutriment  from  the  bat  in  the 
ordinary  position,  with  the  back  upwards;  it 
must,  therefore,  necessarily  stand  with  it  down- 
wards when  engaged  in  suction.  When  under 
the  forming  hand  of  the  Almighty  Creator,  its 
1^8  were  planted,  it  was  not  on  the  lower  side  of 
the  trunk,  as  they  usually  are  in  other  hexapods, 
but  on  the  upper  side  or  margin  of  that  part.^ 
Colonel  Montague  observes, — '-  So  strange  and 

*  Nycteribia,  Lat.  *  N,  Blainvilliu 
3  See  Montague.  Linn,  Trans,  xi.  t.  iii.  f,  5. 

*  N.  Verpertilimis.        »  N.  D,  D*Hist.  Nat  xxxiii.  131, 132. 


308  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

contradictory  to  experience  is  the  formation  of 
this  Insect,  that  were  it  not  for  the  structure 
of  the  legs,  no  one  could  doubt  that  the  upper 
was  actually  the  under  part  of  the  body.^  From 
the  account  given  by  the  last  acute  and  inde- 
fatigable naturalist,  the  motions  of  this  little 
creature  are  so  rapid  as  to  be  almost  like  flight, 
and  it  can  fix  itself  in  an  instant  whereyer 
it  pleases.  Putting  some  into  a  phial,  their 
agility  was  inconceivable ;  not  being  able,  like 
other  Dipterous  insects,  to  walk  upon  the  glass, 
their  efibrts  were  confined  to  laying  hold  of  each 
other,  and  during  the  struggle  they  appeared 
flying  in  circles."  * 

Their  head  is  furnished  with  antennae  and 
feelers,  immediately  below  the  insertion  of  the 
former,  on  each  side,  is  a  slightly  prominent 
eye,  so  that  they  have  ^ight  to  guide  them  in 
their  motions,  which  the  bat-mite  appears  to  be 
without. 

I  may  conclude  this  account  with  the  pious 
reflection  of  the  worthy  author  lately  mentioned. 
The  very  singular  structure  of  ihis  insect, 
which,  at  first,  appears  to  be  a  strange  deformity 
in  nature,  and  excites  our  astonishment,  will, 
like  all  other  creatures,  constructed  by  the  same 
Omnipotent  hand,  be  found  to  be  most  ad- 
mirably contrived  for  all  the  purposes  of  its 

1  Linn.  Tr.  xl  12.  «  Ibid.  13. 


ARACHNIDANS.  309 

creation;  and  the  scrutinizing  naturalist  will 
soon  discover  this  unusual  conformation  to  be 
the  character  which  at  once  stamps  its  habits 
and  economy.^ 

One  of  the  most  singular  animals  of  this  Class 
is  one  called  the  vegetating  mite.*  These  are 
fixed  for  a  time,  by  an  anal  thread,  to  certain 
beetles,  by  means  of  which,  as  by  an  umbilical 
chord,  they  derive  their  nutriment  from  them. 
After  a  certain  time,  they  disengage  themselves, 
and  seek  their  food  in  the  common  way  of  their 
tribe. 

It  is  dilSicult  to  say  where  Latreille's  Order  of 
Aporobranchians^  should  properly  be  placed. 
Savigny  considers  them  as  leading  from  the 
Crustaceans  to  the  Arachnidans  by  Phalangium. 
If  they  are  parasitic  upon  marine  animals,  as 
there  is  reason  to  believe,  might  they  not,  in 
some  sort,  be  regarded  as  one  of  those  branches, 
which,  without  going  by  the  regular  road,  form 
a  Unk  between  tribes  apparently  distant  from 
each  other?*  They  seem,  in  some  respects  at 
least,  to  present  an  analogy,  if  not  an  affinity, 
to  the  Hexapod  parasites,  the  bird-louse,^  &c. 
I  offer  this  merely  as  a  conjecture. 

^  Linn,  TV.  xi.  13.  ^  Uropoda  vegetans. 

*  Nymphon.  Pycnogonum,  &c.  *  See  above,  p.  1 8. 

*  Nirmus, 


310 


Chapter  XX. 

Functions  and  Instincts.     Insect  Candylopes. 

The  animals  of  the  class  we  are  next  to  consider, 
have  been  regarded  by  many  modem  zoologists, 
especially  of  the  French  school,  as  inferior  both 
to  Crustaceans  and  Arachnidans,  on  account  of 
their  having  only,  as  it  were,  a  rudimental  heart, 
exhibiting  indeed  a  kind  of  systole  and  diastole, 
but  unaccompanied  by  any  system  of  vessels  by 
which  the  blood  might  circulate  in  them.  A 
learned  and  acute  writer,  and  eminent  zoologist, 
amongst  our  own  countrymen,  has  with  great 
force  controverted  the  justice  of  this  sent^ce  of 
degradation  pronounced  upon  Insects;  an  opi- 
nion which  has  also  been  embraced  by  many 
other  modern  writers  on  the  subject,  and  consi- 
derable doubt  has  been  shown  to  rest  upon  the 
main  foundations  upon  which  the  illustrious  and 
lamented  Baron  Cuvier,  who  was  the  father  of 
the  hypothesis,  had  built  it.* 

But  the  important  discoveries  of  Dr.  Cams, 
who  first  proved  that  a  circulation  really  exists 
in  various  larves  of  Insects,  and  afterwards  that 

*  Mac  Leay,  Hor,  Entomolog,  904,  297, 


INSECl'  CON  D Y  LOPES.  3 1 1 

it  is  also  discoverable  in  several  perfect  ones/ 
have  placed  the  matter  beyond  all  doubt.    Tak- 
ing, therefore,   into    consideration   the  nervous 
system  of  Insects,  as  well  as  those  of  circulation 
and  respiration,  as  ought,  in  all  reason,  to  be  done 
—for  upon  comparison  of  these  three  systems  so 
intimately  connected  with  life  and  sensation, 
surely  the  first  place  is  due  to  that  by  which  alone 
the  animal  is  conscious  of  its  existence  and  that  of 
the  world  it  inhabits,  and  is  enabled  to  run  the 
race  appointed  by  its  Creator ;  surely  if  even  no 
Cams  had  appeared  to  demonstrate  the  exist* 
ence  of  a  circulation  in  these  animals,  still  the 
perfection  of  their  nervous  system,  compared 
with  that  of  the  MoUuscans,   in  determining 
their  respective  stations,  would  be  a  sufficient 
counterpoise  to  a  heart  and  vascular  system  for 
circulation ;  and  if  to  this  superiority  we  add 
the  number  and  nature  of  the  several  organs  by 
which  this  system  acts,  and  the  fruits  of  such 
agency  in  the  activity  and  various  instincts  of 
the  animals  endowed  with  it,  embodying  the 
moving  will,  the  informing  sense,  the  impelling 
appetite,  compared  with  the  inertness  and  slug- 
gish motions,  and  apathetic  existence,  and  pau- 
city of  instinctive  actions  in  the  great  majority 
of  the  Molluscans, — who  is  there  that  will  hesi- 
tate to  conclude  that  He  who  created  the  Insect 

1  Introd.   to   Comp.  Anat.  E,  T,  by   Gore,  lu  392.      Act, 
Acad,  Cas  Nat.  Cur,  xv.  ii. 


312  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

world,  gifted  them  with  so  many  and  such  won- 
derful instincts,  inspired  them  with  such  inces* 
sant  activity,  fitted  them  with  such  various 
organs  for  such  a  diversity  of  locomotions  under 
the  earth,  on  the  earth,  in  the  air  and  in  the 
water,  meant  to  place  them  far  above  the  bead- 
less  Oyster^  with  scarcely  any  organs  of  sensa- 
tion, and  scarcely  any  motion  but  that  of  open- 
ing and  shutting  its  shell,  or  even  than  the 
Cutth'Jish^  though  furnished  with  eyes,  and 
even  three  hearts,  and  a  very  extraordinary 
animal,  yet  destitute  of  many  organs  of  the 
senses  and  of  locomotion  found  in  Insects,  and 
most  of  those  that  they  have  not  formed  upon 
the  plan  of  the  higher  animals,  but  rather  bor- 
rowed from  the  confessedly  lower  Classes  of 
Polypes  and  Radiaries  ?  ^ 

With  regard  to  the  Crustaceatis  and  Arach- 
nidans,  setting  aside  the  superiority  of  Insects  in 
their  instincts,  the  single  circumstance  of  the 
reproduction  of  mutilated  organs  in  the  former 
seems  to  prove  an  inferiority  of  rank  and  a  ten- 
dency towards  the  Polype.* 

When  we  consider  attentively  these  little 
beings,  the  infinite  variety  of  their  forms,  the 
multiplicity  and  diversity  of  their  oi^ns,  whe- 
ther of  sense  or  motion,  of  oftence  or  defence, 
for  mastication  or  suction ;  or  those  constructed 

»  Vol.  I.  p.  303,  304.  «  Mac  Leay,  Hor.  Ent.  206,  m 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  313 

with  a  view  to  their  several  instincts,  and  the 
exercise  of  those  functions  devolved  upon  them 
by  the  wisdom  of  their  Creator ;  the  different 
kinds  also  of  sculpture  which  is  the  distinction 
of  one  tribe,  and  of  painting,  which  ornaments 
another,  the  brilliant  colours,  the  metallic  lustre, 
the  shining  gold  and  silver  with  which  a  liberal 
and  powerful  hand  has  invested  or  bespangled 
numbers  of  them ;  the  down,  the  hair,  the  wool, 
the  scales,  with  which  He,  who  careth  for  the 
smallest  and  seemingly  most  insignificant  works 
of  his  hand,  hath  clothed  and  covered  them; 
when  all  these  things  strike  upon  our  senses, 
and  become  the  subject  of  our  thoughts  and 
reflection,  we  find  a  scene  passing  before  us  far 
exceeding  any,  or  all  of  those,   that  we  have 
hitherto  contemplated  in  our  progress  from  the 
lowest  towards  the  highest  members  of  the  ani- 
mal kingdom,  and  which  for  its  extent,  and  the 
myriads  of  its  mustered  armies,  each  corps  dis- 
tinguished as  it  were  by  its  own  banner,  and 
under  its  proper  leaders,  infinitely  outnumbers 
all  the  members  of  the  higher  Classes,  which 
stand  as  it  were  between  aquatic  and  terrestrial 
animals,  many  of  its  tribes  under  one  form  inha- 
biting the  water,  and  under  another  the  earth 
and  the  air. 

The  following  characters  distinguish  this  great 
Class: 


314  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Body,  covered  with  a  homy  or  coriaceous 
integument.  Spinal  chord  knotty,  terminating 
anteriorly  in  a  bilobed  brain ;  a  heart  and  im- 
perfect circulation^  sometimes  vascular,  and 
sometimes  extra-vascular ;  respiration  by  trachea ^ 
receiving  the  air  by  spiracles;  /^^.^ jointed,  ia  the 
perfect  insect  always  six. 

The  Class  of  Insects  may  be  divided  into  two 
Sub-classes^^  viz.  Ametabolians^  or  those  that  do 
not  undergo  any  metamorphosis^  and  have  no 
wings ;  and  Metabolians,  or  those  that  undergo 
a  metamorpfiosiSf  and  are  usually  fitted  with 
wings  in  their  final  state. 

Sub-class  1. — Ametabolians  are  further  subdi- 
vided into  two  Orders^  Thysanurans  and  Parasites. 

Order  1. — The  Thysanurans  are  remarkable 
for  their  anal  appendages,  which  consist  either 
of  jointed  organs  resembling  antennsB,  and 
approaching  very  near  to  the  caudal  organs  of 
the  cockroach,^  the  use  of  which  is  not  cer- 
tainly known ;  or  of  an  inflexed  elastic  caudal 
fork  bent  under  the  abdomen,  which  enables 
them  to  leap  with  great  agility.  To  the  first 
of  these  tribes  belongs  the  common  sugar- lause,^ 
and  to  the  last  the  spring- tails .^ 

It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  this  is  not 

*  See  above,  p.  18.  ^  Blatta. 

^  Lepisma.  *  Podura,  Sminthunu. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  315 

a  natural  Order,  for  there  is  no  analc^y  between 
the  jointed  tails  of  the  sugar-louse,  which  some 
have  supposed  to  belong  or  approach  to  the 
OrthopterUf  and  the  unjointed  leaping  organ  of 
the  spring'tail.  The  latter  animals,  indeed, 
seem  to  form  an  osculant  tribe,  without  the  pale 
of  the  Class  of  Insects,  and  perhaps  having 
some  reference  to  the  Chilopodans  amongst  the 
Myriapods,  with  which  they  agree,  in  having 
only  simple  eyes,  like  spiders,  on  each  side  of 
the  head.  Those  of  the  spring-tails  consist  of 
eight  such  eyes,  arranged  in  a  double  series,  and 
planted  in  an  oval  space,  in  shape  resembling 
an  Insect's  eye.  The  Chilopodans  have  only 
four  on  each  side.  The  Insects  of  this  Order 
probably  feed  upon  detritus,  whether  animal 
or  vegetable,  their  masticating  organs  being 
very  weak,  and  fitted  to  comminute  only  pu- 
trescent substances. 

Order  2. — The  Order  of  Parasites — consisting 
of  the  most  unclean  and  disgusting  animals  of 
the  whole  Class,  infest  both  man,  beast,  and  bird, 
and  no  less  than  four^  species,  accounted  by 
linne,  &c.  as  varieties,  being  attached  to  the 
former — may  be  divided  into  two  sections,  those 
that  live  by  suction,  and  those  that  masticate 
their  food.     To  the  first  of  these  belong  the 

*  Pediculua  Capitis,  Corporis,  Nigritarum,  and  Phthirus 
Pubis, 


316  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

human  and  the  dog-louse,  and  to  the  other  the 
various  lice  that  inhabit  the  birds/  of  which 
almost  every  species  has  a  peculiar  one. 

I  have,  on  a  former  occasion,  alluded  to  the 
Order  of  Parasites^  when  speaking  of  punitive 
animals  :^  here  I  must  observe,  that  like  other 
instruments  employed  by  God  to  visit  the  sins 
of  mankind,  they  are  intended  to  produce  a 
sanative  effect,  as  well  as  to  punish.^  It  is 
generally  known  that  they  abound  only  on  those 
whose  habits  are  dirty,  in  whom  they  may  pre- 
vent the  diseases  which  such  habits  would  other- 
wise generate,  as  well  as  stimulate  them  to 
greater  attention  to  personal  cleanliness.  The 
hird-hnse  is  probably  useful  to  birds  in  devour- 
ing the  sordes  which  must  accumulate  at  the 
root  of  their  plumes. 

Sub-class  2. — Metabolians,  by  most  modem 
writers  on  Insects,  are  considered,  from  their 
oral  organs,  as  constituting  two  Sections,  which 
are  denominated  Haustellate  and  Mandibtdate 
Insects.  I  may  here  observe  that  the  instru- 
ment of  suction  in  a  Haustellate  ^outh  consists 
of  pieces,  though  differently  circumstanced,  pre- 
cisely analogous  to  those  employed  in  mastica- 
tion in  a  Mandibulate  one,  which  has  been  most 

1  Nirmus. 

»  Vol.  1.  p.  12.     Sec  Introd.  to  Ent.  i.  83. 

'  Ibid,  p.  253. 


INSECT  COND YLOPES.  3 1 7 

satisfactorily  demonstrated,  and  with  great  ele- 
gance, by  M.  Savigny,  in  the  first  part  of  his 
Animaux  sans  Verthh^es} 

Ab  there  are  several  Orders  called  Osculant^ 
that  are  intermediate  between  these  Sections,  I 
shall  arrange  the  whole  in  three  columns. 

OSCULANT  ORDERS. 

1.  Aphaniptera, 

2.  Homaloptera. 

3.  Trichoptera. 

4.  Dermaptera. 

5.  Strepsiptera. 

HAUSTELLATE  ORDERS.  MANDIBULATE  ORDERS. 

6.  Diptera.  10.  Hymenoptera, 

7.  Lepidoptera.  11.  Neuroptera, 

8.  Homoptera.  12.  Orthoptera. 

9.  Hemiptera.  13.  Coleoptera. 

With  regard  to  the  characters  of  these 
Orders: 

Order  1. — The  Aphaniptera  (Flea^  Chigoe)  are 
apterous  and  parasitic,  but  differ  from  the 
Order  of  Parasites  by  undergoing  a  metamor- 
phosis. They  connect  the  Suctorious  Parasites 
with  the  Diptera. 

Order  2. — The  Homaloptera  (^Forest-Jly ^  ^c.) 
callied  also  Pupipara^  because  their  eggs  are 
hatched  in  the  matrix  of  the  mother,  where  thev 
pass  their  larve  state,  and  are  not  excluded  till 

*  t.  i.— iv. 


318  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

they  have  become  pupes.  Most  of  them  have 
two  wings,  but  one  genus  is  apterous:^  these 
seem  intermediate  between  certain  Acaridansy 
as  the  bat-mite,  and  the  Diptera;  they  seem 
also,  in  some  respects,  to  connect  with  the 
ArachnidanSf  whence  they  have  been  called 
spider-flies. 

Order  3. — The  Trichoptera  {Caseworm-flied) 
have  four  hairy  membranous  wings,  in  their 
nervures  resembling  those  of  Lepidoptera^  the 
under  ones  folding  longitudinally.  The  mouth 
has  four  palpi,  but  the  masticating  oi^ans  are 
merely  rudimental.  Their  place  seems  to  be 
somewhere  between  the  saw-flies  and  those 
moths  whose  caterpillars  clothe  themselves  with 
different  substances. 

Order  4. — ^The  Dermaptera  (Earwigs)  have 
two  elytra  and  two  wings  of  membrane,  folded 
longitudinally,  and  their  tail  is  armed  with  a 
forceps.  They  appear  to  be  between  the  Co- 
leoptera  and  Orthoptera. 

Order  5. — The  Strepsiptera  {Wild  heefly^ 
Waspfly\  parasitic  animals,  that  have  two 
ample  wings,  forming  the  quadrant  of  a  circle, 
and  of  a  substance  between  coriaceous  and  mem- 
branous, and  two  elytriform  subspiral  organs, 
appendages  of  the  base  of  the  anterior  legs. 
Their  place  is  uncertain,  some  placing  them 

'  Melophagus,    The  Sheep- louse. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  319 

between  the  Coleoptera  and  Dermaptera;    and 
others  between  the  Lepidoptera  and  Diptera. 


Order  6. — The  Diptera^  (Two-winged  Flies 
and  GnatSf  &c.)  as  their  name  indicates,  have 
only  two  membranous  wings,  usually  accom- 
panied by  two  wingletSj  representing  the  under 
wings  of  the  Tetrapterous  Orders,  and  two 
poisersj  which  appear  connected  with  a  spiracle. 

Order  7. — The  Lepidoptera  (Butterflies  and 
Moths)  have  four  membranous  wings,  covered 
with  minute  scales,  varying  in  shape. 

Order  8. — The  Homoptera  (  Tree- Locusts^ 
Frog-hoppers,  Froth-hoppers)  have  four  deflexed 
wings,  often  of  a  substance  between  coriaceous 
and  membranous. 

Order  9. — The  Hemiptera  (Bugs,  &c.^  have 
four  organs  of  flight,  the  upper  pair  being  homy 
or  coriaceous,  but  tipped,  in  the  generality,  with 
membrane,  the  lower  pair  being  membranous. 


Order  10. — The  Hymenoptera,  (Saw  Flies , 
Gall  Flies,  Ichneumon  Flies,  Bees,  Wasps,  Ants, 
&c.)  which  are  the  analogues  of  the  Diptera, 
have  four  membranous  wings,  and  the  tail  of  the 
female  is  usually  armed  with  a  sting,  or  in* 
strument  useful  in  laying  their  eggs. 

Order  11. —  The  Neuroptera  (Dragon  Flies, 
Lace-winged  Flies,  Ephemeral  Flies,  White  Ants, 
&c.)  have  four  membranous  wings,  usually  reti- 


320  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

culated  by  numerous  nervures,  but  no  sting  or 
ovipositor.  They  are  analogues,  especially  As- 
calaphuSf  of  the  Lepidoptera. 

Order  12. — The  Orthoptera  (Cockroaches^ 
Locusts^  Praying-insects y  Spectres,  Grasshoppers, 
Crickets,  &c.)  have  mostly  two  tegmina,  or  upper 
wings,  of  a  substance  between  coriaceous  and 
membranous,  and  two  under  ones,  formed  of 
membrane,  and  folded  longitudinally  when  un- 
employed. These  are  analogues  of  the  Honwp- 
tera. 

Order  13. — The  Coleoptera  (Beetles)  have  two 
upper  organs,  of  a  homy  or  leathery  substance, 
called  elytra,  to  cover  their  two  membranous 
wings,  which  are  folded  longitudinally  and  trans- 
versely. These  are  analogues  of  the  Hemiptera, 
especially  those  with  no  apical  membrane. 


In  considering  the  three  descriptions  of  Orders 
here  enumerated  and  characterized,  it  must  be 
recollected  that  we  are  not  following  the  usual 
order  of  arrangement  in  systems,  that  of  de- 
scending from  the  highest  to  the  lowest ;  but 
that  we  are  ascending  in  an  inverse  direction, 
consequently  that,  in  the  above  tables,  the  lowest 
numbers  indicate  the  lowest  and  not  the  highest 
Orders. 

I  shall  now  make  some  remarks,  as  to  their 
functions  and   vses,   upon   the    animals    consti- 
tuting these  several  Orders,   enlivening  them 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  321 

occaMonally  with  such  histories,  not  before  pro- 
duced, or  not  well  known,  as  may  interest  the 
reader  and  answer  the  great  end  of  this  treatise, 
the  glory  of  God,  as  manifested  in  the  history 
and  instincts  of  animals. 

Before,  however,  I  enter  upon  the  separate 
consideration  of  these  Orders,  I  must  premise 
a  few  remarks  upon  the  circumstance  which  dis« 
tinguishes  them  from  the  preceding  Sub-class, 
their  metamorphoses.  I  have,  on  a  former  oc- 
casion,^ mentioned  some  beneficial  effects  m-^ 
suiting  from  this  law  of  the  Creator;  and  its 
action  and  the  results  of  it  have  been  so  ably 
explained  and  illustrated  in  another  treatise,^ 
that  it  is  quite  unnecessary  for  me  to  enter 
largely  into  the  subject.  The  striking  remarks 
made  upon  the  developements  of  the  higher 
animals,  towards  the  close  of  the  treatise  alluded 
to,^  merit  particular  attention. 

It  has  been  observed  by  an  ingenious  and 
learned  writer*  on  this  subject — that  every  spe- 
cies of  plant,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  exhibits  it- 
self in  different  states.  First  are  seen  the  succu- 
lent stems  adorned  with  the  young  foliage,  next 
emerge  the  buds  of  the  flowers>  then  the  cal3rx 
opens,  and  permits  the  tender  and  lovely  blos- 
soms to  expand.  The  insects  destined  to  feed 
upon  each  plant  must  be  simultaneous  in  their 

*  See  above,  p.  26.  «  Roget.  B.  T,  i.  302—316. 

5  Ibid.  ii.  631.  ♦  Dr.  Vhey. 

VOL.  n.  Y 


322  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

developement.  If  the  butterfly  came  forth  be- 
fore there  were  any  flowers,  she  would  in  vain 
search  for  the  nectar  that  forms  her  food ;  and  if 
the  caterpillar  was  hatched  after  the  leaves  had 
begun  to  fade  and  wither,  she  could  not  exercise 
her  function.^  In  another  passage  he  thus  illus- 
trates this  analogy  between  the  metamorphoses 
of  the  insect  and  the  successive  developements  of 
the  plant.  If  we  first  place  an  egg,  says  he, 
next  to  it  its  caterpillar,  further  on  its  chrysalis, 
and  lastly  the  butterfly ;  what  have  we  but  an 
animal  stem,  an  elongation  perfectly  analogous 
to  that  of  the  plant  proceeding  from  its  seed,  by 
its  stem  and  its  appendages  to  the  bud,  tlie 
blossom,  and  the  seed  again  ?'  For  the  difierent 
kinds  and  forms  of  larves  and  pupes  I  must 
refer  the  reader  to  another  work,'  merely  ob- 
serving that,  in  their  forms,  the  larves  seem  to 
represent  all  the  preceding  Classes  of  Condy- 
lopes,  and  also  some  Annelidans  and  MoUuscans. 
The  great  majority  of  pupes  are  not  locomotive, 
and  take  no  food,  while  the  rest  are  locomotive 
and  continue  to  feed.  This  circumstance  some- 
times exposes  the  former  to  the  attacks  of  their 
enemies,  the  ichneumons,  and  thus  numbers  are 
destroyed  which  would  otherwise  escape;  but 
though,  in  this  state,  they  are  thus  more  exposed 
to  the  attack  of  one  enemy,  they  are  more  ef- 

>  N.  D,  D'H.  N.  XX.  348.  «  Ibid,  355. 

*  Introd,  to  Ent.  iii.  Lett.  xxx.  xxxi. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  323 

fectually  concealed  from  those  of  another,  the 

insectivorous  birds.  Those  that  bury  themselves 

in  the  earth  seem  still  more  privileged  from 
attack. 

Orders  1 » 2,  and  6.  There  is  so  close  a  connec- 
tion between  the^o^,  the  pupiparaus  insects y  and 
the  tfoo'wingedfliesj  that  it  will  be  best  to  consider 
them  under  one  head.  The  former  of  these,  the 
fleas/  the  mosquitos,  or  gnats,^  and  the  horse- 
flies/ all  suck  the  blood  of  man,  as  well  as  that 
of  beast  or  bird.^  The  wonderful  strength  and 
agility  of  the  flea  are  well  known/  and  it  ap- 
pears to  have  been  endowed  with  those  faculties 
by  its  Creator,  to  render  its  change  of  station 
from  one  animal  to  another,  and  means  of  es- 
cape, more  easy ;  and  though  the  bite  of  mos- 
quitos,  and  other  blood-suckers,  is,  at  certain 
times  of  the  year  and  in  certain  climates,  an 
almost  intolerable  annoyance;^  yet,  doubtless, 
some  good  end  is  answered  by  it ;  with  regard  to 
cattle,  it  is  evident  that,  while  they  are  suffering 
from  the  attack  of  these  blood-letters,  their  feed- 
ing is  more  or  less  interrupted ;  a  circumstance 
which  may  be  attended  by  beneficial  effects  to 
their  health ;  and  probably  even  to  man,  the 
torment  he  experiences  may  be  compensated,  in 

»  Pulex,  *  Culex.  •  Tabanus.  Stomoxys, 

♦  Introd.  to  Ent  1.  100,  109,  112,  &c. 
«  Ibid.  ii.  310.  iv.  195.  «  Ibid.  113. 


324  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

a  way  that  he  is  not  aware  of,  on  account  of 
which,  principally,  a  wise  Physician  prescribed 
the  painful  operation,  and  furnished  his  chirur* 
gical  operators  with  the  necessary  and  indeed 
most  curious  knives  and  lancets. 

Another  group  connecting  the  bat-mite  and 
hat'lause^  and  the  ArachnidanSj  perhaps,  with 
the  Dipteruy  are  those  two- winged  insects,  called 
pupiparous  or  nymphiparousy  because  their  young 
when  extruded  from  the  abdomen  of  the  mother, 
though  appearing  like  eggs,  are  really  in  the 
state  of  nymph  or  pupe.  It  is  remarked  of  this 
group,  which  is  parasitic  upon  beasts  and  birds, 
that  its  internal  structure  is  particularly  accom- 
modated to  this  circumstance;  it  is  furnished 
with  a  regular  matrix,  consisting  of  a  large 
musculo-membranous  pocket,  and  with  ovaries 
totally  different  from  those  of  other  insects  ;  but, 
by  their  configuration  and  position,  exhibiting  a 
considerable  resemblance  to  those  of  a  woman  .^ 
The  reason  of  this  singular  aberration  from  the 
gestation  of  other  Diptera^  which,  with  few  ex- 
ceptions, are  oviparous,  seems  connected  with 
their  peculiar  habits :  in  their  perfect  state  they 
are  usually  winged,  and  attach  themselves  ex- 
ternally to  horses,  oxen,  &c.;  it  may  therefore 
be  the  means  of  preserving  the  race  from  ex- 
tinction, that  they  are  supported  in  the  womb  of 

^  Latr.  Cruit.  Arachn.  ei  Im,  ii.  542. 


INSECT  CONDYLOP£S.  325 

their  mother,  in  some  inscrutable  way,  during 
their  grub  state,  and  only  leave  her  when  their 
next  change  will  enable  them  readily  to  attach 
themselves  to  their  destined  food. 

The  gad'flies^  though  they  do  not,  like  the 
forest  flies,  nourish  their  young  in  their  own 
womb ;  yet  their  Creator  instructs  some  of  them 
to  deposit  their  eggs  in  a  situation  where  means 
are  provided  for  their  conveyance  to  a  more 
capacious  matrix,  ministering  to  them  a  copious 
supply  of  lymph,  which  forms  their  nutriment, 
in  the  stomach  and  intestines  of  the  horse,  for 
this  animal,  with  its  own  mouth,  licks  off  the 
e^s,  wisely  attached,  by  this  fly,  to  the  hairs  of 
its  legs  in  such  parts  as  are  exposed  to  this 
action  ;  and  thus  unwittingly,  itself  conducts  its 
foes  into  its  citadel :  others  of  the  same  genus 
undermine  the  skin  of  the  ox,  of  the  sheep,  and 
in  some  countries,  even  of  man  himself.  The 
grubs,  by  their  action  in  their  several  stations, 
produce  a  purulent  matter,  which  they  imbibe, 
and  which  is  stated  by  those  who  have  studied 
them,  to  be  beneficial  to  the  animals  they 
attack.^  Another  tribe  of  this  Order,  Xk^ifiesh- 
fliesy^  \Q,y  their  eggs  on  dead  bodies,  and  soon 
remove  those   nuisances,   and   the  putrid  and 

^  (Estrus,  SfC. 

*  The  species  of  gad-flies  here  alluded  to  are  Gastnis  Equiy 
and  OSstrus  BovU,  (E,  Ovis  and  (E,  Hominis, 
'  Sarchophaga, 


320  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

pestilential  miasmata  which  they  occasion,  from 
the  face  of  our  globe.  This  function  is  of  such 
importance  to  the  welfare  of  our  species,  that 
some  of  these  ^ie^,  in  order  that  no  time  may  be 
lost,  are  viviparous/  and  bring  forth  their  young 
in  a  state  in  which  they  can  begin  their  work  as 
soon  as  they  are  bom. 

The  aphidivor<ms  flies^  have  another  function, 
in  conjunction  with  the  lace-winged  flieB^^  lady- 
birds^^ and  some  other  insects,  to  reduce  and 
keep  within  due  limits  the  infinite  myriads  of 
the  plant-licej^  which,  in  these  climates,  are  the 
universal  pests  of  the  garden,  the  orchard,  and 
the  field.  There  are  also  flies^  that  lay  their 
eggs  in  the  combs  of  humble-bees^  which,  as  it 
were,  wear  their  livery,  for  the  hairs  that  clothe 
their  body  are  so  disposed  and  coloured,  as  to 
imitate  that  of  the  bee,  whose  nests  they  fire- 
quent ;  so  that,  probably,  they  are  oflen  mistaken 
for  members  of  the  family,  and  effect  their  mis- 
chief unmolested . 

Another  tribe  of  flies,  called  hornet-flies^  with 
some  others  related  to  them,®  like  a  hawk  or 
other  predaceous  bird,  seize  their  prey  with 
their  legs,  or  their  beak,^  but  it  can  only  be  with 

i  Se-vivipara,  ^  Syrphus,  Sfc. 

^  Hemerobiux,  *  Coccinella. 

*  Aphides.  ^  Volucella^  ^c. 
^  Asiius,  *  Empis, 

•  Introd.  to  Ent.  i.  274. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  327 

the  view  of  Bucking  its  juices^  as  they  hare  no 
iDMticating  organs. 

Dipterous  insects,  however,  are  not  confined  to 
animal  food,  whether  living  or  putrescent,  many 
also  subsist  upon  a  vegetable  diet.  Mushrooms 
and  other  agarics  sometimes  swarm  with  the 
grubs  of  certain  flies  or  gnats  ;^  others  pass  their 
first  states  in  decaying  timber;  the  narcissus 
and  onion  flies'  feast  upon  the  bulbs  from  which 
they  take  their  name ;  and  a  little  gnat,'  when  a 
grub,  feeds  upon  the  pollen  of  the  flowers  of 
the  wheat. 

To  these  may  be  added  those  flies,  that  in 
their  first  state,  may  be  regarded  as  purifiers  of 
stagnant  waters,  and  other  offensive  fluids  or 
semi-fluids.  The  larves  of  the  gnat  or  mosquito 
are  aquatic  animals  which  may  be  seen  either 
suspended  at  the  surface,  or  sinking  in  most 
stagnant  waters,  compensate  in  some  d^^ree, 
for  the  torment  of  their  blood-thirsty  attacks, 
by  discharging  this  function,  and  assisting  to 
cleanse  our  stagnant  waters  from  principles  that 
might  otherwise  generate  infec:ion.  A  variety 
of  others  contribute  their  efforts  to  bring  about 
the  same  beneficial  purpose.  Almost  all  the 
Diptera^  in  their  perfect  state,  even  the  blood- 
suckers, emulate  the  bees,  in  imbibing  the  nectar 

'  Mycttephilay  jc. 

*  Eristalis  Narcissi,  and  Scatopliaga  Ccparum. 

*  Cscidamyia  Triiici. 


328  FUNCTIONS  AND  1N9TINCT8. 

from  the  variouB  flowers  with  which  God  has 
decorated  the  earth,  and  thus  assist  in  keeping 
within  due  limits,  the,  otherwise  suffocating, 
sweets  that  th^  exhale. 

From  the  statement  here  given,  we  see  that 
the  Creator  has  provided  the  m^oibeis  of  this 
Order  with  a  very  diversified  bill  of  fare,  and 
that  their  efforts  in  their  several  states,  and 
various  departments,  are  of  the  first  importance, 
as  scavengers  and  depurators,  to  remove  or  miti- 
gate nuisances,  that  would  otherwise  deform  and 
tend  to  depopulate  our  globe.  What  they  want 
in  volume,  is  com{>ensated  for  by  numbers,  for 
perhaps  the  individuals  of  no  Order  are  so  nume- 
rous. It  is  true,  in  particular  periods,  the  locusts 
and  aphides  seem  to  outnumber  them ;  yet,  ordi- 
narily, the  two-winged  race,  are  those  which 
everywhere  most  force  themselves  upon  our 
attention  ;  during  nearly  three-fourths  of  the 
year  we  hear  their  hum,  and  see  their  motions, 
in  our  apartments,  and  even  in  the  depth  of 
winter,  in  sunny  weather,  by  their  myriads, 
dancing  up  and  down  under  every  hedge,  they 
catch  ounBttention  in  our  walks. 

Order  10. — If  we  next  turn  our  attention  to 
the  tnandilfulate  Order,  which  stands  most  in 
contrast  with  the  Diptera^  the  Hymemoptera 
immediately  occurs  to  us,  in  which  we  find  a 
variety  of  forms,  which  seem  made  to  imitate 


INSECT  CONDYLOPEB.  329 

thoife  of  flies,  or  vice  versa.  Thus  there  are 
flies^  that  resemble  saw-flies ;  others  that  simu- 
late the  ichneumouidan  parasites ;  others  again 
that  resemble  wasps,  bees,  and  humble-bees. 

Though  the  Insects  belonging  to  this  Order 
are  included  in  the  mandibulate  Section;  for 
their  mouth  is  furnished  with  mandibles  and 
maxillae ;  yet  they  do  not  geaerally  use  them  to 
masticate  their  food^  but  for  purposes  usually 
connected  with  their  sequence  of  instincts,  as 
the  bees  in  building  their  cells;'  the  wasps  in 
scraping  particles  of  wood  from  posts  and  rails  for 
a  similar  purpose,  and  likewise  to  seize  their 
prey ;  but  the  great  instrument  by  which,  in 
their  perfect  state,  they  collect  their  food  is 
their  tongue^  this,  the  bees  particularly  have 
the  power  of  inflating,  and  can  wipe  with  it  both 
concave  and  convex  surfaces ;  and  with  it  they, 
as  it  were,  Itck^  but  not  suck^  the  honey  from  the 
blossoms,  for,  as  Reaumur  has  proved,  this  organ 
acts  as  a  tongue  and  not  as  a  pumpJ^  In  the 
numerous  tribes  that  compose  this  most  interest- 
ing of  the  Orders,  the  tongue  is  lambent,  and 
varies  considerably  in  its  structure,  but  in  the 
great  majority  it  is  a  flattish  organ,  often  divided 
into  several  lobes. 

Some  entomological  writers  have  bestowed 
upon  the  members  of  the  present  Order  the  title 

1  AMjriHeSf  Meig.      *  See  above,  p.  188.      '  Mem.  See.  v.  322. 


330  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

of  Principe$j  as  if  they  were  the  princes  of  the 
Class  of  Insects,  and  if  we  consider  the  con- 
spicuous manifestation  of  the  Divine  attributes 
of  Power,  Wisdom,  and  Goodness,  exhibited  in 
the  wonderful  instincts  of  those  of  them  that  are 
gregarious^  we  shall  readily  concede  to  them  this 
title.  If  superior  wisdom  and  devotedness  to 
the  general  good  are  the  best  titles  to  rank  and 
station ;  the  laborious  and  indefatigable  ant^  and 
the  hee^  celebrated  from  the  earliest  ages  for  its 
wonderful  economy,  its  admirable  structures, 
and  its  useful  products,  are  surely  entitled  to  it, 
though  they  cannot  vie  with  the  insects  of  many 
of  the  other  Orders  in  size,  and  in  the  brilliancy 
and  variety  of  their  colours,  and  the  pencil  of 
the  Creator  has  not  decorated  their  wings  with 
the  diversified  paintings  which  adorn  those  of 
the  butterfly. 

The  functions  which  are  given  in  charge  to 
the  several  members  of  this  Order  are  various. 
Some,  like  the  predaceous  and  carnivorous  tribes 
of  the  JDiptera^  appear  engaged  in  perpetual 
warfare  with  other  insects  ;  thus  the  wasps  and 
harnets  seize  flies  of  every  kind  that  come  in 
their  way,  and  will  even  attack  the  meat  in  die 
shambles;  the  caterpillar-wasp^  walks  off  with 
caterpillars^  the  spider-wasp*  with  spiders^  and  the 
fly-wasp^  mih flies.    But  the  motive  that  influ- 

*  Ammophila,  '  Pompilus,  '  Bembe:^* 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  331' 

eaces  them,  will  furnish  an  excuse  for  their 
predatory  habits.  They  do  not  commit  these 
acts  of  violence  to  gratify  their  own  thirst  for 
blood,  like  many  of  the  flies,  but  to  furnish  their 
young  with  food  suited  to  their  natures.  The 
wasp  carries  the  pieces  of  flesh  she  steals  from 
the  butcher  to  the  young  grubs  in  the  cells  of  her 
paper  mansion.  The  other  wasps  I  mentioned 
each  commit  their  eggs  to  the  animal  they  are 
taught  to  select,  and  then  bury  it ;  so  that  the 
young  grub  when  hatched  may  revel  in  plenty.^ 

Some  of  the  Hymenoptera  prefer  a  vegetable 
diet,  and  assist  the  Lepidoptera  in  their  office. 
The  caterpillars  which  infest  many  species  of 
willow  are  hatched  from  the  eggs  of  the  saw- 
flies;^  one  genus'  nearly  related  to  them  con- 
fines itself  to  timber,  to  which  it  is  sometimes 
very  destructive. 

Another  tribe  afiect  plants  in  a  very  remark- 
able manner.  Their  egg-placer,  like  a  magi- 
cian's wand,  is  gifted  with  the  privilege,  by  a 
slight  puncture  in  the  twig  or  leaf  of  any  shrub 
or  tree,  or  the  stalk  of  any  plant,  to  cause  the 
production  of  a  wonderful  and  monstrous  ex- 
crescence, sometimes  resembling  moss,  as  in  the 
Bedeguar  of  the  rose,  at  other  times,  a  kind 
of  apple,  or  a  transparent  berry,  both  of  which 

'  See  Introd.  to  EnU  i.  346. 

'  Cimbexj  Tenthredoy  Lyda,  Sfc,     See  Introd,  to  Ent,  i.255. 

•  Sirex* 


332  FUNCTIONS  AND  lNi(TINCTS. 

seeming  fruits,  the  oak,  when  touched  by  two  of 
these  little  gall-flies  of  different  species,  produces 
as  well  as  acorns :  various  other  forms^  their  galls 
assume,  which  need  not  be  here  mentioned. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  eggs  of  these  gall- 
flies grow  after  they  are  laid,  and  perhaps 
these  singular  productions  are  more  favourable 
to  their  growth,  being  softer  and  more  spongy 
and  succulent  than  the  twigs  themselves  would 
be.  Even  here  Creative  Power,  Wisdom,  and 
Goodness  are  conspicuously  manifested,  in  pro- 
viding such  wonderful  nests  for  these  little 
germe-like  eggs ;  these  excrescences,  indeed, 
instead  of  deforming  the  plants  they  are  pro- 
duced from,  are  often  ornamental  to  them ;  and 
besides  this  are  also,  some  of  them,  of  the 
highest  utility  to  mankind — ^witness  the  Aleppo 
oak-gall,^  to  which  learning,  commerce,  the  arts, 
and  every  individual  who  has  a  distant  friend, 
are  so  deeply  indebted. 

Another  tribe  is  equally  useful  in  a  different 
department;  I  allude  to  those  Hymenoptera 
that  are  parasitic  upon  other  Insects,  parti-  ' 
cularly  upon  the  destructive  hordes  of  cater- 
pillars that  are  often  so  injurious  both  to  the 
horticulturist  and  agriculturist.  These  insects 
are  denominated  by  Latreille  Pupivaraus^  not, 
as  some   may  suppose,   because   they  devour 

'  Introd,  to  Ent,  i.  446.  *  Cynips  Scriptorum. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  333 

insects  in  their  second,  or  pupe  state,  but  from 
the  classical  meaning  of  the  word,  because  they 
devonr  them  before  they  are  arrived  at  their 
perfect  or  adult  state.  This  tribe  may  be  con- 
sidered as  divided  into  two  great  bodies,  one 
represented  by  the  proper  Ichneumons  of  Linn^, 
which  have,  usually,  veined  wings,  and  the  ab- 
domen connected  with  the  trunk  by  a  footstalk  ; 
the  other  forming  the  Minute  Ichneumons  of  that 
great  reviver  of  Natural  History,  distinguished, 
usually,  by  having  wings  with  few  or  no  veins 
on  their  disk,  and  by  a  sessile  abdomen.  These 
attack  eggs  and  chrysalises,  as  well  as  cater- 
pillars. Though  the  latter  are  the  principal, 
yet  they  are  not  the  only  object  of  the  great 
Ichneumonidan  host,  for  they  attack  insects  of 
every  order  indiscriminately;  they  seem,  how- 
ever, to  annoy  beetles,  grasshoppers,  bugs,  and 
froghoppers,  less  than  others.  They  may,  with 
great  propriety,  be  called  conservatives^  since 
they  keep  those  under  that  would  otherwise 
destroy  us.*  A  little  fly,  before  alluded  to  in 
these  pages,*  which  appears  very  destructive  to 
wheat  when  in  the  ear,  is  rendered  harmless,  by 
the  goodness  of  Providence,  by  not  less  than 
three  of  these  little  benefactors  of  our  race.^ 

Connected  with  the  subject  of  parasites  is  a 
singular  history  communicated  to  me  by  the 

«  Introd.  to  Ent.  I  267.  «  See  above,  p.  327. 

•  Linn.  Trans,  v,  107. 


334  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Rev.  F.  W.  Hope,  one  of  the  most  eminent 
entomologists  of  the  present  day.  In  the  month 
t>f  August,  1824,  in  the  nest  of  a  species  of 
waspy^  he  found  more  than  fifty  specimens  of 
a  singular  \iti\e  beetUj  which  may  be  called  the 
wasp-beetle^  long  known  to  frequent  wasps'  nests. 
From  their  being  found  in  cells  which  were 
closed  by  a  kind  of  operculum,  he  conjectures 
that  they  lay  their  eggs  in  the  grub  of  the  wasp, 
upon  which  they  doubtless  feed.  Subsequent  to 
this,  upon  opening  some  of  the  cells,  he  was 
surprised  to  find,  instead  of  the  beetles,  several 
specimens  of  an  Ichneumon  belonging  to  Jurine  s 
genus,  Anamalan.^  Upon  another  examination, 
some  days  after  this,  no  more  of  these  last  in- 
sects appearing,  he  discovered  that  they  had 
been  pierced,  in  their  chrysalis  state,  by  a 
minute  species  belonging  to  the  family  of  Choi- 
cididansj  of  which  he  found  no  less  than  twenty 
specimens  flying  about  in  search  of  their  prey. 

"  From  the  above  facts,"  Mr.  Hope  remarks, 
"  we  have  a  convincing  proof,  if .  such  were 
wanted,  of  a  Superintending  Power  which  or- 
dains checks  and  counterchecks  to  remedy  the 
superfecundity  of  the  insect  world."  First  the 
wasp,  a  great  destroyer  of  flies  and  various  other 
insects,  and  often  a  troublesome  pest  and  an- 

1   Vespa  rufa.  ^  Ripiphorus  paradoxus, 

3  Latreille  is  of  opinion  that  this  is  not  a  natural  genus.    N. 
D.  D'H.  N.  ii.  128. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES,  335 

noyance  to  man  himself,  is  prevented  from 
becoming  too  numerous,  amongst  other  means, 
by  the  wasp-beetle ;  then,  lest  it  should  reduce 
their  numbers  so  as  to  interfere  with  their  ef- 
ficiency, this  last  is  kept  in  check  by  the  Ano- 
nuJany  which,  in  its  turn,  that  it  may  obey  the 
law.  Thus  far  shalt  thou  cmne^  and  no  further ^ 
becomes  the  prey  of  another  devourer.  Mr. 
Hope  observed,  and  the  fact  is  curious,  that  the 
specimens  of  the  wasp-beetle  obtained  from  the 
female  wasps  were  about  one-third  larger  than 
the  others. 

But  of  all  the  Hymenopterous,  or  indeed  any 
other  Insects,  there  are  none,  as  I  before  ob- 
served, that  illustrate  the  primary  attributes  of 
the  Deity  more  strikingly  than  those  that  are 
gregarious^  which  build  for  the  members  of  their 
societies  spacious  colleges,  if  I  may  so  call  them, 
capable  often  of  containing  many  thousand  in- 
habitants, and  remarkable  for  the  pains  they 
bestow  upon  the  nurture  and  education  of  their 
young.  There  are  three  great  tribes  in  the 
present  Order,  distinguished  by  this  instinct, — 
the  wasps  and  hornets^  the  bees  and  humble-beesy 
and  the  ants. . 

The  wasps  and  hornets  are  remarkable  for  the 
curious  papier-mach6  edifices,  in  the  construc- 
tion of  which  they  employ  filaments  of  wood, — 
scraped  from  posts  and  rails  with  their  own 
jaws, — mixed  with  saliva,  of  which  the   hexa- 


336  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

gonal  cells,  in  which  they  rear  their  young,  are 
formed,  and  often  their  combs  are  separated  and 
supported  by  pillars  of  the  same  material ;  and 
the  external  walls  of  their  nests  are  formed 
by  foliaceous  layers  of  their  ligneous  paper.^ 
Latreille  mentions  a  Brazilian  species  that 
makes  an  abundant  provision  of  honey. 

In  the  book  of  Joshua  we  are  informed*  that 
God,  by  means  of  some  animal  of  this  genus, 
drove  out  the  two  kings  of  the  Amorites  from 
before  the  Children  of  Israel.  In  the  second 
volume  of  Lieut.  Holman's  Travels — in  whom 
the  loss  of  sight  has  been  compensated  by  a 
wonderful  acuteness  of  mental  vision — ^the  fol- 
lowing anecdote  is  related  illustrative  of  this 
fact.' 

"  Eight  miles  from  Grandie ,  the  mu- 
leteers suddenly  called  out '  Marambundas,  Ma* 
rambundas !'  which  indicated  the  approach  of 
a  host  of  wasps.  In  a  moment  all  the  animals, 
whether  loaded  or  otherwise,  laid  down  on  their 
backs,  kicking  most  violently ;  while  the  blacks, 
and  all  persons  not  already  attacked,  ran  away 
in  different  directions,  all  being  careful,  by  a 
wide  sweep,  to  avoid  the  swarms  of  tormentois 
that  come  forward  like  a  cloud.  I  never  wit- 
nessed a  panic  so  sudden  and  complete,  and 
really  believe  that  the  bursting  of  a  water-spout 

1  See  Introd  to  Ent.  i.  501.  <  xxiv.  12. 

3  Quoted  in  Lit.  Oazette,  Jan.  3,  1835,  p.  4. 


INSECT  CONDYLOP£S.  337 

Could  hardly  have  produced  more  commotion. 
However  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  alarm 
was  not  without  a  good  reason,  for  so  severe  is 
the  torture  inflicted  by  these  pigmy  assailants, 
that  the  bravest  travellers  are  not  ashamed  to 
fly  the  instant  they  perceive  the  terrific  host  ap- 
proaching, which  is  of  no  uncommon  occurrence 
on  the  Campos.*' 

I  shall  now  turn  to  those  admirable  creatures, 
which  though,  as  a  wise  man  observes,  tJiey  are 
little  among  such  as  fiy^  their  fruit  is  the  chief  of 
sweet  thingSy^  those  Heaven-instructed  mathema- 
ticians, who  before  any  geometer  could  calculate 
under  what  form  a  cell  would  occupy  the  least 
space  without  diminishing  its  capacity,  and  be- 
fore any  chemist  existed  to  discover  how  wax 
might  be  elaborated  from  vegetable  sweets,  in- 
structed by  the  Fountain  of  Wisdom,  had  built 
their  hexagonal  cells  of  that  pure  material,  had 
closed  them  at  the  bottom  with  three  rhomboidal 
pieces,  and  were  enabled,  without  study,  so  to 
construct  the  opposite  story  of  combs,  that  each 
of  these  rhomboids  should  form  one  of  those  of 
three  opposed  cells,'  thus  giving  strength  to  the 
structure  that,  in  no  other  place,  could  have  been 
given  to  it.  Wise  in  their  government,  diligent 
and  active  in  their  employments,  devoted  to 
their  young  and  to  their  queen,  they  read  a  lec- 

1  Ecclus,  xi.  3.  •  Plate  XL  Fio.  3. 

VOL.  II.  Z 


3;38  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

ture  to  mankind  that  exemplifies  their  Oriental 
name — she  that  speaketh}  Whoever  examined 
their  external  Btrncture,  as  has  been  before  ob- 
served,' will  find  every  part  adapted  to  their 
Various  employments. 

These  valued  animals,  so  worthy  of  the  atten- 
tion of  the  sage,  as  well  as  the  culture  of  the 
economist,  are  almost  the  only  ones  of  the 
Order  that  are  guilty  of  no  spoliation,  and 
injure  no  one:  they  take  what  impoverishes 
none,  while  it  enriches  them  and  us  also,  by 
the  valuable  products  which  are  derived  from 
their  skill  and  labour — true  emblems  of  honest 
industry. 

I  shall  merely  mention  the  humble-bee,*  and 
their  subterranean  habitations,  which  are  of  a 
much  ruder  architecture  than  those  of  the  hive- 
bee  :  the  cells,  however,  are  made  of  a  coarse 
kind  of  wax,  but  placed  very  confusedly,  nor  ex- 
hibiting the  geometrical  precision  observable  in 
the  latter.* 

I  may  here  observe  that  all  insects  of  this 
Order,  in  their  perfect  state,  imbibe  the  nectar 
from  the  flowers,  but  none,  the  hive  and  humble 
bees  and  one  species  of  wasp  excepted,  with  the 
view  of  storing  it  up  for  future  use. 

*  Heb.  mm 

«  See  above,  p.  187,  and  Tntrod.  to  Ent.  i.  481— 497,  and  ii. 
Lett.  xix.  XX. 

'  Ibidy  Lett,  xviii.  ♦  See  Linn,  Trans,  vi.  t.  xxvii. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  339 

last  Hymenopterous  tribe  ^  include  the 
ants^  and  is  almost  equally  interesting  with  the 
preceding  one,  for  the  wonderful  industry  of  the 
animals  just  mentioned.  They  are  universal 
collectors ;  every  thing  that  comes  in  their  way, 
whether  animal  or  vegetable,  living  or  dead, 
answers  their  purpose*;  and  the  paths  to  their 
nests  are  always  darkened  with  the  busy  crowds 
that  are  moving  to  and  fro.  Their  great  func* 
tion  seaois  to  be  to  remove  every  thing  that 
appears  to  be  out  of  its  place,  and  cannot  go 
about  its  own  business.  I  have  seen  several  of 
them  dragging  a  half-dead  snake,  about  the  size 
of  a  goose-quill.  They  do  not,  however,  like 
the  bees,  usually  store  up  provisions,  but  they 
will  imbibe  sweet  juices  from  fruits  and  also 
from  the  plant-lice,  which  may  be  called  their 
cows.*  However,  almost  all  their  cares  and 
labour  are  connected  with  the  nurture  and  sus* 
tenance  of  their  young. 

I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Lieutenant* 
Colonel  Sykes,  of  the  Bombay  army — ^well 
known  for  the  zeal  and  ability  with  which  he 
investigated  the  animal  productions  of  the  wes- 
tern provinces  of  India— for  some  interesting 
observations  upon  three  species  of  ants,  particu- 
larly one,  which,  from  making  its  nests  on  the 

1  Heterogyna,  Latr.  See  Introd,  to  Ent.  i.  476—461.  ii. 
Lett.  xvii. 

»  Ibid,  ii.  87—91. 


340  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

branches  of  trees,  is  called  the  Tree-aM^  singu* 
larly  exemplifying  the  extraordinary  instincts  of 
these  laborious  and  provident  insects,  and  which 
1  have  his  permission  to  insert  in  this  work. 

The  Tree-anV  inhabits  the  Western  Ghauts, 
in  the  coUectorate  of  Poona,  in  the  Deccan,  at 
an  elevation  of  from  2,000  to  4,000  feet  from 
the  level  of  the  sea.  It  is  of  a  ferruginous 
colour,  two-tenths  of  an  inch  in  length ;  head  of 
the  neuter  disproportionably  large  ;^  the  thorax 
is  armed  posteriorly  with  two  sharp  spines. 
When  moving  the  insect  turns  the  abdomen 
back  over  the  thorax,'  and  the  knotty  pedicle  lies 
in  a  groove  between  the  spines.  The  male  is 
without  the  spines.^ 

These  ants  are  remarkable  for  forming  their 
nests,^  called  by  the  Marattas  moongeeara^  on  the 
boughs  of  trees  of  different  kinds;  and  their 
construction  is  singular,  both  for  the  mat^al 
and  the  architecture,  and  is  indicative  of  admir- 
able foresight  and  contrivance :  in  shape  they 
vary  from  globular  to  oblong,  the  longest  dia- 
meter being  about  ten  inches,  and  the  shortest 
eight.  The  nests  consist  of  a  multitude  of  thia 
leaves  of  cow-dung j  imbricated  like  tiles  upon  a 
house,  the  upper  leaf  formed  of  one  unbroken 
sheet,  covering  the  summit  like  a  skull-cap.  The 

'  Myrmica  Kirbiu  Sykes.         *  Plate  XI.  c.  Fio.  1,  3. 
•  Plate  XI.  Fio.  3.  ♦  Ibid.  Fig.  2. 

«  Ibid.  Fig.  4. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  341 

leaves  are  placed  one  upon  another,  in  a  wavy 
or  scalloped  manner,  so  that  numerous  little 
arched  entrances  are  left,  and  yet  the  interior  is 
perfectly  secured  from  rain.  They  are  usually 
attached  near  the  extremity  of  a  branch,  and 
some  of  the  twigs  pass  through  the  nest.  A  ver- 
tical section  presents  a  number  of  irregular 
cells,  formed  by  the  same  process  as  the  exte- 
rior. Towards  the  interior  the  cells  are  more 
capacious  than  those  removed  from  the  centre, 
and  an  occasional  dried  leaf  is  taken  advantage 
of  to  assist  in  their  formation.  The  nurseries 
for  the  young  broods  in  different  stages  of  deve- 
lopement  are  in  different  parts  of  the  nest.  The 
cells  nearest  the  centre  are  filled  with  very 
minute  eggs,  the  youngest  members  of  the  com- 
munity ;  those  more  distant,  with  larger  eggs,^ 
mixed  with  larves;  and  the  most  remote,  with 
pupes  near  disclosure.  In  fact,  in  these  last 
cdils  only  were  found  winged  insects.  The 
female  is  in  a  large  or  royal  cell,  near  the  centre 
of  the  nest :  she  is  about  half  an  inch  long,  of 
the  thickness  of  a  crow-quill,  white,  and  the 
abdomen  has  five  or  six  brown  ligatures  round  it, 
like  the  female  of  the  white  ants ;  the  head  is 
very  small,  and  the  legs  mere  rudiments :  she  is 
kept  a  close  prisoner,  and  incapable  of  motion  in 
her  cell,  a  circumstance  in  which  these  appear 

'  It  should  seem  from  this  that  the  eggs  grow. 


342  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

to  approach  the  white  ants,  and  which  indicated 
that  they  should  form  a  distinct  genus. 

There  was  no  store  of  provisions  in  the  nests ; 
they  were  indebted  therefore  for  their  support  to 
daily  labour.  We  may  gain  some  idea  of  their 
perseverance  when  we  consider  that  the  mate* 
rial  of  which  the  nest  is  formed — cow-dung — 
must  have  been  sought  for  on  the  earth,  and 
probably  carried  from  a  considerable  distance 
up  the  trees. 

Colonel  Sykes  related  to  me  another  anec- 
dote with  regard  to  an  Indian  species  of  ant, 
which  he  calls  the  large  black  ant^  instancing, 
in  a  wonderful  manner,  their  perseverance   in 
attaining    a   favourite    object,    which  was   vrit- 
nessed  by  himself,  his  lady,  and  his  whole  house* 
hold.     When   resident    at  Poona,   the    dessert, 
consisting  of  fruits,  cakes,  and  various  preserves, 
always  remained  upon  a  small  side-table,  in  a 
verandah  of  the  dining-room.    To  guard  against 
inroads  the  legs   of  the  table  were  immersed 
in   four  basins  filled    with  water;   it   was  re- 
moved an  inch  from  the  wall,  and,  to  keep  off 
dust  through  open  windows,  was  covered  with  a 
table-cloth.    At  first  the  ants  did  not  attempt  to 
cross  the  water,  but  as  the  strait  was  very  nar- 
row, from  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half,  and  the 
sweets  very  tempting,  they  appear  at  length  to 
have  braved  all  risks,  to  have  committed  tbem- 


INSECT  CONDYLOP^,  343 

selves  to  the  deep,  to  have  scrambled  across  the 
channel,  and  to  have  reached  the  object  of  their 
desires,  for  hundreds  we  found  every  morning 
revelling  in  enjoyment:  daily  vengeance  was 
executed  upon  them  without  lessening  their 
numbers;  at  last  the  legs  of  the  table  were 
painted,  just  above  the  water,  with  a  circle  of 
turpentine.  This  at  first  seemed  to  prove  an 
effectual  barrier,  and  for  some  days  the  sweets 
were  unmol^ted,  after  which  they  were  again 
attacked  by  these  resolute  plunderers ;  but  how 
^^y  got  at  them  seemed  totally  unaccountable, 
till  Col.  Sykes,  who  often  passed  the  table,  was 
surprised  to  see  an  ant  drop  from  the  wall, 
about  a  foot  above  the  table,  upon  the  cloth  that 
covered  it ;  another  and  another  succeeded.  So 
that  though  the  turpentine  and  the  distance 
from  the  wall  appeared  effectual  barriers,  still 
the  resources  of  the  animal,  when  determined 
to  carry  its  point,  were  not  exhausted,  and  by 
ascending  the  wall  to  a  certain  height,  with  a 
slight  effort  against  it,  in  falling  it  managed  to 
land  in  safety  upon  the  table.  Col.  Sykes 
aaks, — is  this  instinct?  I  should  answer,  no: 
the  animal's  appetite  is  greatly  excited,  its  scent 
probably  informs  it  where  it  must  seek  the  object 
of  its  desire ;  it  first  attempts  the  nearest  road ; 
when  this  is  barricaded  it  naturally  ascends  the 
walls  near  which  the  table  was  placed,  and  so 


344  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

succeeds  by  casting  itself  down, — all  the  while 
under  the  guidance  of  its  senses.^ 

It  is  observed,  in  the  Introduction  to  Ento- 
mology, that  though  ants,  '^  during  the  cold 
winters,  in  this  country,  remain  in  a  slate  of 
torpidity,  and  have  no  need  of  food,  yet  in 
warmer  regions,  during  the  rainy  seasons,  when 
they  are  probably  confined  to  their  nests,  a  store 
of  provisions  may  be  necessary  for  them.*  Now, 
though  the  rainy  season,  at  least  in  America,  as 
has  been  stated  on  a  former  occasion,^  is  a 
season  in  which  insects  are  full  of  life,  yet  the 
observation,  that  ants  may  store  up  provisions  in 
warm  countries,  is  confirmed  by  an  account  sent 
me  by  Col.  Sykes,  with  respect  to  another 
species  which  appears  to  belong  to  the  same 
genus  as  the  celebrated  ant  of  visitations'^  by 
which  the  houses  of  the  inhabitants  of  Surinam 
were  said  to  be  cleared  periodically  of  their 
cock-roaches,  mice,  and  even  rats.^  The  present 
species  has  been  named  by  Mr.  Hope,  the  pr<wt* 
dent  ant.^  These  ants,  after  long  continued 
rains  during  the  monsoon,  were  found  to  bring 
up  and  lay  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  on  a  fine 
day,  its  stores  of  grass  seeds,  and  grains  of 
Guinea  corn,  for  the  purpose  of  drying  them* 
Many  scores  of  these  hoards  were  frequently  oh* 

»  See  above,  p.  239,  278,  and  Introd,  to  Ent.  il  62. 
,  «  Ibid.  46.  »  See  above,  p.  250.  <  Atta  cephaloUs. 

*  De  Geer.  iii.  607.  ^  A.  providens. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  345 

senrable  on  the  extensive  Parade  at  Poona. 
This  account  clearly  proves  that,  where  the 
climate  and  their  circumstances  require  it,  these 
industrious  creatures  do  store  up  provisions. 

From  these  very  interesting  communications 
we  may  remark  how  the  functions  of  animals  are 
varied,  the  same  function  being  often  given  in 
charge  to  tribes  perfectly  different  in  different 
climates.  In  temperate  regions,  the  principal 
agents  in  disinfecting  the  air  by  devouring  or 
removing  excrement,  belong  to  the  Order  of 
beetlesy  but  in  India,  where  probably  more  hands 
are  wanted  to  effect  this  purpose  of  Providence, 
the  tree-ants  are  called  in  to  aid  the  beetles,  by 
building  their  nests  of  this  fetid  mortar,  and 
thus  clear  the  surface  of  innumerable  nuisances, 
which  probably  soon  dry  and  become  scentless. 
In  Europe,  again,  no  ants  are  found  to  verify 
Solomon's  observation,  literally  interpreted,  but 
in  India  we  see,  and  probably  it  may  also  be  the 
case  in  Palestine,  provision  for  the  future  is  not 
stored  up  solely  by  the  bees,  but  the  ants,  where 
it  is  necessary,  are  gifted  with  the  same  ad- 
mirable instinct. 

A  circumstance  here  requires  notice,  which  is 
almost  peculiar  to  the  gregarious  Hymenoptera 
dwelling  in  a  common  habitation ;  in  all  their 
communities,  besides  one  or  more  prolific  fe- 
males and  males,  there  is  an  order  of  sterile 
females,  which    have    no  connexion   with  the 


346  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

other  Bex,  and  are  solely  employed  in  laboon 
and  pursuits  beneficial  to  the  commuaity  at 
large  to  which  they  belong,  especially  the  care 
and  nurture  of  the  young. 

The  wisdom  and  beneficial  effects  of  this  law, 
by  which  the  Creator  has  regulated  their  com* 
munities,  and  prescribed  to  all  their  duties  and 
functions,  must  be  evident  tp  every  one.  It  sets 
free  the  majority  of  the  community  to  give  their 
whole  attention  to  those  labours  upon  which  the 
welfare  and  existence  of  their  several  associa- 
tions depend.  Indeed,  if  they  were  all  to  be 
prolific,  their  societies  would  soon  be  dissolTed, 
or  destroyed  by  the  evils  attendant  upon  an 
overabundant  population  ;  or  their  increase 
would  be  so  rapid,  that  the  whole  earth  woald 
soon  be  covered  by  them,  to  the  great  annoyance, 
if  not  destruction,  of  the  rest  of  its  inhabitants. 

Now  I  am  upon  this  subject,  I  may  add  a  few 
remarks  upon  the  kindred  societies  of  white-mti, 
which,  though  they  belong  to  a  different  Order, 
are,  in  many  respects,  analogous  to  those  of  the 
true  ants;  and  the  differences  observaUe  be- 
tween them  arise  from  a  marked  diversity  in  the 
nature  of  their  metamorphosis ;  namdy,  that  in 
the  last  named  insects,  both  larves  and  pupes 
are  incapable  of  locomotion,  and  all  the  labours 
of  the  society,  as  well  as  its  defence  and  the  care 
and  nurture  of  the  young,  are  devolved  upon  a 
description  of  its  members  that .  are  not  gifted 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  347 

with  the  faculty  of  reproduction  :  whereas,  ia  the 
former,  the  white  ants,  the  larves  and  pupes,  in 
conformity  to  the  law  which,  in  this  respect, 
regulates  the  Class  to  which  they  belong,  are 
locomotive  and  more  active  in  those  states  than 
in  the  last  or  reproductive  onei,  and  are  therefore 
fully  qualified  to  act  in  all  the  working  depart-^ 
meats,  and  to  transact  the  general  business  of 
the  society ;  but  as  this,  in  their  case,  required  a 
conformation  of  the  head  and  oral  organs  incon* 
sistent  with  their  use  as  offensive  weapons^ 
another  order  was  necessary  to  act  as  sentinels, 
and  to  be  entrusted  with  the  defence  of  the  nest 
or  termitary,  as  it  is  called,  and  its  inhabitants. 
That  such  an  order  exists,  we  learn  from  the 
statements  of  Smeathman  and  Latreille,  who, 
both  of  them,  had  means  of  personal  investiga* 
tion,  and  the  latter  of  whom  brought  to  the 
investigation  the  deepest  insight  into  his  subject, 
and  the  most  extensive  knowledge  of  insects  and 
their  history  possessed  by  any  man  in  Europe. 
Upon  the  accuracy  of  his  statements,  therefore, 
the  most  entire  reliance  may  be  placed.  The 
species^  he  investigated  was  discovered  by  him- 
self, in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bordeaux,  inhabit- 
ing the  trunks  of  firs  and  oaks,  immediately 
under  the  bark,  where,  without  attacking  the 
bark  itself,  they  formed  a  great  number  of  holes 
and  irregular  galleries.     In  these  societies  he 

^   Termes  lucifuga. 


348  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

discovered,  at  all  times,  two  kinds  of  individuals, 
which  were  without  wings,  elongated,  soft,  of  a 
yellowish  white,  with  their  head,  trunk,  and 
abdomen  distinct;  they  were  active,  furnished 
with  six  legs,  their  head  large,  and  the  eyes  very 
small,  or  altogether  wanting ;  but,  in  one  of  these 
kinds  of  individuals,  which  compose  the  bulk  of 
the  society,  the  head  is  rounded  and  the  man- 
dibles not  extended ;  while  in  the  others,  which 
form  not  more  than  one  twenty-fifth  of  the  popu- 
lation, the  head  is  much  larger,  elongated,  and 
cylindrical,  and  terminated  by  mandibles  that 
extend  from  it  and  cross  each  other ;  these  La- 
treille  always  found  stationed  at  the  entrance  of 
the  cavities  where  the  others  were  assembled  in 
greatest  numbers  :  towards  the  end  of  the  winter 
and  in  the  spring,  he  discovered  individuals  ex- 
actly resembling  those  first  mentioned,  but  hav- 
ing the  rudiments  of  four  wings,  and  in  June, 
the  same  individuals  had  acquired  four  ample 
wings,  had  become  of  a  blackish  colour,  and 
consisted  of  males  and  females ;  a  month  later 
a  few  only  were  found  in  the  termitary,  which 
had  lost  their  wings,  and  eggs  now  begun  to 
appear  laid  up  in  certain  labyrinths  of  the 
wood.* 

It  is  clear  from  this  account  that  those  with  a 
round   head  and    short    mandibles  are  larves, 

1  Latreille  in  N.  D.  D'H.  N.  xxxiii.  90. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  349 

which  go  through  the  usual  metamorphosis  of 
their  tribe,  not  changing  their  form,  but  ac- 
quiring wings,  first  packed  up  in  cases,  and 
afterwards  developed.  The  second  description, 
with  the  elongated  head  and  crossed  mandibles, 
neTer  acquired  wings,  and  therefore  correspond 
precisely  with  the  neuters  amongst  ants,  only 
as  Providence  always  economizes  means,  and 
wills  that  nothing  be  lost  or  wasted,  he  has 
decreed  that  these  locomotive  larves  and  pupes 
should  not  live  in  idleness. 

Order  7. — ^We  now  come  to  an  Order,  taking 
their  food  by  suction,  which  appear  to  have  been 
formed  to  deck  our  fields  and  groves  with  va- 
rious beauty;  but  which  in  their  first  state, 
when  they  masticate  their  food,  they  mar  and 
destroy,  often  stripping  the  trees  of  their  leaves^ 
and  covering  our  hedges  with  their  webs  full  of 
crawling  myriads  of  devastators.  It  will  be  seen 
that  I  am  speaking  of  the  Lepidopterous  Order, 
consisting  of  three  great  phalanxes,  the  diurnal 
fliers,  or  butterflies,^  the  crepuscular  fliers,  or 
hawkmoths,^  the  nocturnal  fliers,  or  moths,^  each 
divided  into  several  genera.  Their  caterpillars 
most  generally  feed  upon  the  foliage  of  vege- 
tables of  every  description  ;  but  those  of  some 
of  the  lower  tribes^  of  moths  devour  animal  sub- 
stance, such  as  wool,  fur,  leather,  grease,  and  the 

1  Papilio.  L.      «  Sphinx,  L.     »  Pkal<Bna,  L.     *  Tineid^B. 


350  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

like ;  some  even  enter  the  bee-hive  and  devour 
the  combs,  others  the  cabinet  of  the  entomolo- 
gist to  prey  upon  his  insects,  others  even  attack 
the  books  of  the  scholar.  Their  office  seems  to 
be  to  keep  in  check  too  luxuriant  vegetation, 
and,  in  many  of  the  latter  instances,  the  remov- 
ing of  dead  animal  matter,  and  every  thing 
putrescent  from  the  surface  of  the  globe. 

But  this  is  not  the  whole,  they  likewise  hdp 
to  maintain,  as  has  been  before  observed,^  half 
the  birds  of  the  air,  forming  a  principal  portion 
of  their  food  ;  and  in  some  countries,  as  well  as 
the  locusts  and  white  ants,*  they  are  eagerly 
devoured  by  man  himself.  There  is  a  certain 
mountain,  in  New  Holland,  as  we  are  informed 
by  Mr.  Bennett,^  called  Bugong  mountain,  frcHn 
multitudes  of  small  moths,  called  Bugong-  by  the 
natives,  which  congr^ate  at  certain  times,  upon 
masses  of  granite,  on  this  mountarin.  The  montiis 
of  November,  December,  and  January,  are  quite 
a  season  of  festivity  amongst  these  people,  wko 
assemble  from  every  quarter  to  collect  these 
moths.  They  are  stated  also  to  form  the  prin^* 
cipal  summer  food  of  those  who  inhabit  to  the 
south  of  the  snow  mountains.  To  collect  these 
moths,  or  rather  butterflies,^  the  natires  make 
smothered  fires  under  the  rocks  on  which  they 
congregate;  and  suffocating  them  with  smoke^ 

*  See  above,  p.  26.  *  Introd.  to  Ent,  I  303,  307. 

'  Wanderings,  &c.  i.  265.  *  Euplcea  hamata,  M*L. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  351 

collect  them  by  bushels,  and  then  bake  them  by 
placing  them  on  heated  ground.  Thus  they 
separate  from  them  the  down  and  the  wings, 
they  are  then  pounded  and  formed  into  cakes 
resembling  lumps  of  fat,  and  often  smoked, 
which  preserves  them  for  some  time.  When 
accustomed  to  this  diet  they  thrive  and  fatten 
exceedingly  upon  it.^  Millions  of  these  animals 
were  observed  also,  on  the  coast  of  New  Holland, 
both  by  Captains  Cook  and  King.'  Thus  has  a 
kind  Providence  provided  an  abundant  supply 
of  food  for  a  race  that,  subsisting  solely  by 
hunting  or  fishing,  must  often  be  reduced  to 
great  straits. 

Orders  3  and  1 1 . — The  masticating  tribe, which 
present  the  most  striking  analogy  to  the  scaly- 
winged  lepidopterous  insects,  is  one  of  very 
different  habits;  mostly  bold,  rapacious,  and 
sanguinary,  they  are  perpetually  chasing  other 
insects,  and  devouring  them,  and  this  they  do, 
not  in  one,  but  in  all  their  states.  I  am  speaking 
here  of  the  Neuropterous  Order,  especially  the 
dragon  flies,  those  insects  of  vigorous  wing  and 
indomitable  force.  Every  one  who  compares 
these  with  the  Heliconian  butterflies,  the  wings 
of  which  are  sometimes,  more  or  less,  denuded 
of   their   scales,'  will    perceive  that  they  are 

«  Bennett,  uH  supr.  271.  «  fbid,  209,  note  ♦. 

3  £.  G.  Heiiconius  Quirina,  Hippodamkiy  &c. 


352  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

analogues  of  each  other ;  and  one  of  this  Order, 
the  Ascalaphus^  resembles  a  butterfly  so  strik- 
ingly, both  by  its  wings  and  antennae,  that  it 
has  been  described  as  one  by  a  very  eminent 
entomologist/  The  Antlions,  and  lace-winged 
flies,  in  the  port  of  their  wings,  resemble  several 
moths ;  and  the  Trichoptera^  an  osculant  Order, 
but  still  reckoned  amongst  the  Neuroptera  by 
Latreille,  in  its  habit  of  clothing  itself  with  a 
case  made  of  various  articles,  imitate  the  clothes- 
moth,  and  others  of  that  tribe,  which  invest 
themselves  with  cases  made  of  wool,  fiir,  and 
similar  materials. 

The  dragon -flies  in  their  two  first  states,  by 
means  of  their  wonderful  mask,*  destroy  a  vast 
number  of  aquatic  insects,  and  in  their  last  an 
equal  number  in  the  air. 

The  white  ants^^  and  some  kindred  insects, 
like  the  ants  devour  every  thing  but  metal,  that 
is  exposed  to  their  attacks,  particularly  timber. 
A  deserted  African  village  is  soon  removed  by 
them,  working  under  their  covered  ways ;  and, 
in  tropical  regions,  a  forest  quickly  springs  up 
where  a  busy  population  ran  to  and  fro  a  few 
years  before.  So  that  they  are  amongst  the 
instruments  in  the  hand  of  Providence,  that  the 
places  deserted  by  man  shall  be  restored  again 
to  the  vegetable  and  animal  races  that  were  in 

*  Scopoliy  see  AT.  D.  D'H.  N.  li.  580. 

«  Introd,  to  Ent.  iii.  125.  »  Termes, 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  353 

possession  before  he  cleared  it  for  his  own  habi- 
tation. The  white  ants  seem  to  connect  this  Order 
with  the  Hymenoptera  by  means  of  the  common 
ants ;  which,  however,  as  Colonel  Sykes  informs 
me,  bear  the  most  rooted  enmity  to  them,  and 
destroy  them  without  mercy.  In  digging  up 
some  white  ants'  nests,  in  his  garden  at  Poona, 
he  once  found  two  queens  in  one  cell,  a  remark- 
able anomaly  in  their  history.  In  the  course  of 
the  present  year  I  received  a  letter  signed  P.  T. 
Baddeley,  inclosing  a  drawing  and  specimens, 
of  a  singular  species  of  white  ant,  with  a  head 
precisely  resembling  that  of  an  elephant,  except 
that  there  was  no  representation  of  the  tusks. 
The  head,  which  is  enormously  large  compared 
with  the  size  of  the  animal,  terminates  in  a  long 
proboscis.  Mr.  Baddeley  found  it  in  great 
numbers  about  two  years  ago,  under  some  teak 
timber;  the  only  circumstance  which  he  men- 
tions of  its  habits. 

Orders  8  and  9. — There  are  two  Orders  taking 
their  food  by  suction,  the  Homoptera  and  Hemip- 
tera,  which  perhaps  should  rather  be  regarded 
as  Sub-orders^  as  Latreille  considers  them,  and 
which  were  included  by  Linn6  in  the  same  Order 
with  the  Orthoptera  of  modern  entomologists,  to 
which,  in  fact,  they  are  contrasted  more  or  less. 
I  shall  therefore  consider  them  together. 

The  Homoptera  are  herbivorous,  sucking  the 

VOL.  II.  A  A 


354  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

sap  of  trees  and  plants/  and  the  principal  tribe 
of  them  was  celebrated  of  old,  both  by  Grecian 
and  Roman  bards,  under  the  names  of  Tetlix 
and  Cicada,  for  the  far-resounding  song  of  its 
males. 

This  Order  contains  some  of  the  most  singular 
monstrosities  that  the  insect  world  produces; 
animals  armed  with  strange  appendages  and 
horns,  which  in  the  majority,  are  processes  of 
the  trunk ;  but,  in  the  lanthom-flies,  of  the  head: 
the  latter  have  been  regarded,  as  their  name 
imports,  as  a  kind  of  lantbom,  given  to  the 
animal  to  afford  it  light ;  but  considerable  doubt 
has  been  thrown  upon  the  fact.  The  use  of  the 
arms  and  processes  of  the  trunk,  which  are 
found  chiefly  in  the  male,  as  well  as  in  many 
male  Lamellicorn  beetles,^  has  not  been  satisfac- 
torily ascertained  ;  but  probably,  like  the  horns 
of  quadrupeds,  and  the  spurs  of  male  gallina- 
ceous birds,  they  use  them  in  their  mutual 
battles. 

One  of  these  animals,  as  producing  the  mama 
of  the  Pharmacopeia,  may  be  regarded  as  of 
some  use  to  mankind.  And  perhaps,  in  general, 
the  tribe,  in  their  perfect  state,  in  which  they 
imbibe  the  juice  of  plants  and  trees,  if  not  too 
numerous,  are  probably  of  use  to  trees  that  are 
over  vigorous,  and  full  of  sap.     In  their  grub 

*  Phytamyza,  plant-suckers. 

*  DynastcSf  OfithophoffuSf  CoptiSy  &c. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES,  355 

state,  in  America,  they  are  very  injurious  to 
timber,  and  fruit  trees,  into  which  they  introduce 
their  eggs  by  a  remarkable  organ  or  ovipositor. 

The  proper  Hemiptera^  so  called  because  their 
wing-covers  at  the  base  are  of   a    substance 
resembling    horn   or    leather,    and    are    mem- 
branous  at   the  tip,  form  the  last    suctorious 
Order ;  they  are  carnivorous,  or  more  properly, 
animal'BvLcken  ;*  for  though  many  of  them  are 
found  on  particular  trees  and  plants,  it  is  not  the 
juices  of  these  that  they  usually  imbibe,  but 
those  of  the  insects  that  frequent  them ;  there  is 
one,  however,  too  well  known  in  this  country,  the 
bed-bug*  which  is  more  ambitious,   extending 
its  attacks,  like  the  flea,  to  the  higher  animals, 
being  often  found  upon  pigeons,  upon  rabbits, 
and   more    commonly   infesting   man    himself, 
during  his  hours  of  repose.    This  Sub-order  also 
presents  a  great  variety  of  forms,  and  the  bite  of 
some  is  very  venomous. 

The  Junctions  of  these  are  similar  to  those 
of  other  Insects,  that  derive  their  nutriment 
from  the  higher  animals  by  sucking  the  blood 
or  juices ;  but  the  bugs,  being  generally  Insect- 
duckers,  with  their  juices  also  suck  away  their 
lives,  and  so  are  employed  to  diminish  their 
numbers.     The  watet^-hugs^  attack  other  aquatic 

'  Zoamyza,  >  Cimix  lectularius, 

*  Hydrometra,  Notonecta,  Nepa,  &c. 


356  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

animals  as  well  as  Insects,  such  as  fishes,  Mol- 
luscans,  &c. 

Order  12. — The  Orders  that  are  placed  as 
parallels  to  the  Homoptera  and  Hemiptera^  are 
the  Orthoptera  and  Coleoptera.  The  former  in- 
cludes within  its  limits  Insects  of  various  habits, 
which  may  be  divided,  respect  being  had  to 
their  food  J  into  three  tribes  : — those  that  are  her- 

m 

bivorausy  those  that  are  carnivorous^  and  those 
that  are  omnivorous. 

The  first  of  these  tribes  includes  all  those 
Insects  known  by  the  common  name  of  grasS" 
hoppers  J  and  locusts;^  several  of  those  whose 
wing-covers  and  wings  resemble  leaves  or  flow- 
ers ;^  besides  other  kinds,  which  I  need  not 
mention.  The  ravages  of  those  first  mentioned, 
especially  the  locusts,  are  so  well  known,' that 
I  shall  not  enlarge  upon  them. 

The  second  tribe  consists  of  what,  from  the 
posture  they  assume,  have  been  called  praying' 
insectSy^  some  of  which  also  resemble  leaves. 
These  are  as  ferocious  and  cruel  as  any  of  the 
insect  tribes.* 

The  last  tribe  consists  principally  of  the  crickets^ 
and  cock-roaches^^  animals  that  make  their  ap- 
* 

^  Locusta.  3  Pteraphylla,  Stoll.  Saut.  t.  i.  3. 

»  See  Vol.  I.  p.  89.  ♦  Mantis.  Phyllium, 

A  Introd.  to  Ent.  i.  278.  ^  Qryllus.  Oryllotalpa,  Ssc. 

7  Blatta. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  357 

pearance  only  in  the  nighty  and  feed  both  on 
animal  and  vegetable  substances.  It  has  been 
suggested  to  me  by  an  eminent  and  learned 
Prelate,  that  the  Egyptian  plague  of  Jlies^  which 
is  usually  supposed  to  have  been  either  a  mix- 
ture of  different  species,  or  a  fly  then  called  the 
dog-fly^  but  which  is  not  now  known,  was  a 
cock-roach.  His  Lordship  did  not  assign  the  rea- 
son that  led  him  to  adopt  this  opinion,  but  the 
Hebrew  name*  of  the  animal,  which  is  the  same 
by  which  the  raven  also  is  distinguished,  fur- 
nishes no  slight  argument  in  favour  of  it.  The 
same  word  also  signifies  the  evening.  Now  the 
cock-roach  at  this  time  found  in  Egypt*  is  blacky 
with  the  anterior  margin  of  the  thorax  white,  and 
they  never  emerge  from  their  hiding  places  till 
the  eveningy  both  of  which  circumstances  would 
furnish  a  reason  to  the  name  given  it ;  and  it 
might  be  called  the  evening  Insect,  both  from  its 
colour  and  the  time  of  its  appearance. 

There  appears  to  be  a  striking  analogical 
resemblance  between  the  bulk  of  the  Orthoptera 
and  Homoptera  to  the  Reptiles^  particularly  the 
JBatrachian  ;  their  leaping  and  song  are  the 
principal  points  in  which  they  agree,  whence  the 
members  of  the  latter  Sub-order  have  usually 
been  called  /rog'-hoppers,  but  in  some  of  the 
grass-hopper  tribe  there  is  also  a  singular  coin- 
cidence in  their  form.* 

*  Gr.  Kvyofivia,         *  lyn  *  Stol!.  Saut,  t,  viii.  h,f.  29. 


358  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Order  4. — The  earwigs^  form  a  truly  osculant 
Order,  between  the  Orthoptera  and  Coleaptera, 
and  partaking  of  the  characters  of  both,  but 
their  habits  are  so  well  known  that  it  is  not 
necessary  to  dwell  upon  them. 

Order  13. — Of  all  the  insect  Orders  which 
God  has  created  and  employed  to  work  his  will 
upon  earth,  by  removing  whatever  deforms 
or  defiles  the  face  of  nature,  there  is  none  more 
remarkable,  both  for  its  numbers,  the  diversities 
of  form  and  aspect  that  it  exhibits,  and  of  ar- 
mour both  defensive  and  offensive,  and  also  of  its 
organs  of  various  kinds,  and  for  various  uses, 
than  that  of  which  I  am  now,  in  the  last  place, 
to  give  some  account,  the  beetles^  namely,  form- 
ing the  Order  Coleoptera, 

The  parallel  to  this  Order  amongst  the  sucto- 
rious  insects,  appears  to  be  the  Hemiptera  Sub- 
order, the  wing-covers  of  some  of  which,*  having 
scarcely  any  membrane  at  their  extremity,  re- 
present the  elytra  of  the  Order  in  questiw; 
indeed  the  substance  of  the  base  of  these  organs, 
in  the  generality,  also  corresponds  with  that  of 
the  beetles. 

Of  all  the  mandibulate  Orders  there  is  none 
that  appears  to  have  so  universal  an  action  upon 
every   substance,   both   vegetable  and   animal, 

'  Forficula,  *  Lygteus  apterus,  brevipenniSf  &c. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  359 

both  living  and  dead,  as  the  one  before  us,  but 
it  is  difficult  to  class  them  according  to  their 
food  without  breaking  up  natural  groups ;  thus 
in  the  great  tribe  of  Lamellicorn  beetles,  forming 
Linux's  genus  Scarabteus^  we  find  insects  that 
feed  upon  a  great  variety  of  vegetable  food,  both 
liquid  and  solid ;  green  and  putrescent ;  the 
feces  of  animals;  and  in  a  few  instances,  on 
their  flesh. 

A  very  considerable  number  of  this  Order  are 
predaceaus  in  their  habits,  and  devour  without 
pity,  any  small  animal  they  can  seize  and  over- 
power. Of  this  description  is  the  whole  tribe  of 
ground-beetles^  called  by  old  writers  clocks  and 
dors,  considered  by  Linn6  as  forming  one  genus,' 
but  now  divided  into  more  than  a  hundred. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  this  tribe  is  the 
spectre^beetle*  described  by  Hagenbach,  which 
is  found  both  in  Java  and  China.  In  its  general 
aspect,  though  evidently  belonging  to  the  Cara- 
bidans,  it  seems  to  represent  the  praying-insects, 
and  the  spectres ;'  and,  from  its  great  flatness, 
it  probably  insinuates  itself  into  close  places, 
either  for  concealment  or  to  he. in  wait  for  its 
prey. 

The  splendid  tribe  of  tiger-beetles,*  as  they 
indicate  by  their  fearful  jaws,  have  the  same 


'  Carabus.  *  Mormolyce,  Plate  XI.  Fio.  1. 

'  Phasma.  ^  Cicindela,  Manticora. 


3G0  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

habits,  adding  a  swift  flight  to  the  rapid  motions 
on  foot  which  distinguish  the  other.  The  grubs 
of  these  emulate  spiders  in  some  respects,  lyiQg 
in  wait  for  their  prey  in  burrows  in  which  they 
curiously  suspend  themselves.^  In  the  waters 
a  considerable  tribe  of  Beetles  pursue  yarious 
aquatic  insects,  and  by  means  of  their  oary  hind 
legs  swim  very  swiftly,  often  suspending  them- 
selves at  the  surface  by  their  anal  extremity,  near 
which  are  two  large  spiracles  for  respiration,  for 
they  do  not  respire  the  water  like  fishes  and  the 
grubs  of  Dragon -flies.  Their  larves  are  armed 
with  tremendous  sickle-shaped  jaws,  through 
which  they  pump  the  juices  from  fishes  as  wdl 
as  insects. 

Besides  those  that  are  indiscriminate  de- 
vourers,  others  confine  themselves  to  particular 
tribes  or  species.  Thus  one  of  the  most  splendid 
of  the,  so  called,  ground-beetles^  named  the  syco- 
phant,^ ascends  the  trees  and  shrubs  after  the 
caterpillars  which  are  its  destined  food,  and 
probably  other  species  of  the  genus  have  the 
same  commission.  The  rove-beetles^  bury  them- 
selves in  excrement  in  order  to  devour  the  grubs 
that  frequent  it.  I  have  before  mentioned^  the 
wasp-beetle ;  there  are  others  which,  in  the  same 
way,  attack  those  of  the  hive  and  other  bees.* 

•  Introd.  to  Ent.  iii.  152.  «  Calosama  Sycophania. 

«  Staphylinus.  L.  ♦  Sec  above,  p.  334. 

^  Clems  apiaritiSy  and  alveaiius. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  361 

Another  has  a  more  remarkable  instinct,  by 
which  it  is  impelled  to  seek  its  nutriment  in  the 
slimy  snail.^  There  is  an  insect  much  resem* 
ling  a  bird-louse  that  is  parasitic  on  wild  bees, 
which  has  been  thought  to  be  produced  from  the 
eggs  of  the  great  oil-beetle,'  but  some  doubt  still 
hangs  on  the  fact.' 

Another  tribe  of  beetles  have  a  different  com- 
mission from  their  Creator,  and  instead  of  living 
ones,  feed  upon  dead  animals,  of  every  description. 
To  this  tribe  belong  the  burying  beetles,  long  cele- 
brated for  the  manner  in  which  they  bury  pieces 
of  flesh  to  which  they  have  committed  an  egg  ;^ 
other  carrion  beetles^  may  be  found  in  conside- 
rable numbers  of  various  species  and  kinds, 
under  every  carcass  ;^  even  honesy  after  they  are 
denuded  of  the  flesh,  are  attended  by  certain 
insects  of  this  Order,  by  whose  efforts  they  are 
completely  stripped  of  every  remnant  of  muscle.^ 
Some  even  find  their  nutriment  in  the  inte- 
rior of  horns.' 

Lacordaire  observes  that  the  carcasses  dry  so 
rapidly  in  South  America,  that  few  necrophagous 
insects  are  found  there:  and  that  even  in  the 
Pampas,  and  at  Buenos  Ayres,  where  animals 

'  Cochleoctonus.  *  Meloe. 

'  See  Introd.  to  Ent,  Hi.  162.  note  6. 

«  Introd.  to  Ent.  i.  352.  ^  Silpha.  L. 

•  Dermestes.  Byrrhus,  &c. 

^  Nitidula,&c.  ®  Trox. 


362  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

decompose  as  in  Europe,  there  are  but  few  of 
these  insects :  but  their  place  is  supplied  by 
innumerable  birds  of  prey.  As  soon  as  an 
animal  is  killed,  they  fly  in  crowds  from  every 
part  of  the  horizon,  though  one  before  was  not  to 
be  seen.  The  most  destructive  beetles  in  these 
countries  are  those  that  attack  leather  or  skins. 
Two  species  of  the  same  genus  ^  commit  dreadful 
ravages  in  the  magazines  of  this  article:  and  in 
spite  of  the  constant  pains  that  are  bestowed  to 
get  rid  of  these  insects  and  their  grubs,  great 
losses  are  suffered. 

Another  unsightly  substance  is  removed  by 
numberless  beetles,  whose  office  is  that  of  sea* 
vengers  ;  the  celebrated  Scarabteus  of  the  Egyp* 
tians,^  the  symbol,  as  it  is  supposed,  of  the  sun, 
is  of  this  description ;  the  pill-beetle  also,^ 
equal  in  fame  to  the  burying  one,  for  trundling 
its  pills,  each  containing  an  egg,  with  the  aid  of 
his  co-species :  many  of  a  smaller  type  are  liker 
wise  devoted  to  the  same  office.^ 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  all  these  feed  only 
on  the  excrement  of  hei^bivorous  animals ;  none 
having  been  recorded,  I  believe,  that  feed  on 
that  of  cat-nivoraus  ones,  except  a  single  species^ 


1  Dermestes  cadaverinus  et  vulpinus. 

«  Scarab(BU$  sacer. 

^  Ateuchus  pilularius,     Introd.  to  Ent.  i.  351. 

♦  Spharidiuniy  &c. 

^  Hybosorus  geminatus. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES,  363 

that  inhabits  human  excrement  solely,  but  forms 
no  burrow  under  it. 

Others  of  the  order  make  a  transition  to  the 
vegetable  kingdom,  by  attacking  various  kinds 
of  fungi,  as  agarics,  Boleti,  puff-balls,  and  the 
like,  which  in  fact  seem  to  exhibit,  in  their 
substance,  some  analogy  to  flesh.  Fabricius 
has  given  the  name  of  Agaric-eater  ^  to  a  genus 
that  is  chiefly  found  in  the  Boletus;  another 
beetle,  however,  devours  agarics,  and  is  found,  I 
believe,  in  no  other  fungus;^  and  the  puff-ball 
affords  a  favourite  nutriment  to  others.^ 

Some  beetles,  or  tribes  of  beetles,  are  both 
predaceous,  carnivorous,  coprophagous,  and 
fungivorous.  The  Histers  will  devour  carrion, 
dung,  funguses,  and  putrescent  wood :  I  once 
found  the  autumnal  dung-beetle^  in  considerable 
numbers  in  a  dead  bird,  and  Lacordaire  men- 
tions others  that  are  carnivorous :  he  says  that 
the  habits  of  Trooc  approach  those  of  the  necro- 
phagous beetles,  it  being  always  found  under 
half-dried  carcasses,  of  which  they  gnaw  the  ten- 
dinous parts.  It  is  found  also  in  the  excrements 
of  man  and  herbivorous  animals.  Phanoeus 
Milon  he  observed  principally  under  putrescent 
fishes  on  the  shores  of  the  River  Plate.* 

>  Mycetophagus,  Boletaria,    Marsh. 

*  Oxyporus  maxillosus,  ^  Ly  coper dina, 

♦  Oeotrupes  autumtialis, 

^  Ann.  des.Sc.  Nat,  xx.  263.  265. 


364  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

• 

We  have  thus  had  a  regular  transition,  with 
regard  to  their  food,  leading  the  beetle  tribes 
through  the  animal  to  the  vegetable  world. 

V^etable  feeders  are  innumerable  amongst 
them,  the  gold,*  tortoise,*  and  flea  beetles'  all 
devour  plants  in  both  their  active  states,  and 
some  of  these  are  extremely  injurious  to  the 
farmer*  and  gardener.  Many  are  destructive  to 
seeds,  fruits,  and  roots,  numbers  of  the  weevil 
tribe,  and  all  the  Bruchi  are  of  this  descrip- 
tion.* 

But  of  all  the  beetle  tribes  the  timber-devourers 
are  the  most  numerous ;  one  of  the  most  splendid 
and  brilliant  of  the  whole  Order,  the  Bupres- 
tidam^  belongs  to  this  department,  and  the  still 
more  numerous  and  more  varied  Capricorn 
beetles,^  though  less  refulgent  with  metallic 
splendour,  add  a  vast  momentum  in  the  inter- 
minable forests  of  tropical  regions,  and  must  be 
of  the  greatest  use  in  gradually  reducing  trees 
that  have  been  uprooted  by  tornadoes,  or  any 
other  cause,  to  a  state  of  putridity,  and  finally  to 
dust.  Other  beetles,  of  smaller  dimensions,  and 
of  a  cylindrical  form,  which  take  their  station  be 
tween  the  bark  and  the  wood,  are  instrumental 
in  separating  them  so  as  to  let  in  the  wet,^  and 

1  Ckrysomela,  &c.  «  Cassida.  *  Haltica. 

*  Introd,  to  Ent.  i.  187.  207.  •  Ibid,  172.  176,  Ac. 

«  Cerambyx.     L.  ^  Jntrod.  io  Ent.  i.  235.  260. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  365 

expose  the  timber  more  effectually  to  the  action 
of  the  elements. 

The  great  majority,  indeed,  of  this  interesting 
Order  deriye  their  nutriment,  in  their  first  and 
last  states,  from  the  vegetable  kingdom.  The  La- 
mellicoms  afford  a  conspicuous  instance  of  this. 
Eyeu  those  of  them  that  are  coprophagous,  feed 
upon  vegetable  detritus  in  some  degree  anima- . 
lized ;  and  some  are  stated  to  feed  indifferently 
both  on  excrement  and  leaves.'  The  giants  of 
the  Order,  the  mighty  Dynastidans,'  appear  to 
feed  upon  putrescent  timber,  burrowing  in  it  as 
well  as  in  the  earth.  The  Melolonthidans,  in 
their  first  state,  devour  the  roots  of  grass,  &c., 
whence  one  of  the  modem  genera  into  which 
they  are  divided  is  named  the  root-eater;^  in 
their  perfect  state,  they  emerge  from  their  sub- 
terranean dwellings,  and  attack  the  leaves  of 
trees  and  shrubs,  and  are  sometimes  very  inju- 
rious to  them.  Again,  there  are  others,  which, 
as  it  were,  disdaining  such  coarse  food,  devour 
the  blossoms  themselves,  whence  Latreille  calls 
them  Anthobians :  and  lastly,  the  lovely  tribe  of 
Cetoniadans,  to  which  the  rose-beetle^  belongs, 
imbibe  the  nectar  of  the  flowers  they  frequent. 

Many  of  the  weevil  tribes  are  very  destructive 

'  Lacordaire,  Ann,  des  Sc*  Nat.  xx.  260. 

'  Dynastes,  M*Leay.  '  Rhizotrogus. 

*  Cetonia  aurata. 


366  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

to  Stored  grain  ;^  and  others  equally  so  to  certain 
fruits.* 


Though  the  Hymenaptera  and  Neuroptera 
Orders  are  most  celebrated  for  the  assaciatiens 
which  certain  tribes  instinctirely  form,  this 
principle  does  not  act  in  them  solely,  other 
Insects  have  their  swarms  at  certain  seasons,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  New  Holland  butterflies  before 
noticed ;  and  the  beetles  afford  several  instances 
of  it«  About  the  time  of  the  summer  solstice, 
the  solstitial  beetle'  may  be  seen  and  heard 
buzzing  in  vast  numbers  over  the  trees  and 
hedges,  and  a  little  earlier  the  cockchafer^  does 
the  same,  and  many  others  of  the  same  family/ 
Lacordaire  observed,  in  Brazil ,  that  two  species 
of  diamond  beetles^  clustered  so  on  some  kinds  of 
Mimosa,  that  the  branches  bent  under  the 
weight  of  their  glitterii^  burthen.^ 

The  same  author  mentions  a  curious  distinc- 
tion between  the  luminosity  of  the  glow-worms 
and  fire-flies  in  Brazil,  which  has  been  confirmed 
to  me  by  a  gentleman  sometime  resident  in  that 
country.  In  the  former,  he  says,  the  light 
perpetually  scintillates,  but  in  the  latter  it  is 

*  Calandra,  «  Cordylia  Palmarum. 

Rhizotrogus  solstitialis,  *  Melolontha  vulgaris. 

Hoplia,  Sec,  ^  Entimus  imperialis,  and  nobilis* 

Ann,  des  Sc,  Nat,  xx.  161. 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  367 

constant ;  ^  the  kind  of  glow-worm  most  common 
in  that  part  of  America,  belongs  to  a  tribe  in 
which  the  shield  of  the  thorax  does  not  cover 
the  eyes,  and  the  female  is  winged  as  well  as 
the  male.^  Thus  in  these  little  illuminators  of 
tropical  nights  we  have  a  kind  of  mimic  stars 
and  planets,  the  former  of  which  are  so  nume- 
rous as  to  fill  the  air  with  their  scintillations. 

The  immediate  object  of  this  faculty,  in  these 
beetles,  and  in  other  insects,  has  not  been 
clearly  ascertained ;  as  the  females  are  usually 
most  luminous,  it  may  be  to  allure  the  male ;  or, 
as  most  insects  fly  to  the  light,  it  may  also  bring 
their  prey  within  their  reach ;  or,  again,  it  may 
be  a  defence  from  their  own  nocturnal  enemies ;' 
but  whatever  be  its  object  with  respect  to  the 
animals  themselves  that  are  gifted  with  this 
faculty,  they  give  man  an  opportunity  of  glori- 
fying his  Creator,  not  only  for  the  starry 
heavens,  but  also  for  these  little  flying  stars  that 
render  night  so  beautiful  and  so  interesting, 
where  they  occur. 

In  considering  the  great  Class  of  Insects  with 
reference  to  their  office^  the  first  thing  that 
strikes  us  is  their  infinite  number,  not  only  of 

*  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat,  xx.  247. 

•  In  the  Introduction  to  Entomology ,  (ii.  407)  this  genus  is 
named  Pygolampis,  after  Aristotle,  Hist,  Anim.  1.  iv.  c.  1. 

'  Vol.  1.  p.  224. 


368  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

individuals  of  the  same  species,  but  of  different 
species  and  even  genera,  and  the  vast  variety  of 
forms  and  structures  that  they  necessarily  in- 
clude. When  we  began  the  present  subject, 
and,  dipping  under  the  waves  of  ocean,  visited 
the  vast  world  of  waters,  to  survey  their  various 
inhabitants;  even  amongst  those  that  can  be 
seen  only  by  the  assisted  eye,  we  saw  no  traces 
of  such  diversity  ;  the  number  of  individuab^  it 
is  true,  were  incalculable,  but  though  they  have 
been  the  objects  of  research,  with  so  many  in- 
quirers, and  for  so  long  a  period,  the  number  of 
species  known  fall  short  of  half  a  thousand,  while 
the  number  of  Insects  already  in  cabinets  are 
stated  to  be  more  than  two  hundred  times  that 
number,  and  even,  in  our  own  country,  more  than 
ten  thoMand  have  been  enumerated  and  named. 
The  momentum  of  so  vast  a  body  of  animals, 
everywhere  dispersed,  and  daily  and  hourly  at 
work  in  their  several  departments,  must  be  incal- 
culable; and  this  momentum  must  be  doubled 
by  the  circumstance  that  so  singularly  distin- 
guishes a  large  proportion  of  them ;  I  mean  that 
the  different  periods  of  their  existence  are  passed 
under  different  forms,  during  which  they  have 
quite  different  functions  assigned  them,  and  are 
fitted  with  different  organs,  being,  when  they  are 
first  disclosed  from  the  egg,  masticators  of  solid 
and  grosser  food,  and  in  their  last  state  imbibing 
nectareous  fluids.    The  connection  of  the  first  is 


INSECT  CONDYLOPES.  369 

with  the  haves  of  the  plant,  to  them  they  are 
committed  by  the  mother  as  soon  as  they  are 
extruded  from  her  matrix,  and  they  supply  them 
with  their  earliest  and  latest  food ;  but  when 
she  is  disclosed  in  all  her  beauty,  dressed  as 
it  were  in  her  bridal  robes,  the  connection  is 
between  her  and  the  flowery  her  lovely  ana- 
logue, from  them  she  imbibes  the  sweet  fluid 
which  their  nectaries  Aimish,  and  now,  instead 
of  a  devourer,  she  abstracts  merely  what  is 
redundant,  which,  while  it  contributes  to  ber 
own  enjoyment  and  support,  in  the  case  of 
the  bee,  enriches  man  himself. 

We  behold,  then,  this  immense  army  of  de- 
vourers,  varying  so  infinitely  in  their  instincts, 
as  well  as  their  forms,  supplying  many  animals 
with  the  whole  of  their  subs^tence,  and  forming 
a  considerable  portion  of  that  of  others,  and  feel 
convinced  that  Providence  has  not  placed  them 
in  their  position,  and  given  them  such  a  variety 
of  organs,  except  with  the  view  to  some  great 
general  benefit  to  those  animals  amongst  whom 
he  has  placed  them;  and  this  benefit  is  not 
so  much  perhaps  the  reducing  the  numbers  of 
their  own  class  within  due  limits,  though  that  is 
a  most  important  object,  as  removing  nuisances, 
which  would  deform,  or  in  any  way  infect  the 
earth  and  its  inhabitants.  For  this  the  Insect 
world  is  principally  distinguished  as  to  its 
functions.     It   consists    of   the    scavengers    of 

VOL,  II.  B  K 


370  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  earth,  and  the  pruners  of  its  too  luxuriant 
productions. 

With  respect  to  ornament  and  pleasurable 
sensations,  which  were  certainly  the  object  of 
our  beneficent  Creator,  as  well  as  our  profit  and 
utility — next  to  the  birds,  nothing  adds  more  to 
the  life  of  the  scene  before  us,  during  the  di- 
urnal hours,  and  even  sometimes  the  nocturnal, 
than  the  vast  variety  of  insects  that  are  flying, 
running,  and  jumping  about  in  all  directions,  all 
engaged  in  their  several  pursuits, — the  bees 
humming  over  the  flowers ;  the  butterflies  open* 
ing  and  shutting  their  painted  wings  to  the  sun ; 
the  gnats,  and  gnat-like  flies,  rising  and  fail- 
ing alternately  in  the  sunbeams;  the  beetle 
wheeling  his  droning  flight ;  others  coursing  over 
the  ground ;  the  grasshopper  chirping  in  every 
bank, — all  adding  to  the  general  harmony,  and 
combining  to  make  the  general  picture  one  of 
life  and  Love  ;  and  speaking,  each  in  difierent 
sort  and  manner,  the  praises  of  its  Creator,  and 
calling  upon  man  to  join  in  the  general  hymn. 


371 


Chapter  XXI, 

Functions  and  Instincts.     Fishes. 

Th£  animals  we  have  hitherto  considered  have 
been  destitute  of  an  internal  jointed  vertebral 
column  and  its  bony  appendages;  and  though 
some,  as  the  Cephalopods  and  some  slugs/  have 
a  kind  of  internal  bone,  and  in  one  Order  of 
Polypes'  the  axis  is  sometimes  articulated,  yet 
these,  especially  in  the  latter  instance,  merely 
indicate  an  analogical  relation,  but  no  affinity. 
In  none  of  these  instances  is  this  internal  bone 
perforated  for  the  passage  of  a  spinal  marrow, 
as  in  a  real  vertebrated  column ;  we  now,  how- 
ever, enter  that  superior  section  of  the  animal 
kingdom,  the  individuals  belonging  to  which, 
with  scarcely  any  exception,  are  built  upon 
the  column  in  question,  incasing  a  spinal  mar- 
row, and  terminated  at  its  upper  extremity  by  a 
bony  casket,  calculated  to  contain  and  protect 
the  most  precious  and  wonderful  of  all  material 
substances,  the  cerebral  pulp,  by  which  the 
organs  of  sense  perceive;  the  will  moves  the 
members ;  the  mind  governs  the  outward  frame ; 

»  Vol.  i.  p.  305.  «  Ibid.  p.  177. 


372  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

and,  in  the  king  of  animals,  an  immortal  spirit, 
is  enabled  to  seek  and  secure  a  higher  destiny. 

This  change  in  the  sU^ncture  of  animals  was 
rendered  necessary  by  an  increase  in  their  fru/ft, 
for  though  there  are  some  of  the  invertebrated 
Sub-kingdom,  as  the  fixed  Polypes  and  several 
of  the  Cephalopods,  that  are  of  as  large  dimen- 
sions, and  a  few  of  the  yertebrated,  as  the 
humming  birds,^  and  the  harvest  mouse,^  that 
are  not  so  large  as  some  insects;  yet  the  ge- 
nerality of  those  distinguished  by  a  vertebral 
column  form  a  striking  contrast,  as  to  magBi^ 
tude,  with  those  that  are  not.  Besides  this, 
as  these  animals,  by  the  will  of  their  Creator, 
were  to  be  endowed  as  they  ascended  in  th^ 
scale,  with  gradually  increasing  intellectual  fa- 
culties, it  was  necessary  that  the  principal  seat 
of  those  faculties  should  be  differently  organized. 
A  different  organ  of  respiration  also,  as  well  as 
of  circulation,  in  the  great  body  of  yertelnrates, 
required  an  internal  cavity  defended  from  the 
effects  of  pressure. 

Having  premised  these  general  observations, 
we  are  next  to  consider  what  animals  form  the 
basis  of  the  vertebrated  Sub*kingdom.  MosI 
modern  zoologists  appear  to  he  of  opinion  that 
the  Fishes  occupy  this  position,  and,  taking  all 
circumstances  into  consideration,  this  seems  the 

^  Trochilus.  *  Mus  messorius. 


FISHES.  373 

station  assigned  to  them  by  their  Creator ;  still 
there  are  characters  in  isome  of  the  Reptiles  that 
seem  to  connect  them  more  immediately  with 
the  Insects.  The  metamorphoses,  particularly 
of  the  Batrachian  Order,  are  of  this  description ; 
as  is  likewise  the  carapace,  or  shell  (tf  the 
Chelonians,  of  which  the  vertebral  column  and 
ribs  form  the  basis.  Those  extraordinary  ani- 
mals, the  hag^  and  the  lamprey,^  half  worms 
and  half  fish,  by  means  of  the  leech,  evidently 
connect  the  Fishes  with  the  Annelidans.^  Per- 
haps those  butterflies  of  the  ocean,  the  flying 
fishes,^  with  their  painted  wing -fins  with 
branching  rays,  may  look  towards  the  Lepi- 
doptera  amongst  Insects,  but  there  is  no  direct 
connection  at  present  discovered  between  the 
two  Classes. 

The  characters  of  the  Class  of  Fishes  are — 
Body  with  a  vertebral  column,  covered  with 
scales^  and  moved  by  Jins.  Respiration  by  per- 
manent gills.  Heart  with  only  one  auricle  and 
one  ventricle ;  blood  red,  cold. 

Fishes  are  distinguished  from  the  other  verte- 
brated  animals,  especially  birds  and  beasts,  by 
their  mode  of  respiration ;  the  latter  breathing 
the  atmospheric  air,  are  furnished  with  lungs^ 

1  Gastrobranchus.     {Myxine.  H.)  *  Pteromyzon. 

»  Sir  E.  Home,  Philos.  Trans.  1815,  265. 
^  Exoccettis  volitanSy  &c. 


374  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

which  receive  that  element,  oxygenate  the  blood, 
and  again  expel  it  in  a  different  state ;  while  the 
former^  which  must  decompose  the  water  for  res- 
piration, breathe  by  means  of  gills^  found  also 
in  many  invertebrates ;  these  are  usually  long, 
pointed  plates,  disposed  like  the  plumules  of  a 
feather,  or  teeth  of  a  comb,  in  fishes  attached  to 
bony  or  cartilaginous  bows ;  each  of  them,  accord- 
ing to  Cuvier,  covered  by  a  tissue  of  innumera- 
ble blood-vessels ;  but,  according  to  Dr.  Virey,* 
having  a  minute  vein  and  artery.  In  the  gill 
of  a  cod-fish,  which  I  have  just  examined 
under  a  microscope,  a  vein  and  artery  traverse 
each  plate  longitudinally  at  the  margin,  which 
appear  to  be  pectinated,  at  right  angles  on  each 
side,  with  innumerable  minute  branches,  and  re- 
semble, in  this  respect,  the  gills  of  CmstaceaDs.* 
Thus  the  blood  is  oxygenated  by  the  air 
mixed  with  the  water,  and  carried  to  the  heart, 
whence  it  is  distributed  to  the  whole  body. 
So  that  the  aerated  water  produces  the  same 
effect  upon  the  blood  in  the  branchial  vessels, 
as  the  air  does  upon  that  in  our  lungs. 

We  know,  by  experience,  how  soon  an  animal 
that  breathes  by  lungs,  if  it  remains  only  a  few 
minutes  under  water,  and  is  cut  off  from  all 
communication  with  the  atmosphere,  is  suffo- 
cated and  dies;  and  that  all  aquatic  animals 

'  N.  D.  D'H.  N.  iv.  330.     •  Latr.  Cours.  D'Eni.  1 11./.  2, 


FISHES«  375 

that  haTe  not  gills,  or  something  analogous,  as 
all  the  water-beetles,  the  larves  of  gnats,  &c.  are 
obliged,  at  certain  intervals,  to  seek  the  surface 
for  respiration.  Whence  we  may  learn  what  an 
admirable  contrivance  of  Divine  Wisdom  is  here 
presented  to  us,  to  enable  the  infinite  host  of 
fishes  to  breathe  as  easily  in  the  water  as  we 
do  in  the  air. 

When  we  sum  up  all  the  diagnostics  of  the 
Class  we  are  considering,  we  can  trace,  at  every 
step,  so  that,  almost,  he  that  runs  may  read.  In- 
finite Power  in  the  construction.  Infinite  Wisdom 
in  the  contrivance  and  adaptations,  and  Infinite 
Goodness  in  the  end  and  object  of  all  the  various 
physical  laws,  and  in  all  the  structures  and  oi^a- 
nizations  by  which  they  are  severally  executed, 
which  strike  the  reflecting  mind  in  this  globe  of 
ours.  What  else  could  have  peopled  the  waters, 
and  the  air,  with  a  set  of  beings  so  perfectly  and 
beautifully  in  contrast  with  each  other,  as  the 
fishes  and  the  biids.  Sprung  originally  from 
the  same  element,  they  each  move,  as  it  were, 
in  an  ocean  of  their  own,  and  by  the  aid  of 
similar,  though  not  the  same,  means.  The 
grosser  element  they  inhabit  required  a  different 
set  of  organs  to  defend,  to  propel  and  guide,  and  to 
sink  and  elevate  the  fishy  from  what  were  requi- 
site to  effect  the  same  purposes  for  the  hird, 
which  moves  in  a  rarer  and  purer  medium ;  yet 
as  both  were  fluid  mediums,  consisting  of  the 


376  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

same  elements,  though  differently  combined; 
analogous  organs,  though  differing  in  substanoe, 
structure,  and  number,  were  required.  For  what 
difference  is  there  between  swimming  and  fly- 
ing, except  the  element  in  which  these  motions 
take  place  ?  The  fish  may  be  said  to  fiy  in  the 
water y  and  the  bird  to  swim  in  the  air;  but 
perhaps  the  movements  of  the  aquatic  animal, 
from  its  greater  flexibility  and  the  number  of  its 
motive  organs,  is  more  graceful  and  elegant  than 
those  of  the  aerial.  The  feathei^s  of  the  one  are 
analogous  to  the  scales  of  the  other ;  the  wings 
to  tlie  pector^l^it^;  and  the  tail  of  both  acts  the 
part  of  a  rudder^  by  which  each  steers  itself 
through  the  waves  of  its  own  element. 

One  distinctive  character  of  fislies  is  taken 
from  the  scales  that  cover  and  protect  their  soft 
and  flexile  forms  from  injury.  Scales,  however, 
are  not  peculiar  to  fishes^  since  many  reptiles^  as 
the  Saurians,  and  some  quadrupeds,  as  the 
Pangolin,^  are  armed  by  them.  Scarcely  any 
species  of  fish  is  really  without  them*  In  some, 
upon  which  when  living  they  are  not  discover- 
able under  a  microscope,  when  they  are  dead, 
and  the  skin  is  dry,  scales  are  readily  detected 
and  detached.  These  organs  vary  greatly  ia 
form  :  sometimes  they  resemble  spines,  at  others 
they  are  tuberculated ;  but  most  commonly  they 

'  Mams, 


FISHES.  377 

aie  plates,  often  carinated,  and  varying  in  shape, 
some  being  round,  others  oyal,  others  again 
angular ;  sometimes  also  they  are  finely  denticu- 
lated. In  some  fish  they  are  separated,  in 
others  they  touch,  often  so  as  to  form  together 
the  resemblance  of  a  beautiful  piece  of  mosaic, 
and  in  many  they  are  imbricated.^  In  those 
that  rarely  approach  the  shore,  and  are  exposed 
only  to  slight  friction,  they  are  fastened  by  a 
smaller  portion  of  their  circumference ;  but  in 
in-shore  fishes  they  are  more  firmly  fixed,  and 
coTered  partly  by  the  epidermis,  which,  in 
those  that  liye  and  burrow  in  the  mud,  almost 
entirdy  envelopes  them.  Some  fishes  set  up 
th^  spines  like  a  hedgehog ;  and  most,  when 
alarmed,  seem  to  have  the  power  of  erecting 
ibem  more  or  less.  Had  we  the  means  of  ascer- 
taining the  situation  and  circumstances  of  every 
individual,  we  should  find  that,  in  every  case, 
the  figure  and  connexion,  and  substance  of  the 
scales,  was  ruled  by  them.  A  proof  of  this  may 
be  seen  in  those  fishes  whose  integument  con-» 
sists  of  bard  scales,  united  together  so  as  to  form 
a  tesselated  coat  of  mail.  I  allude  to  the 
Ostraeionsy  whose  organs  of  locomotion  seem  not 
calculated  to  effect  their  escape  when  pursued ; 
the  want  of  speed,  however,  is  compensated  by 
a  covering  that  the  teeth  of  few  of  their  enemies 

»  Roget,  B.  T,  i.  116. 


378  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

can  penetrate :  the  same  remark  applies  to  those 
fishes  that  can  inflate  themselves  into  a  globe/ 
in  some  of  which  the  fins  are  so  minute,  as  to 
be  scarcely  discoverable.  In  these  the  scaly 
spines,  when  erected,  assist  in  preventing  the 
attack  of  enemies. 

I  have  given  a  detailed  account  of  the  fins  of 
fishes  on  a  former  occasion.^  I  shall  therefore 
here  only  consider  the  motions  of  which  they  are 
the  organs,  and  their  theatre. 

Though  the  hii^s-'\i  we  consider  the  whole 
atmosphere  of  the  globe,  whether  expanded  over 
earth  or  sea,  as  their  domain — may  perhaps 
have  a  wider  range  than  Xh^  fishesy  yet  when  we 
further  consider  that,  besides  the  whole  extent 
of  the  ocean,  and  the  seas  in  connection  with  jL, 
with  all  its  unfathomable  depths  and  abysses, 
and  all  the  rivers  that  flow  into  it — all  the  imiu* 
merable  lakes  also,  and  other  stagnant  waters^  on 
mountains,  and  at  every  other  elevation,  that  the 
earth's  surface  contains,  belong  to  the  fishes, 
and  compare  at  the  same  time  the  greatest 
depth  to  which  they  descend  with  the  greatest 
height  to  which  birds  ascend,  we  may  conclude 
that,  with  regard  to  its  extent^  their  habitable 
world  may  be  nearly  commensurate  with  that  of 
their  rivals  or  analogues. 

As  to  their  motions^  in  their  element,  birds  of 

*  Roget,  B.  T.  i.  433.  «  See  above,  p.  135. 


FISHES.  379 

the  most  rapid  and  unwearied  wing  must  yield 
the  palm  to  them ;  the  eagle  to  the  shark,  and 
the  swallow  to  the  herring  and  salmon.  The 
form  of  fishes,  generally  speaking,  is  particu- 
larly calculated  for  swift  and  easy  motion ;  and 
the  resistance  of  the  fluid  in  which  they  move 
seems  never  to  impede  their  progress.  While 
birds  that  undertake  long  flights  are  often 
obliged  to  alight  upon  vessels  for  some  rest  and 
renovation  of  strength,  fishes  never  seem  ex* 
hausted  by  fatigue,  and  to  require  no  respite  or 
repose.  Sharks  have  been  known  to  keep  pace 
vith  ships  during  long  voyages ;  and,  like  dogs, 
they  will  sport  round  vessels  going  at  several 
knots  an  hour,  as  if  they  had  plenty  of  spare 
force.*  The  thunny  darts  with  the  rapidity  of 
an  arrow,  and  the  herring  goes  at  the  rate  of 
sixteen  miles  per  hour.  But  though  many 
fishes  thus  pursue  an  unwearied  course  without 
any  intervals  of  repose,  yet  there  are  some  that 
often  appear  to  sleep.  Inflating  its  natatory  ve- 
sicle, our  firesh-water  shark,  the  pike,  in  the  heat 
of  the  day,  rises  nearly  to  the  surface,  and  there 
remains  perfectly  motionless  and  apparently 
asleep:  at  this  time  he  is  easily  snared,  by 
passing  a  running  noose  of  wire  over  his  tail,  and 
by  a  sudden  jerk  bringing  him  on  shore. 

The  eye  of  fishes  is  like  that  of  the  higher 

>  N.  D.  D'Hist.  Nat.  xxvii.  247, 


380  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCl^. 

animals,  but  of  a  substance  that  makes  the 
access  of  the  water  to  it  no  more  troublesome 
than  that  of  the  air  to  terrestrial  animals. 
Generally  speaking,  it  is  protected  by  no  eyelid 
or  nictitant  membrane.  One  genus,  however, 
removed  from  the  gobiesy^  has  the/ormer ;  and  a 
species  of  bodian,^  from  the  equatorial  seas,  had 
a  moveable  membranous  valve  above  each  eye, 
with  which,  at  will,  it  can  cover  it,  that  seems 
analogous  to  the  latter.  The  eye  of  the  eel,  and 
other  serpentiform  fishes,  which  are  usually 
buried  and  move  about  in  the  mud,  is  covered, 
through  the  provident  care  of  their  Creator,  by 
an  immoveablie  membrane ;  and  in  several  spe- 
cies the  organ  can  be  withdrawn  to  the  bottom  of 
the  socket,  and  even  concealed,  in  part,  under  its 
margin.  But  the  most  singular  kind  of  eye  in 
the  Class,  and  that  in  which  the  forethought  of 
the  Deity  is  most  conspicuous,  is  that  of  the 
Anablepsj  a  viviparous  fish,  inhabiting  the  rivers 
of  Surinam,  and  called  by  the  natives  the  four- 
eyed  fish.  If  the  cornea  of  this  eye  be  examined 
attentively  it  will  be  found  that  it  is  divided  into 
two  equal  portions,  each  forming  part  of  an  in- 
dividual sphere,  placed  one  above  and  the  other 
below,  and  united  by  a  little  narrow  membranous, 
but  not  diaphanous,  band,  which  is  nearly  hori* 
zontal  when  the  fish  is  in  its  natural  position ;  if 

'  Periophthalmus^  ^  B,  palpebratus. 


PISHES.  381 

the  lower  portion  be  examined,  a  rather  large 
iris  and  pupil  will  be  seen,  with  a  crystalline 
humour  under  it,  and  a  similar  one  with  a  still 
lai'ger  pupil  in  the  upper  portion.  The  object  of 
Divine  Wisdom  in  this  unparallelled  structure,  if 
we  may  conjecture  from  the  circumstances  of  the 
animal,  is  to  enable  it  to  see  near  and  distant 
objects  at  the  same  time — ^the  little  worms  below 
it  that  form  its  food,  with  one  pupil  and  iris,  and 
the  great  fishes  above  it  or  at  a  distance,  which 
it  may  find  it  expedient  to  guard  against,  with 
the  other. 

The  senses  of  smell  and  hearing  have  no  ex- 
ternal avenue  in  fishes.  The  former  is  the  most 
acute  of  all  their  senses.  Lacepede  says  it  may 
be  called  their  real  eye,  since  by  it  they  can 
discover  their  prey  or  their  enemies  at  an  im- 
mense distance ;  they  are  directed  by  it  in  the 
thickest  darkness,  and  the  most  agitated  waves. 
The  organs  of  this  sense  are  between  the  eyes. 
The  extent  of  the  membranes  on  which  the  ol- 
factory nerves  expand,  in  a  shark  twenty-five 
feet  long,  is  calculated  to  be  twelve  or  thirteen 
square  feet. 

The  teeth  of  fishes  may  be  divided  into  the 
same  kinds  as  those  of  quadrupeds ;  they  have 
their  laniary,  incisive,  and  molary  teeth ;  they 
are  differently  distributed,  according  to  the  spe- 
cies and  mode  of  life ;  some  are  almost  immove- 
ably  fixed  in  bony  sockets,  others  in  membra- 


3»2.  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

nous  capsules,  by  which  means  tttey  can  be  ele- 
vated or  depressed  at  the  will  of  the  animal* 
They  not  only  have  often  many  rows  of  teeth  in 
their  mouth,  but  even  their  palate,  their  throat, 
and  their  tongue  are  sometimes  thus  armed.^ 
And  this  accumulation  of  teeth  is  not  confined  to 
the  fiercest  mcmsters  of  the  deep,  but  even  some 
herbivorous  fishes  have  several  rows  of  molary 
teeth.  An  instance  of  this  is  afforded  by  a  jaw 
of  some  unknown  fish,  perhaps  a  Siluridan,  in 
my  possession,  in  which  there  are  six  rows  of 
such  teeth,  the  anterior  ones  being  somewhat 
conical.  This  specimen  was  found  on  the  shore 
of  one  of  the  lakes  in  Canada,  and  belonged  to  a 
fish,  which  the  firiend  who  gave  it  to  me  stated 
was  much  relished  by  the  Indians. 

Many  of  the  organs  of  the  members  of  this 
Class  are  more  independent  of  each  other  than 
those  of  warm-blooded  animals ;  they  seem  less 
connected  with  common  centres,  in  this  respect 
resembling  vegetables,  for  they  may  be  more 
materially  altered,  more  desperately  wounded, 
and  more  comj^etely  destroyed,  without  any 
mortal  effect.  Many  of  their  parts,  as  the  fins, 
if  mutilated,  can  be  reproduced.  Indeed  a  fish, 
as  well  as  a  reptile,  can  be  cut,  torn,  or  dismem- 
bered without  appearing  to  sufier  materially. 
The  shark,  from  which  a  harpoon  has  taken  a 

1  Plate  XIII.  Fio.  3. 


FISHES.  383 

portion  of  its  flesh,  pursues  his  prey  with  the 
usual  avidity,  if  his  blood  has  not  been  too  much 
exhausted.  We  see  in  this  a  merciful  provision, 
that  animals  so  much  exposed  to  injury  should 
suffer  less  from  it  than  those  which  are  better 
protected,  either  by  their  situation  or  structure. 

Fishes  are  amongst  the  most  long-lived  ani- 
mals. A  pike  was  taken,  in  1754,  at  Kaisersi- 
lautem,  which  had  a  ring  fastened  to  the  gill- 
covers,  from  which  it  appeared  to  have  been  put 
into  the  pond  of  that  castle  by  the  order  of 
Frederick  the  Second,  in  1487,  a  period  of  two 
hundred  and  sixty-seven  years.  It  is  described 
as  being  nineteen  feet  long,  and  weighing  three 
hundred  and  fifty  pounds  1  ! 

Though  the  animals  of  the  Class  under  con- 
sideration are  not  generally  remarkable  for  their 
sagacity,  yet  they  are  capable  of  instruction. 
Lacepede  relates  that  some,  which  for  more  than 
a  century  had  been  kept  in  the  basin  of  the 
Tuilleries,  would  come  when  they  were  called  by 
theit*  names ;  and  that  in  many  parts  of  Ger- 
many trout,  carp,  and  tench  are  summoned  to 
their  food  by  the  sound  of  a  bell.^ 

At  the  first  blush  it  seems  as  if  fishes  took 
little  care  or  thought  for  their  offspring;  but 
when  we  inquire  into  the  subject,  we  find  them 
assiduous  to  deposit  their  eggs  in  such  situations 

>  Hist,  des  Poiss,  Introd.  cxxx. 


384  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

as  are  best  calculated  to  ensure  their  hatching, 
and  to  supply  the  wants  of  their  young  when 
hatched;  but  sometimes  they  go  further,  and 
prepare  regular  fiests  for  their  young.  Two 
species,  called  by  the  Indians,  though  of  dif- 
ferent genera,^  by  the  name  of  the  flat-head  and 
round-head  hassar^  have  this  instinct,  and  con- 
struct a  nest,  the  former  of  leaves  and  the  latter 
of  grass,  in  which  they  deposit  their  eggs,  and 
then  cover  them  very  carefully ;  and  both  sexes, 
for  they  are  monogamous,  watch  and  defend 
them  till  the  young  come  ferth.  Greneral  Hard- 
wicke  mentions  a  parallel  instance  in  the  ffo- 
ramyty^  of  the  Isle  of  France,  a  fish  of  the  size  of 
the  turbot,  and  superior  to  it  in  flavour,  culti- 
vated in  the  ponds  of  that  island. 

It  has  been  observed  that  some  fishes,  whesi 
dead,  emit  a  phosphoric  light,  I  have  particularly 
noticed  this  in  the  mackarel,  but  others  do  this 
when  living.  The  sun-fish^  which  sometimes  has 
been  found  of  an  enormous  bulk,^  when  swim- 
ming  yields  a  light,  which  looks  like  the  reflec- 
tion of  the  moon  in  the  water,  whence  it  has  also 
been  called  the  moon-fish — and  the  spectator  in 
vain  searches  for  that  planet  in  the  heavens. 
Sometimes  many  individuals  swim  together,  and 

^  Doras  and  Callicthys, 
*  Osphromenus  olfax.  ^  Mola. 

^  One  is  said  to  have  been  caught  in  the  Irish  sea  twenty-five 
feet  long!  ! — Lacep.  Hist*  51 U 


FIHH£».  385 

by  their  multiplied  luminous  disks,  generally  at 
some  distance*  compose  a  singular  and  startling 
spectacle  ;  and  if  we  take  into  consideration 
the  magnitude  p{  these  animals/  we  may  con- 
ceive the  wonder  and  amazement  that  would 
agitate  the  mind  of  any  one  when  he  first  beheld 
such  an  army  of  great  lights  moving  through  the 
waters.  For  what  purpose  Providence  has  gifted 
the  sua-fish  with  this  property,  and  how  it  is 
produced,  has  not  been  ascm*tained.  It  may 
either  be  for  defence,  or  illumination. 
'  Few  animals,  with  regard  to  magnitude,  pre- 
sent to  the  eye  such  enormous  masses  as  some 
fishes ;  leaving  the  whales  out  of  the  question, 
]irhich  though  aquatic,  belong  to  another  Class, 
what  quadruped  can  compete  with  the  sharks 
which  is  also  a  phosphoric  fish.  That  tribe 
called  by  the  French  Reqnins^  which  is  thought 
to  be  synonymous  with  the  Carcharias  of  the 
Greeks,  and  one  of  which  was  probably  the  sea- 
monster,  mistranslated  the  whahy  which  swal- 
lowed the  disobedient  prophet — are  stated  to 
exceed  thirty  feet  in  length;  another'  of  a  dif- 
ferent tribe^  is  still  larger,  sometimes  extending 
to  the  enormous  length  of  more  than/orty  feet  1  !^ 
Next  to  the  sharks,  the  rcofs^  nearly  akin  to 
them,  exceed  in  their  magnitude ;  they  are  some- 

»  Hist,  of  Waterford,  271.   Borla»e,  Comw.  267.     ' 
^  Carcharias.  Cuv.  '  Squalus  maximuH. 

♦  N.  D.  D'H.  N.  XXIX.  192.  xxxii.  74. 

VOL.  11.  C  C 


886  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

times  called  sea-eagles,  because  in  their  rage  and 
fury  they  occasionally  elevate  themselves  from 
the  water,  and  fall  again  with  such  force  as  to 
make  the  sea  foam  and  thunder.  An  individual 
of  a  species^  of  this  tribe,  called  by  the  sailors  the 
sea-devil,  taken  at  Barbadoes,  was  so  large,  as  to 
require  seven  pairs  of  oxen  to  draw  it  on  shore ! !  * 
If  we  consider  the  vast  tendency  to  increase  of 
the  oceanic  tribes,  that  where  a  terrestrial  animal 
gives  birth  to  a  single  individual,  a  marine  one 
perhaps  produces  a  million,  we  may  conceive 
that  if  no  check  was  provided  to  keep  their 
numbers  within  due  limits,  they  would  so  fill  the 
waters  as  to  interfere  with  each  other's  and  the 
general  welfare.  The  Cod-fish  alone,  which, 
according  to  Leeuwenhoek  and  Lacepede,^  pro- 
duces more  than  nine  millions  of  eggs  in  one 
year,  if  neither  man,  nor  shark  nor  other  preda- 
ceous  fish,  made  it  their  food,  would  so  fill  the 
ocean  in  congenial  climates,  in  the  course  of  no 
long  period  of  time,  that  there  would  scarcely  be 
space  for  the  motions  or  life  of  any  other  ma- 
rine animal :  the  same  may  be  said  of  almost  all 
the  migratory  fishes.  In  these  circumstances 
we  see  the  reason  why  such  enormous  monsters 
were  created  that  could  swallow  them  by  hun* 
dreds,  why  their  yawning  mouth  and  throat  were 

^  Rata  Banksiana, 

«  Lacep.  Hist,  des  Poiss.  ii.  1 16. 

*  Leeuwenh.  £pist.  iii.  188.  Lacepe.  Hist.  Ibid.  393. 


FISHES.  387 

planted  with  teeth  and  fangs  of  different  descrip- 
tions, fixed  and  moveable,  arranged  in  many  a 
fearfnl  row  of  bristling  points,  and  why  this 
tremendous  array  has  been  mustered  in  the 
mouth  of  animals  of  such  never-sated  voracity, 
and  of  such  unmitigated  cruelty  and  ferocity. 

Still  though  the  scene  is  one  of  blood  and 
slaughter,  yet  He  whose  tender  mercies  are  over 
all  his  works,  has  fitted  the  creatures  exposed  to 
it  for  their  lot.  Cold-blooded  animals,  as  I  lately 
observed,  do  not  suffer  from  the  various  dis- 
memberments to  which  their  situation  exposes 
them,  like  those  of  a  higher  and  warmer  tempe* 
rature,  whence  we  may  conclude,  that  great  pain 
and  anguish  are  not  felt  by  them . 

Another  function  of  these  tremendous  animals 
is  to  devour  all  carcasses ^  which,  from  whatever 
cause,  are  floating  in  the  water,  thus  they  act 
the  same  part  in  disinfecting  and  purifying  the 
ocean,  that  the  hysenas  and  vultures,  their  terres- 
trial analogues,  and  other  animals,  do  upon  earth. 

Another  lesson  may  be  learned  from  the  exist- 
ence of  these  terrible  monsters ;  for  if  God  fitted 
them  to  devour,  he  fitted  them  also  to  instruct. 
The  existence  of  creatures  so  evil,  and  such 
relentless  destroyers  of  his  works  in  the  material 
world,  teach  us  that  there  are  probably  analo- 
gous beings  in  the  spiritual  world  ;  and  what 
occasion  we  have  for  watchfulness,  to  escape 
their  destructive  fury. 

There  is  nothing  more  remarkable  in  the  Class 


388  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

we  are  considering  than  the  infinite  variety  and 
singularity  of  the  figures  and  shapes  of  fishes. 
It  has  been  thought  that  the  ocean  contains 
representatives  of  every  terrestrial  and  aerial 
form.  However  this  be,  it  may  be  asserted  that 
the  forms  of  fishes  are  more  singular  and  extra- 
ordinary, more  grotesque,  and  monstrous,  dian 
those  of  any  other  department  of  the  animal 
kingdom  ;  but  on  this  subject  I  need  not  enlarge. 

Having  made  these  general  remarks  upon 
fishes,  I  shall  next  say  something  on  their  Classi- 
Jication.  Of  all  the  Classes  of  animals,  that  of 
Fishes,  as  Baron  Cuvier  observes,  is  the  most  dif- 
ficult to  divide,  into  Orders.  Linn6  considered 
what  have  been  usually  denominated  CartUagi' 
nam  Fishes^  as  forming  a  section  of  his  Amphi- 
bians:^ but  the.  former  illustrious  naturiedi^  has 
very  judiciously  arranged  them  with  the  fishes. 
Ichthyologists  in  general  agree  with  Cuvier  in 
dividing  this  Class  into  two  Sub-classes—viz. 
Osseansj  in  which  the  skeleton  is  hcm^  and  formed 
of  hony  fibres ;  and  Cartilagineans,  in  which  it  is 
cartilaginous  and  formed  of  calcareous  grt^nS' 
Lacepede,  the  most  eminent  of  modern  Ichthyo- 
logists, has  observed  that  there  is  a  striking 
resemblance  or  analogy  between  certain  points  of 
these  two  Sub -classes,  of  which  he  has  given  a 
table  drawn  up  in  a  double  series,  which  I  shall 
here  subjoin. 

*  Nantes. 


FISHES.  389 

CARTILA0INEAN8.  OSSEANS. 

Peiromyzan.  Oasirobranchus.  Cadlia.  Murttna.  Ophis. 

Raia PleuronecteM. 

Squalus Eaox. 

Accipenser Loricaria. 

Syngnaihut Fistularia. 

Pegasus    ..,.'....  Trigla. 

Torpedo.  Tetrodon Gymnotus.  Silurus, 

Cuvier  also  remarks,  with  respect  to  the  ani- 
mals of  the  present  Clads,  that  they  form  two 
distinct  series,^  which  in  another  place  he  says, 
cannot  be  considered  as  either  superior  or 
inferior  to  each  other. 

Many  genera  of  the  Cartilagineans,  he  thinks, 
approach  the  Reptiles  by  some  parts  of  their 
organization,  whilst  it  is  almost  doubtful  whether 
others  do  not  belong  to  the  Invertebrates.^  He 
has  made  no  remark  with  respect  to  the  connec- 
tion of  the  Osseans  with  the  above  Class :  though 
his  thirteenth  Family  consists  of  fishes  that 
have  always  gone  by  the  name  oi  Jishing-frogSy* 
from  the  resemblance  which  they  exhibit  to  that 
animal,  and  from  their  pectoral  fins  assuming 
the  appearance  of  legs.*  The  species  of  one 
genus^  resemble  a  fish  with  a  lizard  on  its  back, 
the  head  being  overshadowed  by  a  conical 
horizontal  horn,  in  the  sides  of  which  the 
eyes  are  fixed,  so  that  the  lower  lobe  simulates 

>  Rkgne  Anim.  ii.  128.  <  Ibid.  376. 

«  Lophius.  L.  ^  Platk  XIII.  Fig.  1. 

*  Malihus. 


390  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  head  of  a  fish,  and  the  upper  one  that  of  a 
lizard.^  This  family  of  fishes,  as  well  as  the 
lump'Jishj^  in  his  Lectures  an  Comparative  Amt- 
tomy^  Cuvier  classed  with  the  Cartilagineans. 

It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  I  should  be  able 
to  thread  my  way  through  a  labyrinth,  in  which 
this  great  man  confesses  himself  to  be  at  a  loss ; 
and  therefore  I  shall  not  attempt  any  alteration 
of  his  system,  though  confessedly  the  reverse  of 
natural  with  respect  to  the  Orders  into  which  he 
divides  it,  but  leave  the  subject  to  an  abler  hand, 
M.  Agassiz,  who  is  reported  to  have  undertaken 
it,  and  in  the  mean  time,  give  a  popular  summary 
of  Baron  Cuvier's  Orders,  as  I  find  them  in  the 
last  edition  of  the  Rhgne  Animal. 

Sub'Class  1. — The  Cartilagineans^  which,  as 
allied  to  the  Annelidans,  I  shall  place  first,  are 
divided  by  Cuvier  into  three  Orders,*  viz.  the 
CyclostameSy  or  suckers ;  the  Selacians  ;  and  the 
Sturionians. 

Order  1. — The  CychstomeSy  or  suckers,  with 
regard  to  their  skeletons,  are  the  most  imperfect 
of  all  the  Vertebrates,  They  have  neither 
pectoral  nor  ventral  fins.  Their  body,  apparently 
headless  and  eyeless,  terminates  anteriorly  in  a 

1  Plate  XIII.  Fio.  2.  •  Cyclopterus. 

«  Ubi  supr.  128.  where  Cuvier  arranges  them  in  the  Order 
here  adopted,  but  when  he  gives  the  details  of  the  Sub-class,  b« 
reverses  it.  Ibid.  378. 


FISHES.  391 

circular  or  semicircular  fleshy  lip^  supported  by 
a  cartilaginous  ring.  Their  gills  consist  of 
pouches  instead  of  pectinated  organs.  By 
means  of  their  mouth,  which,  as  well  as  the 
tongue,  is  armed  with  teeth,  they  fix  themselves 
to  fishes,  and  derive  their  nutriment  from  them. 
The  lamprey^  lampeme^  and  hagj  &c.  belong  to 
this  Order. 

Orde9*  2. — ^The  Selacians  have  gills,  fixed  by 
their  outer  margin,  and  not  disengaged  as  in  the 
Osseans,  and  they  expel  the  water  by  lateral 
openings.  To  this  Order  the  sharks  and  the 
rays  belong. 

Order  3. — ^The  Sturianians  agree  with  the 
Ossean  Fishes  in  their  gills,  but  their  skeleton 
is  cartilaginous.  They  have  only  a  single  ori- 
fice, covered  with  an  operculum.  The  sole 
genera  included  in  this  Order  are  the  Sturgeon^ 
and  the  Sea-ape.* 

Sfd^'Class  2. — The  Osseans  Cuvier  divides  into 
four  Orders,  viz«  Acanthopterygians^  Malacop- 
terygians,  LophobranchianSy  and  Plectognathians. 
These  Orders,  for  reasons  before  assigned,^  I 
shall  reverse. 

Order  1.  (Cuv.  6.) — Plectognathian  Fishes. 
Gill-cavers  concealed  under  a  thick  skin.  Ribs 
rudimental.   Ventral  Jins  wanting.   To  this  Order 

'  Petramyzon  fiuvialiSf  &c.  *  P.  branckialis? 

*  Accipenser.  *  Chinuera  monstrosa. 

^  Vol.  I.  p.  145,  and  above,  p.  320. 


392  FUNCTIONS  AND. INSTINCTS. 

beloDg  the  Coat  of  MaiUJish,^  the  Sun-Jhhj*  and 
the  BUtdder-ifiih^ 

Order  2.  (Cud.  &.) — Lopbobranekian  Fishes* 
So  called  because  their  gills  are  not  pectmated^ 
but  disposed  in  tufts,  as  is  the  case  likewise 
with  some  Annelidans  ;^  body  ridged^longitudi- 
nally,  coyered  with  hard  scales,  united  to  each 
other ;  mouth  elongated.  To  this  Order  belong 
those  singular  animals — the  dragonetj^  thaAorse- 
heady^  or  sea-horse^  and  the  sea-^needkJ 

Orders.  (Cuv.  2 J — Malacopterygianj  or  soft- 
rayed  Fishes.  Itajfs  not  s^ny,  except  some- 
times the  first  of  the  dorsal  or  pectoral  fins^ 
This  great  Order  Cuyier  divides  into  three 
Orders^  or  rather  Sub-orders,  which  I  shall  give 
inversely. 

Sub-order  I.  (Ctw.  A.y^Apode  Malaeoptery- 
gians.  Body  serpentiform,  elongated;  skin  thick, 
soft,  and  slimy.  To  this  Sub-oider  belong  the 
comnum-eelj^  the  eonger-ed,^  and  the  eketric^ 
eeli^^  which  have  many  points  in  common  with 
the  cylostomous  fishes  of  the  preceding  Subr 
class,  and  with  respect  to  their  form  seem  to 
look  both  towards  the  Annelidans^  and  more 
especially  to  the  Ophidian  Reptiles.  . 

■  Ostracion,  ^  Mola. 

^  Diodon,  *  See  above,  p.  127. 

^  Pegasus.  ^  Hippocampus, 

^  Syngnathus^  *  Murmna  AnguUia. 

9  M.  Conger^  *•  Gymnotus. 


FISHES.  393 

Sub-order  2.  (Cuv.'  3 J — The  SuJhbrcxhian 
Mahcopterygians.  Ventral  &ns  attached '  under 
the  pectoral.  In  this  Order  we  find  the  sucking^ 
Jiskj^  the  hump-fish^  the  fiat-fishes^  and  the  cod- 
fish^ which  deems  an  heterogenous  mi^tu^e ; 
the  flat*fishes  seem  clearly  entitled  to  rank  a& 
an  Order. 

SviM^der  3.  (Cuv.  2.) — Abdominal  Malacop- 
terygiansi  Ventral  fins  attached  under  the  ab« 
doinen  and  behind  the  pectoral.  Here,  as  we 
asccind,  we  meet  with  the  spraty^  thd  herring^ 
the  hanar^  th^  salmon^  the  anablepsj  the  foach^^ 
ienlek,^  and  carp.^ 

Order  4.  (Cuv.  I.) — ^The  Acanlhopterygiims^  or 
spiny-rayed  Fishes.  First  rays  of  the  dorsal  fin, 
OT  of  ihe  first  dorsal  fin,  spiny,  or  dorsal  spines  in 
the  place  of  dorsal  fins.  Under  this  vast  Order 
are  arranged  an  infinity  of  families  and  genera; 
which  Cuvier  seemis  to  lament  that  he  wad 
obliged  to  leaye  together/'  The  tobacco-pipe-: 
fishy^  the  rasorfishy^  the  fishing^frogSy^^  the  lyre^ 
fisky^  the   John    Dory y^^   the  swordfish^^^    the 

*  Eckeneis,  ^  Cyclopterus.  ^  Qadus. 

'  ♦  Clupea  Sprattus.  *  C  Harengus, 

^  Doras,  Callicthy$.  7  Salmo. 

®  Cyprinus  ruiilus,  ^  C  Tinea. 

10  C.  Carpio.  ^»  R^gne  Anim.  ii.  131. 

1*  Fistularia.  i^  CorypKtBna. 
1^  Laphius,  Malihus,  Batrachus, 

^  Callionymus  Lyra.  ^^  Zeus  Faber, 
*'  Xiphias. 


394  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

mtickareU^  the  gurnard^  the  muUeU^  and  the 
'perch^  are  amongst  those  that  belong  to  this 
Order. 

It  is  impossible  to  consider  the  Orders  of 
Fishes  as  we  have  done  those  of  Insects,  and 
give  any*  satisfactory  account  of  the  fdnctioiis 
and  instincts  of  the  several  families  and  tribes 
that  compose  them.    We  cannot  dip  beneath 
the  waves,  to  visit  the  depths  of  the  ocean,  that 
we  may  investigate  their  manners  and  histoiy; 
but,  doubtless,  we  may  conclude,  that  the  same 
Wisdom,  Power,  and  Goodness,  which  we  find 
so  visibly  manifested  in  the  structure  and  opera* 
tions  of  all  the    animals   that  are  under  our 
eyes  and  inspection,  have  equal  place  and  are 
equally  conspicuous,  when  brought  into  view,  in 
the   marine   and  other  aquatic  animals.     We 
know  by  experience  that  a  large  portion  of  them 
are  of  the  greatest  benefit  to  mankind,  and  the 
rest,  from  the  gigantic  shark  to  the  pigmy  min- 
now, each  in  their  place,  and  engaged  in  the 
fulfilment  of  their  several  functions,  are,  we  may 
conclude,  equally  beneficial,  though  in  a  way 
that  we  cannot  fully  appreciate. 

I  have  had  more  than  one  occasion  to  enlai^ 
upon  some  of  those  parts  of  the  history  of  fishes 


*  Scomber  Scombrus.  ^  Trigla  Oumardus, 

^  Mullus,  ♦  Perca. 


FISHES.  395 

with  which  we  are  acquainted,^  I  shall  there- 
fore only  add  here  some  particulars  with  respect 
to  the  habits  of  a  few  individuals  which  may 
throw  some  light  upon  their  history. 

Amongst  the  Cyclostomous  Cartilagineans  the 
hag  is  distinguished  by  a  singular  means  of 
escape  from  its  enemies.  This  animal  adheres 
to  fishes  by  creating  a  vacuum  by  means  of 
its  lips;  this  effected,  it  lacerates  them  with 
its  teeth,  without  their  being  able  to  shake  it  off, 
and  then,  like  the  leech,  it  sucks  their  blood  and 
juices;  but  since,  when  thus  fixed  and  em- 
jJoyed,  it  might  easily  become  the  prey  of 
other  fishes,  Providence  has  enabled  it  to  con- 
ceal itself  fipom  them,  by  means  of  the  excre- 
ment which,  when  in  danger,  it  emits,  and 
which  remains  for  a  time  near  it,  detained  by 
the  slime  which  exudes  from  its  pores.  This 
is  so  abundant  that  Kalm,  having  put  one  in 
a  lai^e  tub  of  sea  water,  it  became  like  a  clear 
transparent  glue,  from  which  he  could  draw 
threads,  even  moving  the  animal  with  them. 
A  second  water,  upon  its  being  again  immersed, 
in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  became  the  same.  Sir 
£.  Home  was  of  opinion  that  these  animals  are 
hermaphrodites. 

Amongst  all  the  diversified  faculties,  powers, 

«  Vol.  I.  106—124. 


396  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

and  organs,  with  which  Supreme  Wisdom  has 
gifted  the  members  of  the  animal  kingdom  to 
defied  themselves  from  their  enemies,  or  to  se- 
cure for  themselves  a  due  supply  of  food,  none 
are  more  remarkable  than  those  by  which  they 
can  givef  them  an  electric  shock,  and  arrest 
them  in  their  course,  whether  they  are  assailants 
or  fugitives.    That  God  should  arm  certain^Aef, 
in  some  sense,  with  the  lightning  of  the  clouds^ 
and  enable  them  thus  to  employ  an  element 
so  potent  and  iiresistible,  as  we  do  gunpowder, 
to  astound,  and  smite,  and  stupify,  and  kiU 
the  inhabitants  of  the  waters,  is  one  of  those 
wonders  of  an  Almighty  arm  which  ao  terrestrial 
animal  is  gifted  to  exhibit.    For  though  some 
quadrupeds,  as  the  cat,  are  known,  at  certain 
times,  to  accumulate  the  electric  fluid  in  their 
fur,  so  as  to  give  a  slight  shock  to  the  hand  that 
strokes  them,  it  has  never  been  clearly  aflce^ 
tained  that  they  can  employ  it  to  arrest  or 
bewilder  their  prey,  so  as  to  prevent  their  es- 
cape.   Even  man  himself,  though  he  can  charge 
his  batteries  with  this  eliement,  and  again  dis- 
chiirge  them,  has  not  yet  so  subjected  it  to 
his  dominion,  as  to  use  it  independently  of  othtf 
substances,  offensively  and  defensively,  as  the 
electric  fishes  do. 

The  fishes  hitherto  ascertained  to  possess  this 
power  belong  to  the  genera  Te/rodem,  Triehi- 


FISH£S.  307 

vmSf  Malapterurus,  Gymnotus^^  and  Raia.^    The 
most  remarkable  are  the  three  last. 

The  &culty  of  the  Torpedo  to  benumb  its 
prey  was  known  to  Aristotle,'  and  Pliny  furthei 
states,:*  that  conscious  of  its  power,  it  hides 
itself  in  the  mud,  and  benumbs  the  unsuspecting 
fishes  that  swim  over  it.  The  Arabians,  when 
they  cultivated  the  sciences  so  successfully, 
had  observed  this  faculty  both  in  the  Torpedo 
tad  the  Malapterurus,  and  perceiving  an  affinity 
between  the  electric  fluid  of  the  heavens  and 
that  of  these  fishes,  called  them  Raash,^  a  name 
Hgnifying  thunder. 

The  electric  organ  in  the  Malapterurus^  ex- 
tends all  round  the  animal,  immediately  under 
the  skin,  and  is  formed  of  a  mass  of  cellular 
tissue,  so  condensed  and  thick  as,  at  first,  to 
h)ok  like  bacon ;  closely  examined,  it  is  found  to 
consist  of  tendinous  fibres,  which  are  interlaced 
together,  so  as  to  form  a  net  work,  the  cells 
of  which  are  filled  with  a  gelatino-albuminous 
substance,  the  whole  accompanied  by  a  nervous 
System,  difiering  from  that  of  the  Torpedo  and 
Electric-eel,  and  similar  to  that  of  other  fishes  J 

>  Tlie  trivial  name  of  the  first  four  of  these  species   is 
electricus, 

*  R,  Torpedo.  3  Hist.  An.  L  ix.  c.  37. 

*  Hist.  Nat.  L  ix.  c.  42.  *  Heb.  wri 

^  Silunu.  L.  7  Geoff.  St.  Hil.  Ann.  du  Mat.  i.  402. 


398  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

This  organ  is  divided  into  two  portions  by  a 
longitudinal  septum. 

The  Torpedo  is  the  most  celebrated  of  the 
electric  fishes.  In  this  the  organ  of  its  power 
extends,  on  each  side,  from  the  head  and  gills  to 
the  abdomen,  in  which  space  it  fills  all  the 
interior  of  the  body.  Each  organ  is  attached  to 
the  parts  that  surround  it,  by  a  cellular  mem- 
brane and  by  tendinous  fibres.  Under  the  skin 
which  covers  the  upper  part  of  these  organs,  are 
two  bands,  one  above  the  other,  the  upper  one 
consisting  of  longitudinal  fibres,  and  the  lower  of 
transverse  ones.  The  latter  continues  itself  in 
the  organ  by  means  of  a  great  number  of  mem- 
branous elongations,  which  form  many-sided 
vertical  bodies,  or  hollow  polygonal  tubes,  some 
hexagonal,  others  pentagonal,  and  others  quad- 
rangular ;  each  of  these  tubes  is  divided,  inter- 
nally, by  a  fine  membrane  into  several  dissepi- 
ments, connected  by  blood-vessels.  In  each  of 
the  organs,  from  two  hundred  to  twelve  hun- 
dred of  these  tubes  have  been  counted  in  in- 
dividuals of  different  age  and  size,  some  regular 
but  others  irregular,  which  may  form  electric 
batteries.  Each  organ  is  also  traversed  by  ar- 
teries, veins,  and  nerves,  in  every  direction, 
which  last  are  remarkable  for  their  size.  The 
tubes,  like  those  above  mentioned,  are  also 
found  in  the  non-electric  Rays,  but  these  termi- 
nate in  pores  without  the  skin,  which  are  so 


FISHES.  399 

many  excretory  organs  of  the  matter  contained 
in  their  interior ;  in  the  Torpedo,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  tubes  are  completely  closed,  not  only 
by  the  skin  which  is  no  where  perforated,  but 
further  by  the  aponeuroses,  or  tendinous  ex- 
pansions of  the  muscles,  which  extend  all  over 
the  electric  organ;  the  gelatinous  matter  not 
being  able  to  expand  itself  externally,  is  forced 
to  accumulate  in  these  tubes,  from  whence 
doubtless  arises  their  size  and  their  progressive 
numerical  increase.  The  two  surfaces  of  the 
electric  organ  are  supposed  to  be  one  positive 
and  the  other  negative.  Reaumur  observed  that 
the  back  of  the  animal  is  rather  convex,  but 
when  about  to  strike  its  convexity  diminishes, 
and  it  becomes  concave,  but  after  the  stroke 
it  resumes  its  convexity.  These  organs  not  only 
affect  the  animals  upon  which  they  act,  by 
an  agency  imperceptible  to  the  eye,  but  they  are 
also  stated  to  emit  sparks ;  and  they  can  strike 
at  some  distance,  as  well  as  by  immediate  con- 
tact. The  author  last  named  put  a  torpedo  and 
a  duck  into  a  vessel  filled  with  sea  water,  and 
covered  it  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  latter, 
which,  after  about  three  hours,  was  found  dead. 
These  wonderful  and  complex  organs,  and  their 
many-phialed  batteries,  the  effect  of  which  has 
attracted  the  notice  of  scientific  men  for  so  long 
a  period,  were  doubtless  given  to  these  animals 
by  their  Creator,  in  lieu  of  the  offensive  and 


400  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

defensive  arms  which  enable  the  rest  of  tktir 
tribe  to  act  the  part  assigned  to  them,  that  thejr 
might  procure  the  means  of  subeistenoe,  and  to 
defend  themselves  when  in  danger.  Ahnost 
always  concealed  in  the  mud,  like  most  of 
the  rays^  they  can  by  this  weapon  kill  the  small 
fishes  that  come  within  the  sphere  of  thdr 
action,  or  benumb  the  large  ones ;  if  they  are 
in  danger  of  attack  £rom  any  voracious  fish, 
they  can  disable  him  by  invisible  blows,  more  to 
be  dreaded  than  the  teeth  of  .the  shark  itsdf. 

The  Gymnotus,  or  electric  ed,  is  a  still  mitfe 
tremendous  assailant,  both  of  the  inhabitants  of 
its  own  element,  and  even  of  large  quadmpeds, 
and  of  man  himself  if  he  puts  himsdf  in  iti 
way.  Its  force  is  said  to  be  ten  times  greater 
than  that  of  the  torpedo.  This  animal  is  a 
native  of  South  America.  In  the  imm^ifle 
plains  of  the  Llanos,  in  the  province  of  Ca- 
raccas,  is  a  cit;y  called  Calabozo,  in  the  vicaaity 
of  which  these  eels  abound  in  small  streams, 
insomuch  that  a  road  formerly  much  irequented 
was  aband(med  on  account  of  them,  it  beiag 
necessary  to  cross  a  rivulet  in  which  many  maks 
were  annually  lost  in  consequence  of  their  ait* 
tack.  They  are  also  extremely  oonunofi  in 
every  pond  from  the  equator  to  the  9th  d^;ree 
of  north  latitude. 

Contrary  to  what  takes  place  in  the  torpedo, 
the  electric  organs  of  the  Gymnotu$  are  placed 


PISHES.  401 

wider  the  tot/,  in  a  place  removed  from  the  vital 
enes.  It  has/oter  of  these  organs,  two  lafge  and 
tiro  small,  which  occupy  a  third  of  the  whole 
fish :  each  of  the  larger  organs  extends  from  the 
abdomen  to  the  tail ;  they  are  separated  from 
each  other  above  by  the  dorsal  muscles,  in  the 
middle  of  the  body  by  the  natatory  vesicle,  and 
below  by  a  particular  septum.  The  small 
oigans  lie  over  the  gre&t  ones,  finishing  almost 
at  the  same  point;  they  are  pyramidal,  and 
separated  from  the  others  by  memlnrane.  The 
interior  of  all  these  organs  presents  a  great 
number  of  horizontal  septa,  cut  at  right  angles 
by  others  nearly  vertical.  John  Hunter  counted 
thirty-four  in  one  of  the  great  organs,  and  four- 
teen in  one  of  the  small  ones,  in  the  same  indi- 
vidual. The  vertical  septa  are  membranous, 
and  so  close  to  each  other  that  they  appear  to 
touch.  It  is  by  this  vast  quadruple  apparatus, 
which  sometimes  in  these  animals  is  calculated 
to  equal  one  hundred  and  twenty-three  square 
feet  of  surface,  that  they  can  give  such  violent 
shocks.  Mr.  Nicholson  thought  that  the  Gym- 
mrtus  could  act  as  a  battery  of  1,125  square  feet. 
Humboldt  says  that  its  galvanic  electricity 
produces  a  sensation  which  might  be  called 
spedficaUy  different  from  that  which  the  con- 
ductor of  an  electric  machine,  or  the  Ley- 
den  phial,  or  the  pile  of  Volta,  cause.  From 
placing  his  two  feet  on  one  of  these  fishes  just 

VOL.  II.  D  I) 


402  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

taken  out  of  the  water,  he  received  a  shock 
more  violent  and  alarming  than  he  ever  expe- 
rienced from  the  discharge  of  a  large  L^den 
jar ;  and  for  the  rest  of  the  day  he  felt  an  acute 
pain  in  his  knees,  and  almost  all  his  joints. 
Such  a  shack,  he  thinks,  if  the  animal  passed 
over  the  breast  and   the  abdomai,  might  be 
mortal.    It  is  stated  that  when  the  animal  is 
touched  with  only  one  hand  the  shock  is  y&j 
slight ;  but  when  two  hands  are  applied  at  a 
sufficient  distance,  a  shock  is  sometimes  given  so 
powerful  as  to  affect  the  arms  with  a  pantyais 
for  many  years.    It  is  said  that  females,  under 
the  influence  of  a  nervous  fever,  are  not  affected. 
Humboldt  gives  a  very  spirited  account  of  the 
manner  of  taking  this  animal,  which  is  done  by 
compelling  twenty  or  thirty  wild  horses  and 
mules  to  take  the  water.    The  Indians  soirouwl 
the  basin  into  which  they  are  driven,  armed 
with  long  canes,  or  harpoons ;  some  mount  the 
trees  whose  branches  hang  over  the  water,  aU 
endeavouring  by  their  cries  and  >  instroments  to 
keep  the  horses  from  escapuig :  for  a  long  time 
the  victory  seems  doubtful,  or  to  incline  to  ib» 
fishes.    The  mules,  disabled  by  the  frequency 
and  force  of  the  shocks,  disappear  under  die 
water ;  and  some  horses,  in  ^ite  of  the  aclife 
vigilance  of  the  Indians,  gain  the  banks,  md 
overcome   by  fatigue,  and   benumbed    by  the 
shocks  thev  have  encountered,  stretch  tfaMi- 


FISHES.  403 

8ely€s  at  their  length  on  the  ground.  There 
could  noty  says  Humboldt,  be  a  finer  subject  for 
a  painter:  groups  of  Indians  surrounding  the 
bistn ;  the  horses,  with  their  hair  on  end,  and 
teatior  and  agony  in  their  eyes,  endeayouring  to 
esci^e  the  tempest  that  has  overtaken  them ; 
the  eels,  yellowish  and  livid,  looking  like  great 
aquatic  s^pents,  swimming  on  the  surface  of 
the  water  in  pursuit  of  their  enemy. 

In  a  few  minutes  two  horses  were  already 
drowned:  the  eel,   more  than  five  feet  long, 
gliding  under  the  belly  of  the  horse  or  mule, 
made  a  discharge  of  its  electric  battery  on  the 
whole  extent,  attacking  at  the  same  instant  the 
heart  and  the  viscera.    The  animals^  stupified 
by  theae  repeated  shocks,  fedl  into  a  pcolbuwl 
lethargy,  and,  deprived  of  all  sense,  sink  under 
the  water,  when  the  other  horses  and  mules 
passing  over  their  bodies,  they  are  soon  drowned. 
The    Gh/nmoti   having   thus    discharged   their 
accumtnlation  of  the  electric  fluid,  now  become 
harmless,  and  are  no  longer  dreaded:  swim- 
ming half  out  of  the  water,  they  flee  from  the 
horses  instead  of  attacking  them ;  and  if  they 
enter  it  the  day  after  the  battle,  they  are  not 
molested,  for  these  fishes  require  repose  and 
plenty  of  food  to  enable  them  to  accumulate 
a  sufficient  supply  of  their  galvanic  electricity. 
It  is  probable  that  they  can  act  at  a  distance, 
and  that  their  electric  shock  can  be  communi- 


406  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

crosses  the  paddy  Ifields  from  one  creek  to  ano- 
ther, often  a  quarter  of  a  mile  asunder.  The 
Chinese  told  him  that  this  was  done  by  means 
of  a  kind  of  leg. 

I  shall  close  this  history  of  Fishes  with  some 
account  of  the  tribe  to  which  the  ^hing-Jrog^ 
belongs.  I  have  b^ore  alluded  to  their  connec- 
tion with  the  Reptiles  f  in  some  points  also  they 
look  to  the  rays  and  the  sharks.  The  attenuated 
tail  of  all,'  and  the  enormous  swallow  of  others/ 
give  them  this  resemblance,  especially  to  the 
first,  so  that  the  French  call  them  ^shing-r^ys*^ 
The  best  known  of  them  is  that  called,  by  way 
of  eminence,  the  fishing-frog .  This  is  a  laiige 
fish,  sometimes  seven  feet  long ;  it  is  found  in  all 
the  JBuropean  seas,  and  is  often  called  the  sea- 
devil.  "  This  fish,"  says  Lacepede,  "  having 
neither  defensive  arms  in  its  integuments,  nor 
force  in  its  limbs,  nor  celerity  in  swimming,  is, 
in  spite  of  its  bulk,  constrained  to  have  recourse 
to  stratagem  to  procure  its  subsistence,  and  to 
confine  its  chase  to  ambuscades,  for  which  its 
conformation  in  other  respects  adapts  it.  It 
plunges  itself  in  the  mud,  covers  itself  with  sea- 
weed, conceals  itself  amongst  the  stones,  and  lets 
no  part  of  it  be  perceived  but  the  extremity  of 

^  Lopkius  Pucator.  <  See  above,  p.  389. 

3  Plate  XIII.  Fio.  1,3.  ♦  Ibid.  Fig.  3. 

*  Raie  picheresse. 


FISH£S.  407 

the  filaments  that  fringe  its  body,  which  it 
estates  in  different  directions,  so  as  to  make 
them  appear  like  worms  or  other  baits.  The 
fishes,  attracted  by  this  apparent  prey,  ap- 
proach, and  are  absorbed  by  a  single  move- 
ment of  the  fishing-fh^,  and  swallowed  by  his 
eiuNrmous  throat,  where  they  are  retained  by  the 
innumerable  teeth  with  which  it  is  armed« 
Another  animal  of  this  tribe  is  furnished  only 
with  a  single  bait,  just  above  the  mouth."  ^ 

We  see  by  this  singular  contrivance  that 
fertility  of  expedient  by  which  the  Beneficence, 
and  Wisdom,  and  Power  of  the  Creator  have 
remedied  the  seeming  defects,  which  appear 
incident  to  almost  every  animal  form.  If  it 
cannot  pursue  and  overtake  and  seize  its  prey, 
it  is  enabled,  as  in  the  case  of  the  electric  fishesy 
the  Jly'shooteTf  and  iheJUhing-frogSf  in  a  way  we 
should  not  expect,  to  ensure  its  subsistence ;  and 
while  it  is  doing  this,  discharging,  if  I  may  so 
speak,  its  official  duty,  and  acting  that  part,  on 
its  own  theatre,  by  which  it  best  contributes  to 
the  general  welfare. 

Doubtless  the  infinite  forms  of  the  Class  we 
are  considering,  that  inhabit  the,  so  called, 
element  of  water,  and  of  which  probably  we 
may  still  be  unacquainted  with  a  very  large  pro- 

1  Malthus  VespertiliOy  Plate  XIII.  Fig.  1,  2,  a. 


408  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

portion,  all  bear  the  same  relation  to  each  other, 
and  are  organized  with  a  view  to  a  similar  action 
upon  each  other,  that  we  see  takes  place  upon 
the  earth.  There  are  predaceous  fishes  to  keep 
the  aquatic  population  of  every  description  within 
due  limits ;  there  are  others  whose  office  it  is  to 
remove  nuisances  arising  from  putrescent  sub- 
stances, whether  animal  or  vegetable ;  and  lastly, 
there  are  others  which,  like  our  herds  and  flocks, 
are  peaceful  and  gregarious,  and  graze  the 
herbage  of  sea- weeds  that  cover  the  ocean's  bed. 
All  these,  in  their  several  stations,  and  by  their 
several  operations,  glorify  their  Almighty  Author 
by  fulfilling  his  will. 


409 


Chapter  XXII. 

Functions  and  Instincts.     Reptiles. 

In  the  whole  sphere  of  animals,  there  are  none, 
that,  from  the  earliest  ages,  have  been  more 
abhorred  and  abominated,  and  more  repudiated 
aft  miclean  and  hateful  creatures,  than  the  majo- 
rity of  the  Class  we  are  next  to  enter  upon, — 
that  of  Reptiles.  One  Order  *  of  them,  indeed, 
consisting  of  the  turtles  and  tortoises,  and  some 
individuals  belonging  to  another,^  are  exempted 
from  this  sentence,  and  are  regarded  with  more 
favourable  eyes ;  but  the  rest  either  disgust  us 
by  their  aspect,  or  terrify  us  by  their  supposed 
or  real  power  of  injury. 

In  Scripture,  the  serpent ;  the  larger  Saurians^ 
under  the  names  of  the  dragon  and  leviathan ; 
and  frogs  are  employed  as  symbols  of  the  evil 
spirit,  of  tyrants  and  persecutors,  and  of  the 
false  prophets  that  incite  them.' 

*  The  Ckelonians. 

<  The  Geckoy  Monitor,  Chamaleon,  &c.  amongst  the  Sau- 
rians. 

»  Joby  xli.  34 ;  Psl.  xxvii.  1  ;  Ezek.  xxv.  3 ;  Rev.  xx.  2, 
xvi.  13. 


410  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Yet  these  animals  exhibit  several  extraor- 
dinary characters  and  qualities.  They  are 
endued  with  a  degree  of  vivaciousness  that 
no  others  possess:  they  can  endure  dismem- 
berments and  privations  which  would  expel  the 
vital  principle  firom  any  creature  in  existence 
except  themselves.  Their  life  is  not  so  concen- 
trated in  the  brain,  which  with  them  is  ex- 
tremely minute,  but  seems  more  expanded  over 
the  wh<de  of  their  nervous  system  :  take  out 
thear  brain  or  their  heart,  and  cut  off  their  head, 
yet  they  can  still  move,  and  the  heart  wiU  eyen 
beat  many  hours  after  extraction ;  it  is  also  stated 
that  they  can  live  without  food  £eNr  months,  and 
even  years.^ 

But  though  gifted  by  their  Creator  with  snch 
a  tenacity  o£  life^  yet  is  that  life  often  raised  a 
very  few  degrees  above  death.  Many  of  them 
select  for  their  retreats  damp  and  gloomy  car 
vems  and  vaults,  shut  out  from  the  access  of  the 
light  and  air.  In  allusioa  to  this  circumstance, 
Babylon,  the  imperied  city,  she,  who  in  ancient 
times  subjected  the  eastern  world  to  her  d<»mna- 
tion,  was  forewarned  that  she  should  heeom 
heaps,  and  a  dwdling-place  for  dragons.' 

Whether  the  many  instances  that  have  been 
recorded  in  different  countries,  of  toads  found 


1  Cuv.  Rhgn.  An,  ii.  1.  8.     Lacep.  QwuL.  Ovipar.  i.  20. 
«  Jerem,  li.  37. 


REPTILES.  4 1 1 

alive  in  blocks  of  stone  or  marble, 
or  in  trunks  of  trees,  are  all  to  be  accounted  for 
by  supposing  a  want  of  accurate  observation  ct 
the  concomitant  circumstances  in  those  that 
witnessed  their  discovery,  I  will  not  take  upon 
me  to  say ;  but  they  are  so  numerous,  as  to  leave 
some  doubt  upon  the  mind  whether  some  of  these 
oreatures  may  not  have  been  accidentally  in* 
terred  alive,  as  it  were,  when  in  a  torpid  state, 
and  continued  so,  till,  their  grave  being  opened, 
and  the  air  admitted  to  their  lungs  again,  th^ir 
vital  functions  have  been  resumed,  to  the  asto- 
niflhment  of  those  who  witnessed  the  seeming 
miracle.  Though  so  given  to  withdraw  them- 
sdves  into  dark  and  dismal  retreats,  yet  many  of 
them  are  fond  also  of  basking  in  the  sun-beam, 
particularly  the  serpents  and  the  lizards. 

Zoologists  seem  not  even  yet  fully  to  have 
made  up  their  minds  with  regard  to  the  classifica- 
tion of  Reptiles.  linn^  placed  them  in  the  same 
Class  ^  with  the  Cartilaginaus  Fishes,  of  which 
they  form  his  first  and  second  Orders ;  but  sub- 
sequent zoologists,  with  great  propriety,  have 
generally  considered  them  as  forming  a  Class  by 
themselves,  under  their  primeval  name  of  Rep- 
tiles. This  Class  M.  Brongniart  divided  into  four 
Orders,  viz.  Cbehnians^  Saurians^  OpiidianSf  and 
Batrachians:  and  Baron  Cuvier  has  followed 

^  Amphibia, 


412  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

this  arrangement  in  his  Rhgne  Animal.  La- 
treille,  adopting  the  Group,  has  divided  it  into 
two  Classes,  Reptiles  and  Amphibians.  The 
Reptiles  he  considers  as  forming  two  Sub-classes, 
viz*  Cataphracta^  containing  the  ChelonianSj  and 
Crocodiles^  and  Squamosa^  containing  the  re- 
maining Saurians  and  the  Ophidians.  His  se- 
cond Class,  the  Amphibians^  consisting  of  the 
Batrachians  of  Brongniart,  with  the  addition  of 
the  ProteuSf  Siren,  &c.  he  divides  into  two 
Tribes,  viz.  Caducibranchiaj  or  the  proper  Ba- 
trachiansy  and  Perennibranchia,  or  the  Proteus^ 
Siren,  Axolot,  &c.  This  classification  is  adopted 
by  Dr.  Grant,*  except  that  he  does  not  sub- 
divide the  Reptiles  into  two  Sub-classes ;  and 
Latreille's  two  Tribes  of  Amphibians  he  pro- 
perly denominates  Orders. 

That  Reptiles,  in  the  larger  sense  of  the  term, 
form  a  natural  Group,  will  be  generally  admitted, 
when  it  is  considered  that  the  salamanders,  or 
naked  efts,  evidently  connect  the  Batrachians 
with  the  Saurians,  and  were  formerly  considered 
as  a  kind  of  lizard;  it  seems  to  me  therefore 
more  consistent  with  nature  to  consider  the 
Reptiles  as  forming  a  single  Class. 

This  opinion  has  received  strong  confirmation 
from  a  circumstance  communicated  to  me  by 
my  kind  friend  Mr.  Owen,  well  known  as  one  of 

*  Outlines  of  a  Course  of  Lectures,  &c.  14 — 16. 


REPTILES.  413 

our  most  eminent  comparative  anatomists.  In 
a  letter  received  from  him,  since  I  wrote  the 
preceding  paragraph,  in  reply  to  some  queries 
I  had  addressed  to  him,  he  says, — '^  I  lose  no 
time  in  replying  to  your  very  welcome  letter, 
because  I  have  a  statement  to  make  which 
justifies  your  disinclination  to  regard  the  Rep- 
tilia  of  Cuvier  as  including  two  distinct  Classes. 
Not  any  of  the  Batrachia  have  a  single  auricle ; 
for  though  the  venous  division  of  the  heart  has 
a  simple  exterior,  it  is  in  reality  divided  inter- 
nally into  two  separate  auricles,  receiving  respec- 
tively, the  one,  the  carbonized  blood  of  the 
general  system,  the  other  and  smaller,  the 
aerated,  or  vital,  blood  from  the  lungs.  This  I 
have  found  to  be  the  case  successively  in  the 
frog  and  toad,  the  salamander  and  newt,  and 
lastly,  in  the  lowest  of  the  true  Amphibia,  the 
Siren  lacertina,  which  in  its  persistent  external 
branchiae  comes  nearest,  I  apprehend,  to  the 
Fishes." 

By  this  statement  it  appears  that  those  cha- 
racters, which  have  been  deemed  sufQcient  to 
warrant  the  division  of  the  Reptiles  into  two 
distinct  Classes,  exist  only  in  appearance.  I 
shall  consider  them  therefore  as  forming  only 
anCj  of  which  the  following  seem  to  constitute  the 
principal  diagnostics. 


414  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Reptilia.     (Rqptil€$.) 

Animal^  yertebrated,  oviparous,  or  ovormpa- 
rous.     Eggs^  hatched  without  incubation. 

Hearty  really  biauriculate,  though  in  some  t^ 
auricles  are  not  extemaUjf  divided.  Bloody  red, 
partially  oxygenated,  cold. 

Braifiy  very  small;  vitality ^  in  s<»ne  degree, 
independent  of  it. 

Integumenty  various. 

As  the  two  Orders  into  which  the  Batra* 
chians  of  Cuvier  are  divided  by  Dr.  Grant, 
differ  from  the  rest  of  the  Class  not  only  in  their 
respiratory  organs,  but  also  in  other  important 
particulars,  indicating  that  they  form  a  group  of 
greater  value  than  the  other  three  Cuvieriaa 
Orders,  I  shall  therefore  consider  the  Class  of 
Reptiles  as  further  divided  into  two  Sui-daMs, 
which  I  propose  to  denominate,  from  the  differ* 
ence  of  their  integument,  MaUtcodennm  and 
Scleroderma. 

Sub-doss  1. — Reptilia  Malacaderma,  (Softr 
coated  Reptiles).  Heart,  with  two  auricles, 
externally  simple,  but  internally  divided.  Inte^ 
gumentf  soft,  naked.  Eggs,  impregnated,  $fitr 
extrusion. 

This  Sub^class  consists  of  the  two  Orders 
called,  by  Latreille  and  Dr.  Grant,  as  above 
stated,  Caducibranchia  and  Perennibranchia ;  but 
considering  the  Reptiles  as  forming  a  single 


REPTILES.  415 

Class,  for  the  sake  of  concinnity  of  nomenclature, 
I  think  it  would  be  better  to  restore  to  the  first 
their  old  name  of  Batrachians ;  and,  as  the 
animals  that  form  the  second,  as  Cuvier  observes, 
are  the  only  true  Amphihians^^  to  distinguish 
them  by  the  name  that  strictly  belongs  to  them 
alone. 

Suk^class  2. — Reptilia  Sclerodervm.  (Hard- 
coated  Reptiles).  Hearty  with  twa  auricles. 
Integument f  hard,  often  scaly.  EggSy  impreg- 
nated lefore  extrusion. 

Orders. 

Sub-class  1.  Sub-class  2. 

1.  Amphibians,  3.  Ophidians. 

2.  Batrachians,  4.  Saurians. 

5.  Chelanians, 

Order  1 . — Amphibians.  (Siren^  ProleuSy  Ax- 
oloty  &c.) 

Respiration^  double,  by  gills  in  the  water,  and 
by  pulmonary  sacs  in  the  air.    Gills^  permanent. 


Order  2. — Satraehians.  (Amphiuma^  Triton 
or  Water-newty  Salamafnder^  Toad^  Frogy  &c.) 

Respiration^  at  first  by  gills^  and  afterwards 
by  lungs.  Gillsy  tCToporary.  Ribs^  rudim^ital. 
Li^Sy  four.    Undergoes  a  m£tammphosis. 


^  R^gne  Anim,  ii.  117. 


416  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Order  3. — Ophidians.    (Snakes  and  Serpents.) 

Body^  covered  with  scales,  without  legs.  Ribsy 
moveable.  Mouthy  armed  with  teeth.  Cad 
their  skin. 

Order  4, — Saurians.  (Two-footed  and  four- 
footed  LizardSi  of  various  kinds;  Crocodiles, 
Alligatorsy  &c.) 

Body^  covered  with  scales^  or  scaly  grains^  ter- 
minating in  a  tail.  Rihsy  moveable;  nunUK 
armed  with  teeth.     Legs^  2  —4. 

Order  5. — Chelonians.  (Turtles  and  Tor- 
toises.) 

Body  J  protected  above  by  a  carapace^  or  shield, 
formed  by  the  ribs,  and  below  by  a  plastron,  or 
dilated  sternum.  Mouthy  without  teeth.  Man- 
dibles y  rostriform.     Legs  or  paddles ,  four. 

Though  the  Malacoderniy  or  soft-coated  Rep- 
tiles, appear  the  legitimate  successors  of  the 
Fishes,  yet  there  are  some  others  in  the  higher 
Orders  that  seem  to  lead  off  towards  them  also, 
for  the  Ophidians  and  Apod  fishes  evidently 
tend  towards  each  other.  The  Coeciliay  or  blind 
serpent,  too,  is  almost  uniauriculate,  and  has 
only  some  transverse  rows  of  scales  between  the 
wrinkles  of  its  skin.^ 

From  this  statement,  it  seems  that  1)ie  Class 
of  Reptiles  is  connected  with  the  Fishes,  not  by 
those  at  the  top  of  the  latter  Class,  but  by  those 

.*  R^gne  Anim.  ii.  99. 


REPTILES.  4]7 

at  its  base ;  with  the  Osseans  by  the  Apods,  and 
with  the  Cartilagineans  by  the  Cyclostomes ;  so 
that  they  may  be  almost  regarded  as  forming  a 
parallel  line  with  them,  instead  of  succeeding 
them  in  the  same  series.  Even  the  proper 
Batrachians  seem  to  tend  to  the  Chelonians, 
while  the  Salamanders  look  to  the  Saurians. 

The  great  body  of  the  Class  are  predaceous, 
subsisting  upon  various  small  animals,  espe- 
cially insects,  and  some  Ophidians  upon  large 
ones;  but  the  Chelaniatts  seem  principally  to 
derive  their  nutriment  from  marine  and  other 
vegetables,  though  some  of  these  will  devour 
Molluscans,  worms,  and  small  reptiles:  the 
Trianyx  ferox  will  attack  and  master  even 
aquatic  birds.  Cuvier  says,  afker  Catesby,  that 
the  common  Igwina  subsists  upon  fruit,  grain,, 
and  leaves.  Bosc  states  that  it  lives  principally 
upon  insects ;  and  that  it  often  descends  from  the 
trees  after  earth-worms  and  small  reptiles^ 
which  it  swallows  whole/ 

Order  1 . — ^The  Siren^  or  Mud-iguana^  occupies 
the  first  place  in  this  Order,  and  seems  to  con- 
nect with  the  Apod  and  Cyclostomous  Fishes, 
from  which  it  is  distinguished  by  its  gills  in 
three  tufts,  and  by  having  only  one  pair  of  legs. 
It  appears  to  be  an  animal  useful  to  man,  since 

*  Rign.  An.  ii.  44.     N.  D.  D'H.  N.  xvi.  413. 
VOL.  II.  E  E 


418  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

it  is  stated  to  frequent  marshes,  iu  Carolina,  in 
which  rice  is  cultivated,  where  it  subsists  upon 
earth-worms,  insects,  and  other  similar  noxioua 
creatures* 

But  of  all  the  animals  which  God  hath  cre- 
ated to  work  his  will,  as  far  as  they  are  known 
to  us,  none  is  more  remarkable,  both  for  its  situ- 
ation and  many  of  its  characters,  than  (uie  to 
which  I  have  before  adverted,^  as  affording  some 
proof,  that  the  waters  under  the  earthy  and  other 
subterranean  cavities,  may  have  their  peculiar 
population .  The  animal  I  allude  to  is  the  Pro- 
teusy  belonging  to  the  present  Order,  which  was 
first  found  thrown  up  by  subterranean  waters 
in  Camiola,  as  we  are  informed  by  the  late  Sir 
H.  Davy,*  by  Baron  Zois.  Sir  Humphry  him- 
self appears  to  have  found  them  in  the  Grotto 
of  the  Maddalena,  at  Adelsburg,  several  hundred 
feet  below  the  surface  of  the  earth;  he  also 
states  that  they  have  been  found  at  Sittich, 
thirty  miles  distant,  and  he  supposes  that  those 
found  in  both  places  might  be  thrown  up  by 
the  same  subterranean  lake.^  In  the  year  1833 
there  were  two  living  specimens  in  the  museum 
of  the  Zoological  Society,  where  I  had  the  plea- 
sure of  seeing  them ;  and  from  one  of  them  the 
accurate  figure  at  the  end  of  this  vcdume,*  by 


»  Vol.  I.  p.  35.  «  Consolat  in  Trav.  187. 

»  Ibid.  188-^188.  *  PiATB  XIV.  Flo.  1. 


REPTILES.  419 

the  kind  permission  of  the  Society,  was  taken 
by  Mr.  C.  M.  Curtis. 

Wh^i  we  look  at  these  animals,  there  is  some- 
thing so  different  in  their  general  aspect  from  the 
tribes  to  which  they  are  most  nearly  related^  that 
the  idea  strikes  one  that  we  are  viewing  beings 
&r  removed  from  those  that  inhabit  the  surfcu^e 
of  our  globe,  and  its  waters;  which,  though 
accidentally  visiting  these  upper  regions,  may 
be  the  outsetters  of  a  population  still  further 
removed  from  our  notice,  and  dipping  deeper 
into  its  interior. 

The  Proteus  is  about  a  foot  in  length,  or 
something  more,  and  about  an  inch  in  thick- 
ness; the  body  is  cylindrical,  tapering  to  the 
tfdl ;  its  colour  is  a  pale  red ;  its  skin  is  trans- 
parent and  slimy,  so  as  easily  to  elude  the  grasp. 
It  has  four  short  slender  legs,  the  anterior  pair 
placed  just  behind  the  head,  having  three,  and 
the  posterior  pair,  which  are  shorter,  and  placed 
jnst  before  the  vent,  having  only  two  toes  with<* 
out  claws.  The  head  terminates  in  a  fiat,  very 
obtuse  muzzle,  somewhat  resembling  the  beak  of 
a  duck ;  its  maxillse  are  armed  with  teeth  ;  the 
eyes  are  extremely  minute,  and  scarcely  dis- 
cernible; they  are  concealed,  and  apparently 
rendered  useless  by  an  opaque  skin ;  but  as  this 
animal  is  «aid  to  avoid  the  light,  it  is  evident 
that  it  produces  some  effect  upon  them ;  behind 
the  head,  on  each  side,  is  an  opening  like  those 


420  FUNCTIONd  AND  IN8TINCTS. 

of  fishes,  over  which  are  the  gills,  divided  into 
several  branches.^  It  has,  besides,  an  internal 
pneumatic  apparatus,  consisting  of  two  vesicles, 
below  the  heart.  The  tail  is  compressed,  fur- 
nished above  and  below  with  a  caudal  fin,  ex- 
tending to  the  posterior  legs.  Its  l^s,  fiom 
their  having  no  claws,  are,  it  is  probable,  prin- 
cipally useful  in  walking  upon  the  mud,  and  by 
means  of  its  caudal  fin  it  can  move  like  an  eel 
or  fish  in  the  water.  From  a  small  shell-fish 
being  found  in  the  stomach  of  one,  it  seems  io 
follow  that  its  food,  at  least  in  part,  conssts  of 
MoUuscans  irihabiting  the  same  subterranean 
eaves  and  waters  with  itself,  and  probably 
distinct  from  any  of  those  to  which  the  atmos^ 
phere  has  free  access.  Sometimes,  elevating  its 
head  above  the  water,  it  makes  a  hissing  noise 
louder  than  could  be  expected  from  so  small  an 
animal. 

Before  quitting  this  subject,  I  may  observe 
that  Baron  Humboldt  has  given  an  account  of  a 
wonderful  eruption  of  subterranean  fishes^  which 
sometimes  takes  place  from  the  volcanos  of  the 
kingdom  of  Quito.  These  fishes  are  ejected  in 
the  intervals  of  the  igneous  eruptions,  in  such 
quantities  as  to  occasion  putrid  fevers  by  the 
miasmata  they  produce :  they  sometimes  issued 
from  the  crater  of  the  volcano,  and  sometimes 

«  Plate  XIV.  Fio.  1,  a. 


REPTILE8.  421 

from  lateral  clefts,  but  constantly  at  the  elevatioh 
of  between  two  and  three  thousand  toises  above 
the  leyel  of  the  sea.  In  a  few  hours,  millions 
are  seei)  to  descend  from  Cotopaxi,  with  great 
masses  of  cold  and  fresh  water.  As  they  do  not 
appear  to  be  disfigured  or  mutilated,  they  can- 
not be  exposed  to  the  action  of  great  heat. 
Humboldt  thought  they  were  identical  with 
fishes  that  were  found  in  the  rivulets  at  the  foot 
of  the  volcanos.  These  fishes  belong  to  a  genus 
separated  from  Silutms.^ 

Order  2. — This  Order  begins  with  two  genera, 
the  species  of  which  have  been  supposed  to  breathe 
by  lungs  only,  no  traces  of  gills  having  yet  been 
discovered  in  any  individual  belonging  to  them. 
Cuvier  thinks  that  they  cast  them  sooner  than 
the  salamanders.  One  of  these  is  a  large. ani- 
mal,^ being  more  than  a  yard  in  length ;  it  wat 
discovered  by  Dr.  Garden,  in  South  Carolina: 
like  the  Proteus,  its  eyes  are  covered  with  a 
thick  tunic,  and  its  toes  have  no  claws.  The 
other,^  found  in  New  York,  comes  near  the 
salamanders,  and  has  been  called  by  American 
writers  the  giant  salamander.  Both  are  found 
in  fredi-water  lakes,  and  similar  places. 

I  have  mentioned,  on  a  former  occasion,  a 
salamander  that  lays  her  eggs  singly  on  the 

1  Pimelodus,     Humboldt  names  the  species  id  question  P, 
Cyclopum,    ZooL  22. 
^  Amphiuma  means.  '  Menopoma. 


422  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

leaves  of  Persicaria^  which  she  doubles  down 
over   thein/    and   which  are  kept    fi>lded   hy 
means  of  the  glue  that  envelopes  the  egg.    Dr. 
Rusconi,   to   whom    we  are  indebted  for  this 
history,  observed   the  whole  progress  and  de- 
velopement    of  this  animal,  from   its    embryo 
state  in  the  egg.     It  is  at  first  opaque,  formed  of 
a  soft  homogeneous  substance.     Almost  as  soon 
as  it  has  escaped  from  Its  envelope,  it  beomies 
gradually  transparent,   so  that  the  successive 
developements,  both  of  its  internal  and  external 
organs,  may  be  discerned — the  heart,  and  its 
systole  and  diastole ;  the  stomach,  its  form  and 
position;    the  intestinal   canal,  which  at  first 
extends  in  a  straight  line,  from  one  end  of  the 
abdomen  to  the  other,  and  then  begins  to  undu- 
late, and  ends  by  forming  many  convolutions: 
next  may  be  seen  the  liver,  the  developement  of 
which  keeps  pace  with  that  of  the  stomach  and 
intestines ;  and  lastly  appear  the  lungs,  taking 
their  place  and  form,  always  filled  with  air,  and 
so  transparent  that  one  might  believe  the  animal 
has  on  each  side  of  the  trunk  a  bubble  of  air 
gradually  dilating  and  lengthening.    When  all 
these  organs  have  acquired  the  necessary  deve- 
lopement, the   spectator    beholds  in  the  little 
creature  the  beginning,  as  it  were,  of  its  animal 

*  Sec  above,  p.  265, 


REPTILES.  423 

life.  ItB  former  life  being  merely  organic,  re- 
sembling that  of  a  vegetable,  but  now  its  mo- 
tions are  become  the  result  of  its  sensations  and 

We  see  in  this  instance  how  exactly  the  rudi- 
ments, as  it  were,  of  the  organs  of  the  future 
animal,  are  fitted  to  respond  to  the  action  of  the 
elements  upon  them,  how  the  germe  of  every 
organ  begins,  if  I  may  so  speak,  to  vegetate,  and 
grows  till  it  is  fully  developed,  so  as  to  become 
either  a  fit  instrument  of  the  will  or  of  the  vital 
powers,  and  adapted  to  carry  the  creature 
through  all  its  destined  operations,  and  to  en- 
able and  iucline  it  to  fulfil  all  its  prescribed 
functions.  These  observations,  and  this  inte- 
resting little  history,  will  apply  to  man  himself, 
who,  in  his  embryo  state,  is  the  subject  of 
similar  developements ;  and  the  words  of  the 
divine  Psalmist  are  a  beautiful  comment  upon 
this  our  embryo  life  :  For  thou  hast  possessed  my 
reins :  thou  hast  covered  me  in  my  mother's  womb. 
My  stibstance  was  not  hid  from  thee^  when  I  was 
made  in  secret ^  and  curiously  wrought  in  the 
lowest  parts  of  the  earth.  Thine  eyes  did  see  my 
substance  yet  being  imperfect ;  and  in  thy  book  all 
my  members  were  written^  which  in  continuance 


1  Rnsconi,  in  Edinh,  Philos,  Joum.  ix.  110 — 113,  on  Sala- 
mandra  platycauda. 


424  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

wei^e  fashioned^  tvJien  as  yet  thax  was  nou€  ^ 
them} 

The  salamander^  as  is  reported,  says  Aristode;, 
if  it  goes  through  fire  extinguishes  it :'  this  is 
repeated  by  Pliny,  who  adds,  that  it  extinguishes 
it  like  ice.  It  never  appears,  he  further  observes, 
except  in  showery  weather,  and  likewise  that 
it  emits  a  milky  saliva,  which  is  depilatory.^ 
Salamanders,  says  Bosc,  emit  from  their  skin  a 
lubricating  white  fluid  when  they  are  annoyed, 
and  if  they  are  put  into  the  fire,  it  sometimes 
happens  that  this  fluid  extinguishes  it  sufficiently 
to  permit  their  escape;  and  again — when  one 
touches  the  terrestrial  salamander,  it  causes  to 
transude  from  its  skin  a  white  fluid,  which  it 
secretes  more  copiously  than  its  congeners. 
This  kind  of  milk  is  extremely  acrid,  and  pro* 
duces  a  very  painful  sensation  upon  the  tongue. 
According  to  Gesner,  it  is  an  excellent  depila- 
tory. It  is  sometimes  spirted  out  to  the  dis- 
tance of  several  inches,  as  Latreille  has  observed, 
and  difiuses  a  particularly  nauseous  scent;  it 
poisons  small  animals,  but  does  not  appear  to 
produce  serious  effects  upon  large  ones/ 

I  have  introduced  these  ancient  and  moderF 
statements  to  show  how  little  they  differ,  and  i) 
confirmation  of  the  truth  of  them  I  have  a  re 


»  P5.  cxxxix.  13—16.  a  Hx&t,  An.  lib.  v.  chap.  19. 

3  Hut.  Nat.  1.  X.  67.  ♦  N.  D.  D'H.  N.  xxx.  58,  51 


REPTILES.  426 

markaUe  occurrence  to  relate,  which  I  give 
upon  the  authority  of  three  ladies  who  witnessed 
the  fiicty  and  upon  whose  accuracy  I  can  rely. 
They  were  residing  at  Newbury,  where  their 
cdlars  were  firequented  by  frogs,  and  a  kind  of 
newt,  or  salamander,  of  a  dull  black  colour. 
Several  of  the  frogs  were  caught  one  day,  and 
put  into  a  pail;  and  while  the  ladies  were 
looking  at  them  they  were  surprised  by  ob* 
serving  the  frogs  one  after  another  turn  them* 
selves  on  their  backs,  and  lie  with  their  legs 
extended  quite  stiff  and  dead.  Upon  examinr 
ing  the  pail  they  found  one  of  these  efts,  as  they 
called  them,  running  round  very  quickly  amongst 
the  frogs,  each  of  which,  when  touched  by  it, 
died  instantaneously,  in  the  manner  above 
stated.  They  afterwards  regarded  these  efts, 
as  may  be  supposed,  with  nearly  as  much 
horror  as  they  would  a  rattlesnake ;  and  a  few 
nights  afterwards,  finding  one  in  the  kitchen, 
it  was  seized  with  the  tongs,  and  thrown  into  a 
good  fire  which  was  burning  in  the  grate.  The 
reptile,  instead  of  perishing,  slipped  like  light- 
ning through  the  coals,  and  ran  away  under  the 
fireplace  apparently  unhurt.  The  house,  in 
which  these  animals  were  found,  was  in  a  re* 
maikably  damp  situation. 

If  our  northern  salamanders  are  gifted  with 
such  powerful  means  of  offence  or  defence,  we 
know  not  how  far  those  powers  may  be  sublimed 


426  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

in  the  species  of  wanner  climates ;  and  tlie  fire- 
quenching  and  death-doing  properties  of  the 
Grecian  or  Roman  salamanders  may  approach 
nearer  to  the,  supposed,  fabulous  descriptions  of 
Aristotle  and  Pliny,  than  modem  Herpetologists 
seem  willing  to  believe. 

There  appears  no  small  analogy  between  these 
properties  considered  as  weapons,  and  means  by 
which  these  animals  eith^  secure  their  prey, 
consisting  of  earth-worms,  insects,  and  odier 
small  game,  or  disarm  and  destroy  their  enemies, 
and  those,  related  in  the  last  chapter,  which 
distinguish  the  electric  fishes. 

Spallanzani,  by  numerous  experiments,  has 
discovered  in  this  tribe  of  animals,  the  power 
of  reproducing  lost  or  mutilated  organs ;  Bcmnet 
and  others  have  confirmed  his  observations.  So 
that  it  seems  proved,  if  their  legs  and  tail  are 
cut  off,  and  even  their  eyes  plucked  out,  that  in 
a  few  months  they  will  be  reproduced ;  and  even 
a  limb  thus  renewed,  if  again  cut  off,  will  be 
reproduced  again. 

In  going  upwards  from  the  salamanders,  at 
first  sight,  we  feel  disposed  to  proceed  next  to 
the  other  animals  of  a  similar  form,  the  lizards 
and  other  Saurians,  for  this  way  their  external 
form  leads  us,  but  their  internal  organization  is 
nearer  that  of  the  frogs  and  toads.  Upon  these 
last  I  shall  not  dwell :  all  know  that  they  b^n 
life  in  the  water  like  fislies ;  that  they  are  at 


.EEPTILES.  427 

4irBt  without  legs,  or  any  instrument  of  motion 
but  a  tail,  which  by  its  undulations  from  side  to 
side  steers  the  apparently  disproportioned  body 
to  which  it  is  appended,  and  makes  its  way  with 
rapidity  through  its  native  element  Few  are 
ignorant  that  they  first  acquire  a  single  pair  of 
legs;  and  lastly,  that,  another  pair  being  also 
acquired,  they  leave  the  water  by  myriads,  and 
appear,  without  a  tail,  as  four-footed,  and,  at 
certain  times,  noisy  reptiles. 

■« 
Order  3. — ^The  general  function  of  the  Ophi- 
dians seems  connected  with  almost  the  whole 
animal  kingdom.  The  insects,  frogs,  and  other 
reptiles,  several  birds  and  beasts,  up  as  high 
as  the  rumitumt  and  even  the  camivaraus  tribes, 
become  the  prey  of  various  species.  They  act 
the  same  part  with  land  animals,  that  their  ana- 
logues, the  eels  and  other  apod  and  cyclostomous 
fishes  do  with  respect  to  those  of  the  water. 
Scmie  are  analogues  of  the  lion  and  the  tiger, 
as  the  Oriental  Python  and  the  Occidental  Boa^ 
which  sometimes  exceed  thirty  feet  in  length, 
and  are  as  thick  as  a  man's  body ;  while  others 
compete  with  the  minor  predaceous  beasts  in 
the  destruction  they  occasion  amongst  the  lesser 
quadrupeds.  But  while  the  predaceous  quad- 
rupeds, with  the  exception  of  the  Hyena,  leave 
untouched  the  skeleton  of  the  animals  they 
devour,  the  Ophidians  swallow  the  entire  ani- 


428  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

mal,  flesh  and  bone  and  skin,  and  thus  com- 
pletely remove  it  from  the  face  of  natoie; 
whereas  the  others,  where  they  abound  and  are 
unmolested,  make  their  domain  like  a  charnd 
house,  and  deform  the  earth  with  the  ghastly 
relics  of  their  cruelty  and  voracity. 

The  mechanism  of  the  mouth  of  these  animals 
is  so  contrived  by  Divine  Wisdom,  and  the 
pdeces  that  form  it  so  put  together,  as  to  enable 
them  to  twist  and  distort  and  dilate  it  so  enor^ 
mously  that  they  can  swallow  animals  bigger 
than  their  own  bodies.^  The  vertebrse  of  the 
great  Boa  are  more  numerous  than  those  of 
other  serpents,  which  gives  them  a  greater 
power  of  surrounding  and  strangling  their  prey 
with  their  dreadful  voluminous  folds,  of  crushing 
it,  and,  with  the  help  of  their  saliva,  rendering 
it  fit  for  deglutition.  With  their  tail,  likewise, 
they  can  lay  strong  hold  of  a  tree,  so  as  to 
use  it  as  a  fulcrum,  by  which  their  powers  ot 
compression  are  increased  and  rendered  mwe 
available  where  they  have  to  contend  with  the 
struggles  of  powerful  animals. 

Order  4. — The  connection  of  the  Sauria$iSf  or 
the  animals  forming  the  next  Order  with  the 
Ophidians,  is  very  intimate.  Cuvier  says  that 
many  serpents  under  the  skin  have  the  vestige  of 
a  posterior  limb,  which  in  some  shows  its  extre- 

• 

1  Cuv.  Anat,  Camp.  Hi.  90. 


REPTILES.  429 

mity  externally,  in  the  form  of  a  little  claw.^ 
Afliongst  the  lizards  is  one  that  has  only  two 
fore  legB^  and  another  that  has  only  two  hind 
ones;'  and  a  third/  in  which  the  legs  are  so 
short  and  so  distant,  and  the  body  so  slender 
and  serpentifonn,  that  they  resemble  a  snake 
with  four  legs  rather  than  a  lizard. 

This  Order  is  divided  into  numerous  genera 
and  sub-genera.  One  of  the  most  celebrated  is 
the  Chameleon.  I  have  already  noticed  some 
of  its  peculiarities,  aUd  its  mode  of  catching  the 
insects  that  form  its  food.^  The  ancients  were 
of  opinion  that  it  lived  upon  air,  led  by  the 
power  it  has  of  swelling  itself  to  twice  its  natural 
size,  by  inflating  its  vast  lungs,  when  its  body 
becomes  transparent.  Cuvier  is  of  opinion  that 
it  is  the  size  of  the  lungs  of  these  animals  that 
enables  them  to  change  their  colour,  not  in  order 
to  assume  that  of  the  bodies  on  which  they 
happen  to  be,  but  to  express  their  wants  and 
passions.  He  supposes  that  the  blood,  being 
constrained  to  approach  the  skin,  more  or  less, 
assumes  different  shades,  according  to  the  degree 
of  transparency.^  The  Rev.  L.  Guilding,  how- 
ever, mentions  another  genus,^  the  species  of 
which,  when  in  search  of  prey,  adapt  their 
colour  to  the  green  tree  or  dark  brown  rock  on 

1  R^gn.  An,  ii.  71.  ^  Chirotes,  ^  Bipes, 

♦  Seps.    See  Roget,  B.  T.  i.  448./.  210. 

^  See  above,  p.  192.        ^  Rhgn.  An,  ii.  59.        7  Anolis. 


430  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

which  they  lie  in  ambush.^  As  these  animals 
have  the  power  of  inflation,  at  least  partially, 
by  assuming  a  degree  of  transparency,  they 
may  appear  of  the  c<dour  of  the  substance  they 
are  standing  upon,  a  reibark  which  may  also 
apply  to  the  chameleon.  The  object  of  this  may 
be  to  conceal  themselves  from  their  enemies,  as 
well  as  from  their  prey. 

The  Guanas^^  also,  are  said  to  change  their 
colour;  they  are  remarkable,  as  well  as  the 
AnoliSf  for  the  kind  of  goitre  in  their  throat, 
which  when  irritated  or  excited  they  can  inflate 
to  a  large  size.  These  animals,  though  their 
flesh  is  said  to  be  unwholesome,  in  the  countries 
they  frequent  are  highly  prized  for  the  table,  and 
are  often  hunted  with  dogs.  Their  eggs  also  are 
in  request. 

The  Monitors^  or  safeguards^  as  the  French 
call  some  of  them,  deserve  notice,  because  one 
species '  is  said  to  assist  in  the  diminution  of  the 
crocodile,  since,  like  the  ichneumon,  it  devours 
its  eggs,  and  even  the  young  ones,  on  which 
account  it  is  supposed  to  be  sculptured  on  the 
monuments  of  the  ancient  Egyptians*  This 
name  was  gr^en  them  because  they  w^^  be* 
lieved  to  warn  people,  by  hissing,  of  the  ap- 
proach of  the  crocodile,  or  venomous  reptUes. 


>  Zool.  Joum.  iv.  165.  *  Iguana  vuigari$, 

3  M,  niloticus. 


BEPTILES.  431 

But  the  most  celebrated  of  the  Saurians,  from 
the  earliest  ages,  is  the  Crocodile:  its  history, 
however,  is  so  well  known  that  I  shall  only  men- 
tion a  few  circumstances,  of  less  notoriety,  con- 
nected with  it.  There  has  been  some  difference 
of  opinion  as  to  whether  the  crocodile  can  move 
the  npper  or  lower  jaw.  Aristotle  observes,  all 
animals  move  the  lower  jaw,  except  the  crocodile 
of  the  river,  for  this  animal  only  moves  the 
upper.^  Denon  says  the  same.^  Lacepede,  on  the 
contrary,  affirms  that  the  lower  jaw  is  the  only 
moveable  one.^  I  was  assured  by  Mr.  Cross, 
when  looking  at  two  alligators  in  his  menagerie, 
then  at  Charing-cross,  that  they  moved  both 
their  jaws ;  and  my  friend  Mr.  Martin  has  o1> 
served  the  same  thing  in  India.  M.  Geofiroy 
St.  Hilaire  and  Baron  Cuvier  nearly  reconcile 
the  two  opinions.  The  heod^  says  the  former, 
moves  on  the  lower  jaw  like  the  lid  of  a  snuff- 
box, that  opens  by  a  hinge.  By  this  mechanism 
they  can  elevate  their  nostrils  above  the  water, 
which  they  do  with  great  rapidity  for  conceal- 
ment :^  and  the  latter  observes,  that  the  upper 
jaw  moves  only  with  the  whole  head.^  So  that 
the  fact  seems  to  be  that  the  lower  jaw  alone 
has  motion  independent  of  the  head,  and  the 
upper  one  can  only  move  with  it :  but  when  we 

»  Hist.  An,  lib.  i.  c.  11.  *   Voyage,  &c,  i.  185. 

3  HUt.  Ov.  194.  ^  An.  du  Mus.  x.  376. 

A  JR^.  An.  ii.  18. 


432  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

consider  that  the  lower  one  extends  beyond  the 
skull,  a  condyle  of  which  acts  in  an  acetabulum 
of  that  jaw,  we  can  easily  comprehend  that  the 
upper  jaw  and  head  forming  one  piece,  may  be 
elevated  at  any  angle,  according  to  the  will  of 
the  animal;  and  thus  the  upper  one  acquires 
additional  power  of  action  in  attacking  its  prey 
in  the  water  and  securing  it. 
'  The  nostrils  of  this  animal  are  at  the  end 
of  the  muzzle,  and  this  structure  enables  it, 
by  causing  the  upper  jaw  to  emerge  a  little, 
which,  as  the  crocodile  cannot  remain  under 
water  more  than  ten  minutes,  enables  it  to 
breathe  without  exposing  itself  to  observation. 
When  on  shore  it  turns  itself  to  the  point  from 
which  the  wind  blows,  keeping  its  mouth  open. 
Adanson  relates  that  he  once  saw  in  the  Se- 
negal more  than  two  hundred  of  these  river 
monsters  swimming  together,  with  their  heads 
only  emerging,  and  resembling  so  maby  trees. 
Were  it  not  for  the  number  of  their  enemies, 
great  and  small,  their  increase  would  be  so  rapid 
that  they  would  drive  man  from  the  vicinity  of 
the  great  rivers  of  the  torrid  zone.  The  Hiver- 
horse  ^  attacks  them  and  destroys  many — Behe- 
moth against  Leviathan, — ^for  though  the  Levia- 
than of  the  Psalmist  is  clearly  a  marine  animal 
or  monster,^  that  of  Job '  is  as  clearly  the  croco- 

'  Hippopotamus.  <  PsL  civ.  26.  '  Chap.  xli. 


dile,^  and  they  are  stated  to  destroy  many  of 
them ;  even  the  feline  race,  in  some  countries, 
contrive  to  make  them  their  prey*  Though  the 
scales  that  cover  their  back  are  impervious  to  a 
musket  ball,  those  on  the  belly  are  softer  an4 
more  easily  penetrated ;  and  here  the  saw-fish, 
and  other  voracious  fishes,  find  them  vulnerable, 
and  so  destroy  them.  The  Trionyx^  also,  a  kind 
of  tortoise,  devours  them  as  soon  as  hatched^ 
Their  eggs  are  the  prey  not  only  of  the  ichT 
neumon  and  the  lizard,  before  mentioned,  but  of 
many  kinds  of  apes ;  and  aquatic  birds  also 
devour  them,  as  well  as  man  himself. 

The  crocodile  has  no  lips,  so  that  when  he 
walks  or  swims  with  great  calmness,  he  shows 
his  teeth  as  if  he  was  in  a  rage.  When  extreme 
hanger  presses  him,  he  will  swallow  stones  and 
pieces  of  wood  to  keep  his  stomach  distended. 
The  heron  and  the  pelican  are  said  to  take 
advantage  of  the  terror  which  the  sight  of  the 
crocodile  produces  amongst  the  fishes — causing 
them  to  flee  on  all  sides — to  seize  and  devour 
.them :  therefore  they  are  frequently  seen  in  iiis 
vicinity. 

iyrder  5. — The  Chelonians^  as  far  as  at  pre<> 
sent  known,  seem  far  removed  from  the  Sau'- 
rians.  The  turtles,  indeed,  in  their  paddles^ 
exhibit  an  organ  which  is  common  to  them, 

^  Vol.  i.  p.  30. 
VOL.  II.  r  F 


434  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

and  some  of  the  foeefil  Saurians,  as  the  IctJ^o- 
saurus  and  Plesiosaurus.  Cuvier  places  the 
Trionyw  next  above  the  crocodiles ;  but  it  agrees 
with  them  only  in  its  fierceness  and  TOfscity, 
and  the  number  of  its  claws. 

The  importance  of  the  highest  tribe  of  thii 
Order  to  seamen  in  long  voyages,  is  universally 
known  and  acknowledged,  but  otherwise  there  is 
nothing  particularly  interesting  in  their  history, 
or  that  of  the  tortoises. 

A  singular  circumstance  distinguishes  the  ani- 
mals of  this  Class, — ^very  few  of  them  have  teeth 
formed  for  mastication.  The  guana  is  almost 
the  only  one  amongst  the  existing  tribes  that 
has  them.  The  ChelonianS)  which  seem  ahnoet 
capable  of  living  without  food,  have  none.  The 
teeth  of  the  predaceous  tribes  are  fitted  to  re* 
tain  or  lacerate  their  prey,  but  not  to  masticate 
it;  so  that  the  function  of  the  great  majority 
appears  to  be  the  same  with  that  of  the  Ophii- 
dians  before  mentioned,  the  complete  degltttir 
tion  of  the  animals  their  instinct  compds  them 
to  devour.  InseclB,  which,  of  all  minor  animab 
are  the  most  numerous,  and  require  most  to  be 
kept  in  check,  form  the  prineipal  part  of  the 
food  oi  a  large  proportion  of  them.  Creatures 
also  that  frequent  dark  and  damp  places,  and 
that  take  shdter  under  stones  and  similar  sub- 
stances, seem  to  be  particularly  appropriated  to 
them  by  the  will  of  their  Creator.    Of  this  de- 


BIRD&.  435 

floriptioQ  are  slugs,  earth- worms,  and  several 
others :  these,  therefore,  they  have  in  charge  to 
kjsep  within  due  limits.  And  thus,  in  their 
doleful  retreats  and  hiding-places,  they  fulfil 
each  its  individual  function,  instrumental  to  the 
general  welfare. 


Chapter  XXIII. 

Punctions  and  Instincts.     Birds.  ■> 

We  are  now  arrived  at  the  highest  department 
of  the  animal  kingdom,  the  members  of  which 
are  not  only  distinguished  by  a  vertebral  co- 
lumn, but  also  by  warm  red  blood,  and  a  more 
ample  brain.  This  department  consists  of  two 
great  Classes,  viz.  those  that  are  oviparous^  and 
do  not  suckle  their  young;  and  those  that  are 
viviparoHSj  which  suckle  their  young  till  they 
are  able  to  provide  for  themselves.  The  first  of 
these  Classes  consists  of  the  Birds^  and  the  last 
of  the  Quadrupeds^  Whales j  and  Seals,  called  from 
the  above  circumstance  Mammalians.  Man, 
though  physically  belonging  to  the  latter  Class, 
metaphysically  considered,  is  placed  far  above  the 
whole  animal  kingdom,  by  being  made  in  the 
image  and  after  the  likeness  of  his  Creator,  re- 
ceiving from  him  immediately  a  reasonable  and 


436  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

immortal  soul ;  and  entrusted  by  him  with  ^kh 
minion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea^  and  over  the  find 
ofi  the  airy  and  over  every  living  thing  that  moveth 
^upon  the  earth. 

Having,  in  a  former  chapter,  given  some 
account  of  those  animals,  to  which  the  waters  of 
this  globe  are  assigned  as  their  habitation  and 
scene  of  action,  I  am  now  to  consider  those 
which  their  Creator  has  endowed  with  a  power 
denied  to  man,  and  most  of  the  Mammalians — 
that  of  moving  to  and  fro  in  the  air  as  the  fishes 
do  in  the  water,  which,  on  that  account,  though 
they  move  also  on  the  earth,  are  denominated, 
m  the  passage  just  quoted,  the  fowl  of  the  air. 

The  animals  of  this  great  Class  are  rendered 
particularly  interesting  to  man,  not  only  because 
many  of  them  form  a  portion  of  his  domestic 
wealth,  look  to  him  as  their  master,  and  vary 
most  agreeably  his  food ;  but  because  numbers, 
also,  strike  his  senses  by  the  eminent  beauty  and 
grace  of  their  forms,  the  brilliancy  or  variety  of 
the  colours  of  their  plumage,  and  the  infinite 
diversity,  according  to  their  kinds,  of  their  mo- 
tions and  modes  of  flight.  But  of  all  their  en^ 
dowments,  none  is  more  striking,  and  ministers 
more  to  his  pleasure  and  delight,  than  their 
varied  song.  When  the  time  6f  the  singing  birds 
is  come,  and  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our 
land,  who  can  be  dead  to  the  goodness  which  has 
provided  forrr/Zsuchanunbought  orchestra,  tuning 


BIRDS.  437 

th^  90ul  not  only  to  joy^  but  to  mutual  goodwill ; 
reyiying  all  the  best  and  kindliest  feelings  of  our 
nature,  and  calming,  at  least  for  a  time,  those 
that  harmonize  less  with  the  scene  before  us. 
^  I  may  here  offer  a  few  obseryations  upon  the 
voice  of  animals,  especially  birds.  A  distinction 
is  made  by  physiologists  between  a  voice  and  a 
^ound^  and  none  but  those  that  breathe  by  means 
of  lungs  are  reckoned  to  utter  a  voice;  others, 
whateyer  their  respiratory  organs,  only  emit  a 
sound.  The  yoice  also  is  from  the  mouth  alone, 
the  sound  from  other  parts  of  the  body.^  The 
vocal  animals,  therefore,  are  confined  to  the 
three  last  classes  of  yertebrates— the  Reptiles^ 
the  JSirdsy  and  the  Mammalians.  In  most  of 
these,  also,  the  voice  partakes,  in  some  degree,  of 
the  character  of  speech ;  it  is  intended  to  indicate 
to  another  the  wishes,  emotions,  or  sufferings  of 
the  utterer.  The  great  organ  of  the  yoice  is  the 
wind-pipCy  or  tracheal  artery,  as  it  is  often  called, 
and  its  parts,  which  by  its  bronchial  ramifica- 
tions is  so  intimately  connected  with  the  lungs 
as  to  form  part  of  their  substance. 

Birds,  of  all  animals,  are  best  organized 
with  regard  to  their  yoice.  Besides  the  upper 
larynx,  or  throat,  which  they  haye  in  common 
with  Mammalians,  at  the  base  of  their  wind- 
pipe, where  it  divides  into  two  branches,  render- 

^  See  Introd,  to  Ent.  Lett.  xxiv. 


438  FUNCTIONS*  AND  INSTINCTS, 

ing  to  each  lobe  of  the  lungs,  it  has  also  another 
larynx,  forming  a  second  yocal  apparatus.  This 
is  produced  by  a  contraction  of  the  organ  fur- 
nished with  muscular  fibres,  or  vocal  strings, 
which  by  their  various  tensions  and  relaxations, 
modify  greatly  the  tones  of  the  voice ;  ascending 
also  in  the  tube  of  the  wind-pipe  to  undei^ 
another  modification  at  the  upper  larynx,  which, 
as  it  were,  adds  the  tube  of  the  horn  to  that  of 
the  reed.  Thus,  if  the  head  of  a  duck  is  cut  off, 
it  can  produce  sounds  by  means  of  its  lower 
throat,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  which  no  quadruped 
could  do.  Besides  this-,  birds  can,  more  or  less, 
shorten  or  lengthen  the  tube  of  their  wind-pipe, 
so  as  to  modify  the  sounds  they  emit. 

Though  the  upper  larynx,  in  birds,  has  no 
vibratory  vocal  strings,  as  in  the  Mammalians,  to 
modify  the  sounds,  these  modifications  taking 
place  at  the  lower  larynx,  still  they  can  enlarge 
or  contract  it,  which  may  affect  the  air  in  its 
exit,  and  so  produce  some  diversity. 

Besides  all  this,  whoever  casts  an  eye  over 
Dr.  Latham's  and  Mr.  YarreFs  figures  of  the 
wind-pipes  of  various  birds,*  especially  wild-fowl, 
will  see  that  they  vary  greatly  in  their  relative 
length  and  volume ;  that  some  are  partially  di- 
lated, and  others  contracted,  with  other  peculi- 
arities that  distinguish  individual  species,  espe- 

*  Linn.  Trans,  iv.  U  ix. — xv. ;   xr.  /.  ix.— xv. ;   and  xvi.  /. 
xvii. — xxi. 


BIRDS.  430 

dally  in  male  birds.  All  these,  no  doubt,  modify 
tb6  voice,  and,  by  the  will  of  Him  who  fonned 
them,  cause  them  to  utter  such  sounds,  and  speak 
such  a  language,  as  are  required  by  the  circum* 
stances  in  which  they  are  placed.  The  cawing 
of  the  rook,  the  croaking  of  the  raven,  the  cooing 
of  the  dove,  the  warbling  of  the  nightingale  and 
the  other  singing  birds,  are  all  the  result  of  their 
organization  according  to  the  plan  and  will  of 
that  Supreme  Intelligence,  infinite  Love,  Wis- 
dom,  and  Power,  which  fabricated  and  fashioned 
them  with  this  view  as  well  as  others,  to  give 
utterance  to  sounds  th^t,  mixed  or  contrasted, 
would  produce  a  kind  of  universal  concert^  der 
lighting  the  ear  by  its  very  discords. 

It  is  said  by  a  late  writer,  that  the  song  of  the 
same  individual  species  of  birds,  in  different  dis- 
tricts, is  difierently  modified.  This,  I  should 
think,  must  be  occasioned  by  a  difference  in  the 
temperature,  and  other  circumstances  connected 
with  the  atmosphere. 

Of  all  animals,  birds  are  most  penetrated 
by  the  element  in  which  they  move.  Their 
whole  organization  is  filled  with  air,  as  the 
spoqg^  with  water.  Their  lungs,  their  bones, 
their  cellular  tissue,  their  feathers — in  a  word, 
almost  every  individual  part,  admit  it  into  their 
interstices.^    Thus  giving  them  a  degree  of  spe- 

>  N.  D.  D'Uist.  Nat.  xxiii.  352. 


.440  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTIKCTS. 

cific  levity  that  no  other  class  of  animals  is 
endowed  with,  which  however  does  not  render 
them  the  sport  of  every  wind  that  blows,  for,  by 
means  of  their  vigorous  wings,  formed  to  take 
strong  hold  of  the  air ;  of  their  muscular  force* 
the  agility  of  their  movements,  and  their  powers 
of  steerage  by  means  of  the  prow  and  rudder  of 
their  little  vessel,  their  head  and  tail,  they  can 
counteract  this  levity ;  and  by  these  also,  and  by 
their  great  buoyancy,  they  can  ascend  above  the 
very  clouds,  as  well  as  descend  to  the  earth; 
they  can  glide  motionless  through  the  air,  or 
skim  the  surface  of  the  waters ;  they  can  sporty 
at  will,  in  the  vast  atmospheric  ocean ;  they  cao 
dart  forward  in  a  straight  line,  or  like  the  butter* 
fly,  fly  in  a  zigzag  or  undulatory  one,  and  with 
ease  take  any  new  direction  in  their  flight  that 
fear  or  desire  may  dictate.  Enveloped  in  soft 
and  warm  plumage,  they  can  face  the  cdd  of 
the  highest  regions  of  the  air ;  and  the  denser 
clad  aquatic  birds  can  also  sail  over  the  bosom 
of  the  waters,  or  plunge  into  them,  without  being 
wetted  by  them.  All  birds,  especially  those  last 
mentioned,  have  a  gland  secreting  an  oily  fluid, 
with  which  they  anoint  their  feathers  and  rqiel 
the  moisture. 

There  is  no  part  of  the  history  of  these  ani- 
mals,  in  which  the  care  of  a  fatherly  Providence 
is  more  signally  conspicuous  than  their  love  of 


BIRDS.  44  L 

Iheir  yoong,  and  their  tender  care  of  them  till 
they  can  diift  for  themBelves.  But  as  I  have 
already  adverted  to  this  subject/  and  shall  here-^ 
after  have  occasion  to  resume  it,  I  shall  now  say 
something  on  the  classification  of  the  feathered 
race.  It  is  singular  that  two  Classes  should  be 
placed  in  apposition  to  each  other,  seemingly  so 
opposite  in  their  character  and  most  of  their  qua« 
lities,  as  the  Reptiles  and  the  Birds — the  one  the 
most  torpid  and  doleful  and  hateful  of  animals, 
symbols  of  evil  demons ;  the  other  the  most  lively 
and  active,  and  beloved  of  all  the  creatures  that 
God  has  made,  symbols  of  the  angelic  host,  and 
calling  upon  us  to  look  upwards,  and  seek  those 
joys  that  are  above  us.  But  in  spite  of  this 
apparently  striking  contrast,  still  there  is  a  real 
affinity  between  the  Birds  and  the  Reptiles ;  and 
when  we  recollect  that  demons  are  fallen  angels, 
we  may  apprehend  why  God  has  placed  their 
symbols  in  the  same  series. 

Zo<^ogists  are  not  altogether  agreed  as  to 
which  of  the  Reptiles  come  the  nearest  to  the 
Birds :  the  beak,  and  some  other  characters  of 
the  Chelonians,  have  been  thought  to  indicate  that 
they  are  entitled  to  that  distinction  f  and,  by  his 
placing  the  latter  immediately  after  the  Birds, 
this  appears  to  be  Baron  Cuvier's  opinion.  Any 
one,  indeed,  that  looks  either  at  the  common,^  or 

»  See  above,  p.  261—264. 

*  Mac  Leay.  Har.  Ent<mol.  263.  ^  T.  Mydas. 


442  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  hawk's  bill,  turtles,^  or  a  good  figure  of  them,* 
will  see  in  them  a  striking  resemblance  of  some 
sea-bird,  especially  a  penguin ;  the  anterior  elcm- 
gated  paddles  imitating  the  wings^  and  the  pos- 
terior dilated  ones  the  webhedfeet  of  such  birds. 
There  are  other  Reptiles,  howeyer,  that  dispute 
this  claim  with  the  Chelonians.  Amongst  the 
rest  is  a  remarkable  fossil  genus,  regarded  as 
extinct,  which  Cuvier  has  arranged  with  the 
dragon  of  modem  Herpetologists,  under  the 
name  oi  Pterodactyle.^  The  carpal  and  m^- 
carpal  bones,  and  the  phalanges  of  the  foofth 
toe  of  the  anterior  leg  are  excessively  elongated, 
to  which  it  is  conjectured  a  membrane  was  at- 
tached, forming  a  wing  for  flight.  M.  Sovuner- 
ing  classes  this  remarkable  animal  with  the 
Mammalians^  supposing  its  affinity  to  be  widi  the 
CheirapteranSj  or  Bats ;  and  Dr.  Wagler  con- 
siders it  as  forming,  with  the  Echidna  and  Or- 
nitkarkynchtis,  an  osculant  Class,  which  he  dis^ 
tinguishes  by  the  ancient  name  of  Chrij^s* 
But  the  wing  in  its  structure  appears  to  approach 
nearer  to  that  of  birds^  and  therefore  Blainyille 
seems  right  in  considering  it  as  a  Saurian  genus 
leading  to  them.^    Professor  Goldfuss,  in  his 

»  T.  Caretta.  «  N.  D.  D'HM.  xxxiv.  U  R.  8./.  1.2. 

3  Pterodactylus.     Ornxthocephalus.     Somm. 
*  G^phu     Gray's  Synops.  Rept.  78. 
«  y.  D.  D'H.  N.  xxviii.  226. 


BIRDS.  443 

description  of  a  new  species,^  mentions  having 
found  upon  it  some  impressions,  looking  like  those 
of  feathers ;  and  though  he  thinks  it  flies  like  a 
bird,  fi^eems  to  regard  it  as  between  the  crocodile 
and  the  monitor.  The  serrated  beak  of  the 
mergansers  is  not  very  unlike  that  of  the  common 
pterodactyle,^  though  that  of  the  species  de- 
scribed by  Professor  Goldfuss  has  a  few  very 
long  dispersed  teeth,  of  different  lengths,  like 
those  of  the  crocodile.^  The  animals  of  the  last 
named  genus,  in  the  structure  of  their  heart, 
approximate  most  nearly  to  birds,  and  in  their 
general  organization  are  at  the  head  of  the  Class 
of  Reptiles/ 

From  these  statements,  it  seems  as  if  the 
Class  just  mentioned  sent  forth  several  branches 
towards  the  Birds ;  but,  all  circumstances  consi- 
dered, the  pterodactyle,  especially  if  it  has  fea- 
thers, or  rather  plumiform  scales,  appears  to 
come  the  nearest  to  them,  and  to  prove  that  the 
feathers  of  the  Bird  are  a  transition  from  the 
scales,  of  the  Reptile. 


^  Pt.  crassirostris.     Isis  Heft.  y.  553. 

*  Pt*  anttquus* 

^  Isis,  tt^  supr.  t,  vi.  /.  y\u 

*  For  these  observations,  with  respect  to  the  crocodile^  I  am 
indebted  to  Mr.  Owen. 


444  FUNCTIONS.  AND  INSTINCTS. 

AvES*    (Birds.) 

Animal f  vertebrated,  oviparous,  biped. 

Anterior  extremities^  organized  for  flight. 

Integument^  plumose. 

Eggs  J  usually  hatched  by  incubation. 

Lnmgs^  fixed. 

Respiration  and  circulation^  double. 

Bloody  red,  warm. 

Ornithologists  appear  at  present  undecided  as 
to  the  division  of  this  great  and  interesting  Class 
into  Orders^  as  the  following  synoptical  table  of 
systems,  difiering  in  this  respect,  will  show : 


Nitzsch  and  Schoepss  bave  only   3 

Vieillot,  Vigors,  Mac  Leay  and  Swainson  •  •  5 

Linn^,  Chivier,  Dumeril  and  Carus 6 

Illiger 7 

Scopoli,  Latham,  Myers  and  Wolf 9 

Temminck 13 

Grant 16 

SchcEffer 17 

Brisson    • i  ..••.••  •  28 

Lacepede 38  ^ 


Orders. 


One  may  truly  say  here,  "the  choice  per- 
plexes ;''  and  the  young  Ornithologist  must  be 
puzzled  to  determine  which  of  these  systems  he 
ought  to  adopt,  especially  since  the  several 
authors  of  them  were  amongst  the  most  eminent 
zoologists  of  their  time. 

I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Owen  for  my  know- 


BIRDS.  44ft 

ledge  of  the  first  of  these  systems,  of  which,  as 
at  present  it  is  little  known  in  this  country,  I 
will  here  give  an  abstract,  without  entering  into 
its  merits,  except  that  its  /irtmarj^  sections,  or 
Orders,  form  a  very  natural  division  of  th6 
Class. 

Oedsrs. — I.  Aerial  Birdft.     Luftvogeln. 

Sub-orders. — A.  Accipitrines. 

B.  Passerines. 

C.  Pies. 

—  II.  Terrestrial  Birds.     Erdvogeln. 

A.  Columbines. 

B.  Gallinaceana. 

C.  Coursers. 

—  III.  Aquatic  Birds.     Wasservogeln, 

A.  Waders. 

B.  Auserines. 

In  this  last  Order  he  includes  the  Bustards^^ 
which  surely  ought  to  form  a  separate  Sub-order. 

On  the  present  occasion  I  shall  follow  the 
system  of  Linn6,  as  improved  by  Baron  Cuvier, 
in  the  last  edition  of  his  Rhgne  Animal^  adopting 
from  lUiger  his  Order  of  CursoreSy  or  runners, 
which  appears  to  be  osculant  between  the  galli^ 
naceaus  Order  and  that  of  the  waders. 

That  the  series  ought  to  begin  with  the  web- 
footed  Birds,  as  approaching  nearest  to  the 
Reptiles,  there  is  no  doubt;  but  which  should 
terminate  it,  seems  not  satisfactorily  determined. 

1  Otis. 


446  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

The  birds  of  prey  appear  naturally  to  connect  widi 

t  

the  beasts  of  prey,  rather  than  with  the  Ceta- 
ceans, next  before  which  Cuvier  has  placed 
them ;  Cams  ends  the  series  with  the  Gallina- 
ceans,  which  Linn6  contrasts  with  the  Ruminants, 
and  Mr.  W.  S.  Mac  Leay  connects  with  the 
Gnawers,^  and  Illiger  and  Lacepede  ^id  with 
the  Psittaceans,  which  are  analogues  of  the 
Quadrumanes,  but  these  are  probably  mostly 
analogous  forms;  there  seems  a  more  strict 
affinity  between  the  web-footed  birds  and  the 
MonotremeSf  the  OmitharhynchuSy  Eckidnti^  &c. 
which,  in  some  respects,  appear  to  form  an  os- 
culant Order,  between  the  birds  and  the  beasts. 
In  fact  the  Birds,  though  united  into  one  group 
with  the  Beasts  by  common  characters,  may  be 
regarded  as  forming  a  parallel  series  with  the 
latter  rather  than  a  continuous  one,  several  of  the 
members  of  which,  respectively,  represoit  each 
other,  both  as  to  many  of  their  external  features, 
and  their  functions.  Branches,  like  those  of  a  tree, 
seem  indeed  to  issue  from  every  natural  series, 
whether  vegetable  or  animal,  on  all  sides,  and  to 
run  in  all  directions  towards  those  of  other  series, 
so  as  to  form  together  a  perplexing  labyrinth^  to 
thread  which,  although  in  many  places  there 
appears  an  evident  clue,  in  others  it  becomes 
evanescent,  and  the  investigator  of  nature  seems 
lost.    But  when  we  reflect  that  the  Author  of 

1  Rodeniia, 


BIRDS.  447 

Nature  is  infinite  in  his  essence  and  attributes,  we 
must  expect  there  will  be  something  that  indi- 
cates their  or^in  from  such  a  Being;  though 
not  a  real,  there  will  be  in  them  a  seeming 
infinity  to  finite  minds.  He  who  made  them  sees 
tbsm  all  at  once,  and  in  their  several  places,  and 
traces  simultaneously  every  series  through  all 
its  mimberless  divarications  or  convolutions; 
whmeas  man  sees  only  a  part  of  the  ways  of  his 
Creator.  He  can  have  no  simultaneous  view  of 
things,  and  must  be  contented  with  adding,  here 
a  little  and  there  a  little,  to  his  stores  of  know- 
ledge. To  investigate  the  works  of  his  Creator 
is  a  laudable  exercise  of  his  powers,  and  to  aim 
as  much  as  possible  to  discover  the  system  of 
things  that  the  God  of  Nature  has  established 
by  his  Wisdom,  and  upholds  by  his  Power,  is 
to  aim  at  the  discovery  of  Truth ;  who  will  more 
and  more  reveal  herself  to  those  that,  using  the 
proper  means,  seek  her  in  sincerity. 

Orders.^ 

1.  Swimmers,  5.  Climbers, 

2.  Waders,  6.  P etchers, 

3.  Coursers,  7.  Raveners, 

4.  Scratchers, 

*  The  Latin  names  of  the  Orders  are, — 

1.  Natatores,  5.  Scansores, 

2.  Orallatores,  6.  Insessores» 

3.  Cursores,  7.  Saptores»* 

4.  Rasores. 

*  Raptor  milvius,     Phcedr. 


448  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Order  1 . — Swimmers.  (  Web-footed^  or  Aqua- 
tic Birds.  This  Order  includes  the  Inertes, 
Pahnipedesj  and  Pinnatipedes  of  Dr.  Grant's 
catalogue.) 

BoDYr  closely  covered  with  feathers*  and 
coated  with  a  thick  down  next  the  skin.  L^s^ 
placed  behind  the  equilibrium^  Toes^  united  by 
membrane  for  swimming;  membrane  sometimes 
divided. 

Order  2. — Waders.  (Flamingo^  Coot^  Avocet^ 
Woodcock^  Snipe,  Ibis,  Spoonbillj  Jabiru^  JBit^ 
tern,  Heron,  Crane,  Stork,  Oyster-catcher,  PUner^ 
Bustard. — Grallatores.    Grant) 

Legs  consisting  of  very  long  tarsi,  with  the 
apex  of  the  tibia  bare ;  stretched  out  in  flight 
Wings,  long. 

Order  3. — Coursers.  (Apteryx,  Ostrich,  JBwkcu, 
Cassowary,  Dodo,  &c« — Cursores.     Grant) 

WiNoSy  very  short,  not  used  for  flying.  Legs, 
robust.  Toes,  3 — 4.  Beak,  depressed  or  cmn- 
pressed. 

Order  4. — Scratchers.  (Pigeon,  Quail,  Par- 
tridge, Common  Poultry,  Chiinea-fowl,  Pheasant, 
Turkey,  Peacock,  &c. — Alectorides,  GalUnie,  and 
ColumbiB.    Grant.) 

Upper  mandible,  vaulted ;  nostrils,  pierced  in  a 
membranous  space  at  their  base,  covered  by  a 
cartilaginous  scale.     Tail-feathers,  14—18. 

Order    5. — Climbers.     (Psittaceans,    TiPucan, 


BIRDS.  449 

Cuckoo  J  Wryneck  J  Woodpecker^  &c. —  Chelidmies^ 
Alcyonesy  Anisodactylij  Zygodactyli.     Grant.) 

Feet  with  two  toes  before  and  two  behind. 

Order  6.  —  Perchers.  (King-fisher^  Hoopoe^ 
Bumming-hirdf  Tree-creeper^  Nut-hatch^  Sird 
of  Paradise^  Crow,  Magpie^  Starling,  Cross- 
beak  J  Gross-beak,  Gold-finch,  Linnet,  Sparrow, 
Titmouse,  Lark,  Goat-sucker,  Swallow,  Taylor- 
bird,  Nightingale,  Red-breast,  Fly-catcher,  Black* 
bird.  Chatterer,  Butcher-bird,  &c. — Granivorae, 
Insectivone,  and  Omnivor<B.    Grant.) 

Toes  four:  formed  for  prehension  in  nidi<» 
fication.  External  toe  united  at  the  base  to  the 
internal.  Three  toes  before  and  one  behind. 
All  other  characters  negative. 

Order  7.  —  Haveners.  (Owl,  Secretary-bird^ 
Buzzard,  Kite,  Sparrow-hawk,  Falcon,  Harpy, 
Eagle,  Vulture,  &c. — Rapaces.    Grant.) 

Beak  robust,  upper  mandible,  on  each  side, 
armed  with  a  tooth.  Legs  short,  robust.  Toes 
armed  with  crooked  claws. 

Order  1 .  —The  swimmers,  or  web-footed  birds, 
form  a  very  important  part  of  the  feathered 
race,  both  as  furnishing  man  with  food,  and  as 
ministering  greatly  to  his  comfort,  by  their  down 
and  feathers,  when  he  retires  to  rest ;  and  also 
by  their  action  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the 
waters  both  of  the  sea  and  rivers,  which  form 
the  principal  part  of  their  food.   Cuvief  remarks, 

VOL.  II.  G  G 


450  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

that  these  are  the  only  birds  in  which  the  neck 
exceeds,  and  sometimes  considerably,  the  length 
of  the  legs.  Swimming  on  the  surface,  they  can 
thus  dip  deeper  to  seize  their  prey.  The  same 
remark  may  be  extended  to  the  Saniians,  in 
which,  though  the  majority  have  a  short  neck, 
one  fossil  animal,^  which  appears  to  be  the 
analogue  of  the  swan,  has  a  very  long  oae. 
Other  birds,  as  well  as  those  of  the  pres^ 
Order,  are  distinguished  by  the  length  of  the 
neck ;  as  the  peacock,  the  turkey,  and  several 
other  Gallinaceans,  and  the  Ostrich  and  its 
congeners  are  still  more  remarkable  in  diat 
respect.  This  structure  is  probably  as  useful 
to  them  as  to  the  web-footed  birds,  in  enabling 
them  to  secure  articles  of  fiK>d  that  would  other- 
wise be  out  of  their  reach. 

The  birds  at  the  foot  of  this  Order,  and  indeed 
of  the  whole  Class,  are  the  short-winged  swm- 
mers,  particidarly  the  auk^  and  the  penguin;^ 
the  one  having  its  station  in  the  northern,  and 
the  other  in  the  southern  seas,  reaching  to 
the  antarctic  circle.  The  narihem  one,  theaukt 
seems  to  rank  above  the  penguin,  for  its  wingi 
have  those  feathers  which,  from  their  office 
being  to  propel  birds  when  they  fly,  are  deno* 
minated  rawing  feathers,^  and  they  can  flutter 
and  flap  their  wings,  while  the  penguins  have 

*  PlesiosauruB  doHchodeirtis.  «  A  lea. 

*  Aptenodytes.  ♦  Remiges, 


BIRDS.  451 

none  of  these  feathers,  and  cannot  use  their, 
so  called,  wings  as  such.  The  legs  of  the  auk, 
also,  are  not  placed  quite  so  near  the  tail  as  in 
the  southern  bird,  in  which  they  are  close  to  it, 
though  both  stand  nearly  in  a  vertical  position. 
But  though  of  no  apparent  use  as  wingSj  their 
short  anterior  appendages  that  go  by  that  name, 
are  not  given  them  by  their  Creator  merely  for 
show,  for  when  under  water  they  use  them  as 
^ns;  and  when  it  is  recollected  that  Captain 
Beechy  found  them  between  three  and  four 
hundred  miles  from  any  land,^  they  seem  to 
have  occasion  for  additional  rowing  organs. 
One  traveller,  D.  Pag^s,  says  that  they  also 
sometimes  use  their  wings  as  fore-legs,  walking 
on  all  fours.^  Some  of  them  burrow  like  rabbits, 
but  how  they  effect  this  has  not  been  ascer- 
tained. In  general  they  are  reckoned  as  the 
most  stupid  and  foolish  animals  in  the  whole 
Class:  in  fact  most  of  the  web-footed  birds 
exhibit  less  of  the  life  and  spirit  and  gaiety  that 
distinguish  so  conspicuously  those  whose  prin- 
cipal tb^tre  of  motion  is  the  air :  belonging  as 
they  do  to  two  elements,  they  may  be  regarded, 
in  some  sense,  as  half  fowl  and  half  fish ;  and 
when  we  call  a  man,  not  remarkable  for  sense, 
a  gwsej  we  admit  some  such  degradation  in 
aquatic  birds. 

1  Voyage,  i.  16.  s  n.  D.  D*H.  N.  xiii.  306. 


452  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

But  all  sea-birds  are  not  of  this  character; 
amongst  these  the  frigate-bird^  and  the  alba- 
tross^ are  most  conspicuous,  emulating  the  eagle 
and  the  vulture  amongst  the  terrestrial  birds  of 
prey.  Of  all  the  oceanic  birds,  the  frigate-bird 
comes  nearest  to  the  eagle.  Its  keen  sight,  its 
crooked  beak,  its  short,  robust,  and  plumy  legs, 
its  sharp  claws,  the  vast  extent  of  its  wings,  and 
its  rapid  flight,  all  show  that  it  is  the  oceanic 
representative  of  the  king  of  birds.  If  the 
peaceful  flying-fish  seeks  a  refuge  from  the 
dorados^  and  bonitos,^  its  aquatic  enemies,  by 
elevating  itself  from  the  water  into  the  air,  the 
frigate-bird  darts  upon  it  like  a  thunder-bolt 
and  devours  it.  If  the  booby  ^  has  caught  a  fish, 
like  the  bald  eagle^  the  frigate-bird  often  com- 
pels it  to  let  go  its  prey,  and  seizes  it  before  it 
reaches  the  water.  Its  extent  of  flight  is  won- 
Uerful,  and  exceeds  that  of  any  other  marine 
bird ;  for  it  possesses  between  the  tropics  a 
domain  of  more  than  four  hundred  leagues,  over 
which  it  directs  its  course  by  day  and  by  night; 
for,  as  the  plumage  of  the  under  side  of  its  body 
is  not  impervious  to  the  water,  it  cannot  continue 
long  upon  it,  but  prefers  to  brave  the  wind  and 

1   Tachypetes  AquUd.  *  Diamedea  exulans, 

'  Caryph€Bna  hippunu.  ♦  Scomber  Peiamis. 

^  Sula  BoBsana. 

^  Richardson,     Fw.    Boreal.    Americ.    ii.    15.      Audabon. 
Biogr.  162. 


BIRDS.  4*53 

the  tempest,  and  to  elevate  itself  above  the 
storm,  and  for  repose  retires  to  lofty  rocks  and 
woody  islets. 

The  albatross  is  the  analogue'  of  the  vulture^ 
and  the  largest  of  the  sea-birds,  and  his  wings 
expand  sonietimes  to  the  extent  of  twenty  feet ; 
like  his  prototype,  he  is  occasionally  so  gorged 
with  food  as  to  lose  the  power  of  flying,  and  when 
pursued,  his  only  resource  is  to  disgorge  his  over- 
loaded stomach.  Mr.  Bennet  has  given  a  very 
interesting  account  of  the  mode  of  flight  of  this 
bird,  to  which  I  must  refer  the  reader.* 

I  observed,  in  the  last  chapter,  that  one  of  the 
short- winged  family  of  this  Order,  the  merganser j 
appears  to  be  connected  with  the  Saurians  by 
its  serrated  beak  ;  but  the  penguins^  which  are 
at  the  foot  of  the  same  Family  and  of  the  Order, 
seem  connected  with  the  CheUmians,  their  rudi- 
mental  wings  and  their  legs  approaching  the 
paddles  and  webbed  feet  of  the  turtles  and 
some  of  the  tortoises.  Their  plumage,  when 
not  analyzed,  resembles  very  much  the  fur  of 
a  seal,  or  some  quadruped. 

Order  2. — I  have  already  noticed  several  cir- 
cumstances relative  to  the  birds  of  this  Order;* 
I  shall  not,  therefore,  in  this  place,  enlarge 
much  upon  them.  Their  general  function  is 
not  only  to  devour  the  smaller  fishes,  aquatic 

*   Wanderings  J  &c,  i.  45 — 47. 
2  See  above,  pp.  177,  194. 


454  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Molluscans,  and  other  animals,  as  well  as  their 
spawn,  that  inhabit  the  waters  of  the  globe, 
whether  salt  or  fresh,  but  also  those  that  are 
found  in  their  vicinity,  as  worms,  small  reptiles, 
and  insects  in  their  different  states;  and  their 
form  is  particularly  adapted  to  thdr  function : 
very  long  legs  and  toes ;  naked  knees ;  a  hmg 
sharp  beak ;  where  they  have  to  dip  under  water 
for  their  food  a  long  neck ;  and  as,  on  accomit 
of  their  great  length,  they  could  not  conveniently 
double  their  legs  in  flight,  their  tail  is  usually 
extremely  short,  so  as  to  permit  the  lege  to  be 
stretched  out,  and  act  in  some  degree  as  steering 
organs.  The  body  of  these  birds,  generally 
speaking,  in  shape,  seems  to  approach  that  of 
the  ScratcherSy  but  is  rather  longer,  and  not  so 
plump.  The  form  of  some  of  them  is  very 
elegant  and  graceful;  the  plumage  of  others, 
especially  of  some  of  the  scolopaceous  tribe,  is 
beautifully  mottled,  but,  generally  speaking, 
their  colours  are  not  brilliant 

There  is  one  bird^  of  this  Order  that  is  par- 
ticularly interesting,  not  only  on  account  of  some 
singularities  in  its  structure,  but  likewise  for  its 
amiable  manners:  this  bird  is  described  and 
figured  by  Piso^  under  the  name  oiAnhymay  but 
it  is  more  commonly  known  by  that  of  Kamickij 


A  Palamedea  comuta, 

2  Hist.  Nat.  et  Med.  Ind.  Occid.  91. 


BIRDS.  455 

It  is  said  to  be  larger  than  the  peacock  or  even 
the  swan.  Its  wings  are  armed  with  two  strong 
spurs,  which  point  outwards  when  the  wing  is 
folded  (  h^t  its  most  remarkable  feature  is  the 
long,  slender,  cylindrical,  and  nearly  straight 
horn  which  arms  its  forehead.  One  would  sup* 
pose  a  bird  so  fitted  for  combats  was  the  terrw 
of  the  feathered  race,  delightii^  in  battle  and 
bloodshed,  but  this  is  not  the  case,  for  it  is  one 
of  the  most  gentle  and  susceptible  of  birds.  It 
feeds  upon  grass,  and  attacks  no  birds  that 
approach  it:  at  the  time  of  pairing,  however^ 
the  males  contend  fiercely  and  sometimes  fatally 
for  the  females;  but  the  victory  gained,  they 
become  patterns  of  conjugal  fidelity,  never  part- 
ing, and  like  the  turtle,  if  one  outlives  the  other^ 
the  survivor  usually  is  the  victim  of  its  grief.^ 

Another  South  American  bird  of  this  Order,^ 
if  we  may  credit  the  accounts  that  are  given  of 
it,  is  gifted  by  its  Creator  with  an  instinct  still 
more  wonderful;  it  seems  to  have  a  natural 
ineliuation  for  the  society  of  man,  and  seems 
to  occupy  the  same  place  amongst  birds  that 
the  dog  does  amongst  quadrupeds.  When  taken 
and  fed  in  a  house,  it  becomes  attached  to  the 
inmates.  Like  tlie  d(^  it  knows  the  voice  of  its 
master,  and  will  follow  or  precede  him  when  he 

1  Sonnini,  in  N.  D.  D'H,  N,  xvii.  21. 
«  Psopkia  crepitans. 


456  FUNCTIONS  ANU  INSTINCTS. 

goes  out»  quits  him  with  reluctance,  and  appears 
delighted  when  it  sees  him  agiedn.  Sensible  of 
his  caresses,  it  returns  them  with  eyery  mark  of 
affection  and  gratitude :  it  seems  even  jealous  of 
his  attentions,  for  it  will  peck  at  the  l^s  of 
those  who  come  too  near  to  him.  It  knows  and 
acknowledges  also  the  friends  of  the  family.  It 
sometimes  takes  a  dislike  to  individuals,  and 
whenever  they  appear,  attacks  them,  and  en* 
deavours  to  drive  them  away.  Its  courage  is 
equal  to  that  of  the  dog,  for  it  will  attack  animals 
bigger  and  better  armed  than  itsdf.  Sonnini, 
who  relates  the  preceding  anecdotes  from  his 
own  observation,  was  also  told  that  in  some  parts 
of  America,  these  birds  were  entrusted  with  the 
care  of  the  young  poultry,  and  even  of  the  flodis 
of  sheep,  which  they  conducted  to  and  fnm 
their  pastures.^ 

The  common  Stork^  seems  equally  attached  to 
man,  and  in  return  has  generally  met  with  pro* 
tection  from  him,  and  in  many  nations  has  be^i 
accounted  a  sacred  bird  that  it  is  a  sin  to  kill 
or  molest;  and  they  are  entitled  to  these  im- 
munities not  only  on  account  of  their  philan* 
thropic  instincts,  but  likewise  because  they 
destroy  lizards,  frogs,  serpents,  and  other  noxious 
reptiles,  which  are  a  considerable  annoyance  in 
low  and  marshy  districts.     The  black  Stork^  is 

1  N,  I>.  JD7/.  N,  i.  190.  2  Ciconia  alba,        «  C.  nigra. 


BIRDS.  457 

of  a  \em  social  turn,  and  ayoids  the  neighbour- 
hood of  man,  and  frequents  solitary  marshes 
and  thick  woods,  where  it  nidificates  on  old 
frees. 

Order  3. — We  seem  to  enter  this  order — which 
from  the  swiftness  of  the  few  animals  that  com- 
pose it,  is  called  the  Order  of  Coursers^ — by  one 
of  the  most  singular  birds  that  is  at  present 
known;  I  mean  the  Aptei'yx  australis  of  Dr. 
Shaw.  As  far  as.  can  be  judged  from  the  only 
known  specimen,  which  was  brought  from  New 
Zealand  in  1812,  one  would  think  this  bird 
osculant  between  the  Waders  and  the  present 
Order.  Its  legs,  indeed,  seem  those  of  a  galli- 
naceous bird,  with  a  tendency,  as  Mr.  Yarrel 
remarks,  to  the  spurs  of  that  tribe,^  but  its  beak 
is  related  to  that  of  the  Ibis^  and  the  lateral  skin 
of  the  toes  is  notched  as  in  the  Phalerapesn 
The  wings  are  shorter  than  in  any  other  known 
bird,  quite  concealed  by  the  feathers,  and  termi- 
nate in  a  claw ;  a  circumstance  which  seems  to 
indicate  an  approximation  to  some  quadruped 
form.  These  wings,  though  useless  for  flight, 
were  doubtless  given  by  its  Creator  to  this 
animal  to  answer  some  purpose  in  its  economy, 
either  as  a  weapon  or  a  prehensive  organ.  With 
the  birds  of  the  Order  in  which  it  is  placed  it 
agrees  in  its  general  form  and  plumage,  but  in 

*   Cursores.  *  See  Zoo/.  Trans,  i.  i.  t.  x.  74. 


458  FUNCTIONif  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Stature  it  falls  below  them,  being  of  the  siae  of 
a  small  turkey.     It  is  called  by  the  natrres 

Ktvi. 

There  is  another  insular  bird,  the  Dodo^  noticed 
in  a  former  chapter,^  which  though  classed  with 
this^  to  judge  from  its  figure  seems  to  connect 
the  Ostrich  with  the  next  Orda,  the  Seratehers  f 
but  if  we  suppose  the  Order  to  form  a  eirde, 
these  birds  will  meet,  one  still  being  conterminous 
to  the  Order  above  it,  and  the  other  to  that 
below  it.  These  two  birds  have/otir  toes.  Mr. 
W.  S.  Mac  Leay,'  as  well  as  several  other  zoolo- 
gists, is  of  opinion  that  the  Ostrich  Family, 
meaning  the  typical  members  of  it,  both  in 
their  internal  as  well  as  their  external  structoie, 
approach  the  nearest  to  Mammalians.  Of  the 
Ostrich  itself  it  is  stated,  amongst  other  charac- 
ters, that  its  upper  eyelid  is  moveable  and 
ciliated,  and  that  its  eyes  are  more  like  the  eyes 
of  a  man  than  those  of  9  bird,  and  they  are  so 
set  as  both  of  theon  to  see  the  same  object  at  the 
same  time;  that  it  is  the  only  bird  that  dis- 
charges urine,^  with  many  circumstances  which 
I  have  no  room  to  enumerate.  Mr.  Owen,  bow- 
ever,  whose  accuracy  as  a  comparative  anatomist 
can  be  fully  relied  on,  has  observed  to  me,  that 
the  urinary  bladder,  sternum,  and  some  other 

*  Vol.  I.  p.  55.  «  Vigors  in  Linn.  Trans,  xiv.  485. 
^  Hor.  Ent,  266.     Linn,  Trans,  xvi.  43. 

♦  N.  D,  D'H,  N,  iii.  85,  86. 


BIRDS.  450 

parts  of  these  birds,  are  closer  approximations 
to  the  Chdanians  than  the  Mamifnalians. 

The  animal  of  the  latter  Class,  whose  external 
form  approaches  nearest  to  the  Ostrich  is  the 
Caniely  a  resemblance  which  has  been  so  striking, 
that  from  a  very  early  period  they  have  been 
designated  by  a  name  which  connects  them  with 
this  quadruped :  ^  in  many  particular  points,  be- 
sides general  form,  they  also  resemble  it.  The 
substance  and  form  of  their  two*toed  feet,  a 
callosity  on  their  breast  and  at  the  os  pubis, 
their  flattened  sternum,  and  their  mode  of  re* 
dining.  It  is  singular  that  these  birds  associate 
with  beasts,  particularly  the  quagga  and  zebra.^ 

The  new  world,  which  has  a  representatiye  of 
the  camel  in  the  Urnna^  and  of  the  hippopotamus 
in  the  tapir,  has  also  a  peculiar  ostHch  of  its 
own,  which  is  called  the  nandu;^  so  that  in 
Africa,  Asia,^  Australia,^  and  America,  there  is 
a  distinct  genus  of  the  present  Order,  each,  as 
at  present  known,  consisting  of  a  single  species. 

With  respect  to  their  /unetiansj  not  much  has 
been  observed :  they  are  said  to  live  a  good  deal 
upon  grain,  fruit,  and  other  vegetable  substances, 
and  the  nandu  is  fond  of  insects ;  probably  others 
of  them  may  also  assist  in  restraining  the  in- 

^  Strutkio-camelus. 

"  Burchell*s  Travels  in  S.  Africa,  ii.  315. 

*  Rhea  americana.  *  Castiarius  geleatus. 

*  Dromaius  ater. 


460  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

cessant  multiplication  of  these  little  creatnres. 
The  ostrich  may  be  said  almost  to  graze,  though 
it  is  yery  eager  after  grain  ;  but  its  history  is  too 
well  known  to  require  any  further  enlargement 
upon  it. 

Order  4, — The  birds  of  this  Order  are  called 
ScratcherSy  from  an  action  common  to  many  of 
them,  and  more  particularly  observable  in  our 
common  poultry,  that  of  scratching  the  ground 
to  turn  up  food,  especially  when  followed  by 
their  chicks.  Of  all  the  gifts  of  Providence, 
there  is  none  that  more  promotes  our  comfort 
and  pleasure  than  the  majority  of  the  animals 
that  compose  this  Order,  for  it  includes  almost 
all  our  barn-door  fowls,  and  the  great  majority 
of  the  game  pursued  so  eagerly  by  the  sports* 
man :  birds  not  only  valuable  for  the  variety 
and  delicacy  of  the  food,  both  flesh  and  eggs, 
with  which  they  supply  our  tables,  but  delighting 
us  by  the  beauty,  the  elegance,  and  stateliness 
of  their  forms ;  the  diversity  of  their  plumage, 
especially  the  elongated  or  expansile  tail  feathers 
of  the  males;  and  the  rich  variety  and  splendor 
of  their  colours.  The  gorgeous  peacock  and  the 
graceful  pheasant  have  scarcely  a  parallel  in 
the  other  Orders,  except  perhaps,  as  to  splendor, 
in  those  brilliant  little  gems,  the  humming  birds. 

I  have  mentioned,  on  a  former  occasion,*  the 
numerous  varieties  of  the  common  fowl,  which 

1  Vol.  I.  p.  %6. 


BIRDS.  461 

have  probably  been  produced  by  climate  and 
cultivation.  With  regard  to  dize,  Sumatra  ap- 
pears to  produce  both  the  smallest  and  the 
largest  kind  of  poultry,  the  common  feather- 
legged  Bantam^  and  the  lago  fowl/  the  cock  of 
which,  .Marsden  says,  he  has  '^  seen  peck  oflf 
a  common  dining  table ;  when  fatigued,  they  sit 
down  on  the  first  joint  of  the  leg,  and  are  then 
taller  than  the  common  breed."^  Colonel  Sykes 
imported  them  into  England  in  1831 ;  the  hen 
laid  freely,  and  reared  two  broods  of  chickens. 

Wild  poultry  are  found  both  in  the  old  world 
and  the  new :  the  jungle-ibwl,'  from  which  our 
breeds  are  supposed  by  Sonnerat  to  have  origi- 
nated, are  common  in  India ;  and  the  Spaniards 
are  said  to  have  foiuid  another  kind  in  Peru 
and  Mexico,  in  which  last  country  they  were 
domesticated,  and  called  chiacckicUacca ;  Par- 
mentier  states  that  he  heard  the  crow  of  the 
cock  of  this  breed  in  the  wildest  forests  of 
Guiana,  and  that  he  had  seen  one  of  them.^ 

The  Birds  of  this  Order  are  graniyorous,  in- 
sectivorous, or  both,  and  the  Hocco  is  stated  to 
subsist  on  buds  and  fruits.    Some  are  gregarious, 

'  Oallus  giganteus.  *  SumatrUy  2  Ed.  98. 

'  Gallus  Sonneratiu 

♦  N.  D.  D'H.  N.  vii.  472.  Modern  ornithologists  appear  to 
account  all  these  breeds  as  well  as  those  mentioned  in  a  former 
chapter  (Vol.  I.  p.  66)  as  distinct  species.  Linne,  besides  his 
Phasianus  Gallus  a,  or  the  common  breed,  has  Var.  /3,  P.  G. 


4(52  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS, 

as  the  pigeons;  while  others,  as  the  partridge, 
form  coveys  only  for  a  time ;  in  spring  those  that 
survive  the  sporting  season  pair  off,  and  are  soon 
at  the  head  of  a  numerous  family. 

Order  5. — Barcm  Cuvier  has  separated  the 
Climbers  from  Mr.  Vigor's  Order  of  PerckerSy  not 
only  oa  account  of  their  having  two  toes  behind, 
as  well  as  before,  but  also  on  account  of  differences 
in  their  larynx,  sternum,  and  coecal  ajyendages. 
Amongst  the  Climbers,  though  tha:^  are  some 
armed  with  beaks  of  very  extraordinary  forms 
and  magnitude,  as  the  toucan,  there  are  none  so 
interesting  and  altogether  so  remarkable  as  the 
Psittacean  Family,  or  the  Parrots,  Parroqi^ts, 
Macaws,  Cockatoos,  &c.  They  seem  complete 
analogues  of  the  Monkeys  and  other  Quadru- 
manes,  which  they  exceed,  in  their  faculty  of 
learning  to  articulate  many  words,  for  wliidi 
their  lower  larynx  is  particulary  constructed, 
and  thus  mimic  the  utterance  of  man,  as  the 
former  animals  do  his  actions;  a  circumstance 
which  seems  to  have  induced  some  omithdiogists 
to  {dace  them  at  the  head  of  tb^  Class/  in  con- 
trast with  the  latter  animals. 


cristatus.^  oc  the  Palish  breed ;  y.  P.  0«  ecaudatuSy  or  the 
Rumplet ;  i,  P.  O,  Morio,  or  the  black-skinned  breed ;  e.  P.  G. 
lanatus,  or  the  silk  breed ;  i|.  P.  G.  crispuSf  or  the  Frieskmd 
breed ;  and  i,  P.  G.  punllus^  or  the  Bantam  breed.  There  are 
several  more  in  Gmelin. 
'  Illiger,  &c* 


BIRDS.  463 

Hiere  is  a  genus,  belonging  to  this  Order,  found 
in  the  southern  parts  of  Africa,  the  species  of 
which  are  called  bee-cuckaws,^  and  are  remarkable 
for  indicating  both  to  the  honey-ratel^  and  the 
Hottentot  the  subterranean  nests  of  certain  bees, 
which  they  do  by  a  particular  cry,  morning  and 
evening,  and  by  a  gradual  and  slow  flight  towards 
the  quarter  where  the  swarm  of  bees  have  taken 
up  their  abode;  the  beast  and  the  man  both 
attend .  to  the  notice,  seek  the  spot,  and  dig  up 
the  nest ;  and  to  the  share  of  the  bird  generally 
falls,  not  the  part  stored  with  the  honey,  but  that 
in  wliich  the  grubs  are  contained :  ^  so  that  the 
bird,  though  it  invites  others  to  partake  with  it, 
has  its  own  subsistence,  which  it  could  not 
otherwise  readily  come  at,  principally  in  view. 
Both  this  animal  and  its  companion,  the  ratel, 
are  fitted  by  Providence  for  their  fonction,  and 
protected  from  the  danger  to  which  they  are 
exposed  from  the  strings  of  the  irritated  bees 
by  a  very  hard  skin.  The  bees,  however,  some- 
times revenge  themselves  on  the  treacherous 
bird  by  attacking  it  about  the  head  and  eyes, 
and  so  destroying  it/  It  is  singular,  and  affords 
a  most  convincing  proof  of  design,  that  two 
animals  that  are  so  necessary  to  each  other,  the 

1  Indicator  major,  minor  Vieill,  &c. 

*  Vivera  mellivora, 

'  Spamnann,  Voyage,  ii.  181,  187. 

♦  Cuv.  Rign.  An.  i.  455.     SparrmanD,  Voy.  ii.  182. 


464  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

one  to  indicate  and  the  other  to  excavate  their 
common  prey,  should  each  be  defended  by  the 
same  kind  of  armour,  and  each  seek  a  different 
portion  of  the  spoil,  suited  to  its  habits. 

Amongst  the  birds  most  remarkable  for  their 
instincts,  in  the  present  Order,  is  the  fcryneck.^ 
It  is  a  feathered  ant-eater j  and  is  organized  by  its 
Creator  to  entrap  its  prey  by  the  very  same  means 
as  the  quadruped  ones.  Like  them,  it  can  protrude 
its  tongue  to  a  very  great  length,  which  is  not 
owing  to  the  structure  of  this  oi^an  itself,  but  to 
a  peculiar  ligamentous  sheath  in  which  it  usu- 
ally is  contained.  Its  salivary  glands  are  above 
an  inch  long,  and  shaped  somewhat  like  a  tea- 
spoon. The  sialiva  they  secrete  is  so  very  viscid 
as  to  be  capable  of  being  drawn  into  threads 
finer  than  a  hair,  and  several  feet  in  length ;  so 
that  when  the  tongue  is  besmeared  with  it,  no 
insect  that  touches .  it  can  escape.  like  its 
analogues,  it  darts  its  tongue  into  an  ant-hill, 
or  lays  it  on  an  ant-track,,  and  draws  it  back 
into  its  mouth  laden  with  prey.^  It  is  singular 
that  the  functions,  in  warm  climates,  given  in 
charge  by  Providence   to  quadrupeds^  in  tern* 

^   Yunx  torquilla. 

^  I  owe  these  observations  on  the  wryneck  principally  to  a 
medical  friend,  Georg;e  Helsham,  Esq.  of  Woodbridge,  in  Suffolk, 
a  practical  ornithologist,  not  only  systematically  and  anato- 
mically, but  knowing  birds  also  in  their  haunts,  and  conyersant 
with  their  habits  and  instincts. 


RiftDs.  465 

perate  ones,  in  this  instance,  devolves  upon 
birds.  The  rapid  increase  of  ants,  in  tropical 
countries,  probably  rendered  it  necessary  that 
their  devourers  should  be  more  numerous,  and 
act  with  a  greater  momentum. 

The  general  functions  of  this  Order,  as  they 
are  in  most  of  those  of  the  present  Class,  are 
various.  The  food  of  some  are  roots,  fruits, 
and  other  vegetable  substances ;  ^  of  others  the 
grubs  of  insects ;'  of  others,  again,  principally 
insects  in  general  under  every  form;'  and 
lastly,  some  to  fruits  or  insects  will  add  the 
eggs  and  the  nestlings  of  other  birds.  ^ 

Order  6.  —  The  birds  of  this  Order,  the 
Pefchers,  are  distinguished  from  the  last,  not 
only  by  the  characters  lately  noticed,  but  like-- 
wise  by  a  considerable  difference  in  their  habits 
and  manners.  Amongst  them  we  find  all  those 
that  delight  us  by  their  varied  song ;  they  are 
truly  birds  of  the  atr,  for  they  seem  to  have  the 
ftill  command  of  that  element ;  many  of  them 
moving  gaily  in  every  direction  that  their  will 
suggests,  rising  and  falling,  flying  backwards 
and  forwards,  or  performing  endless  evolutions, 
pro  re  nata^  in  their  flight.  These  Perchers  also 
are  the  best  nest-builders,  not  usually  selecting, 
like  the  Climbers,  the  interior  of  a  hollow  tree 


1  The  Psittaceans.  *  The  Pies. 

»  The  Cuckaws.  ♦  The  Toucan. 

VOL.  II.  H  H 


406  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

or  simijar  situations,  but  most  commonly  inter- 
weaving their  nests  between  the  twigs  and 
branches  of  trees  and  shrubs,  or  suspending 
them  from  them,  or  even  attaching  them  to 
humbler  vegetables;  some  having  even  exer- 
cised arts  from  the  creation,  which  man  has 
found  of  the  greatest  benefit  to  him,  since  he 
discovered  them.  These  birds,  indeed,  may  be 
called  the  inventors  of  the  several  arts  of  the 
weaver,  the  sempstress,  and  the  tailor,  whence 
soaie  of  them  have  been  denominated  weaver  and 
taihr-hirds. 

The  nest  of  the  little  Indian  weaver-hird,^ 
though  it  has  neither  warp  nor  woof,  being 
formed  by  various  convolutions  of  the  slender 
leaves  of  some  grass,  so  intertwined  and  en- 
tangled as  to  produce  a  web  sufficiently  sub- 
stantial for  the  protection  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  nest,  is,  nevertheless,  a  very  wonderful 
structure,  but  as  it  is  well  known  ^  I  shall  not 
further  enlarge  upon  it,  but  proceed  to  the 
tailor-hirdsy  whose  nests  are  still  more  remariL* 
able. 

India  produces  several  species  that  are  in- 
structed by  their  Creator  to  sew  together  leaves 
for  the  protection  of  their  eggs  and  nestlings 
from  the  voracity  of  serpents  and  apes ;  they 

^  Ploceus  Textor. 

*  There  are  several  of  these  nests  in  the  maseum  of  the  Zoolo- 
gical Society. 


BIRDS.  467 

generally  select  those  at  the  end  of  a  ^branch 
or  twig,  and  sew  them  with  cotton,  thread,  and 
fibres.  CcJonel  Sykes  has  seen  some  in  which 
the  thread  was  literally  knotted  at  the  end/ 
The  Indian  birds  of  this  description  fwm  two 
genera,  separated  from  Sylvia  by  Dr.  Horsfield.^ 
The  inside  of  these  nests  is  lined  usually  with 
down  and  cotton. 

But  these  birds  are  not  confined  to  India  or 
tropical  countries;  Italy  can  boast  a  species 
which  exercises  the  same  art :  and  I  am  indebted 
to  the  kindness  of  one  of  our  most  eminent  orni^ 
tbologiats '  for  being  enabled  to  give  a  figure  of 
thia  pretty  and  interesting  bird,  from  a  specimen 
in  his  possession  ;^  and  to  the  Zoological  Society 
fiur  their  permission  to  have  a  drawing  made  fix)m 
a  nest  in  their  museum.^  This  little  creature 
was  originally  described  and  figured  by  M.  T^a-> 
minck  in  1820,  but  its  singular  instincts,  as  to  its 
mode  of  nidification,  were  afterwards  giv^d  in 
detail  by  Professor  P.  Savi.  It  is  called  by  the 
Pisans  Becca  moschinoy  and  is  a  species  of  the 
genus  Sylvia.^ 

In  summer  and  autumn  it  frequents  marshes, 
but  in  the  spring  it  seeks  the  meadows  and  corn- 
fields; in  which,  at  that  season,  the  marshes 
being  bare  of  the  sedges  which  cover  them  in 

*  Catalogue  of  birds,  &c,  16.         ^  Prinia  and  Orthotomus, 
»  Mr.  Gould.  ♦  PLiLTE  XV.  Fig.  1. 

*  Ibid.  Fio.  2.  «  S.  cisticola. 


468  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  summer,  it  is  compelled  to  construct  iU 
neat  in  tussocks  of  grass  on  the  brink  of  ditcher: 
but  the  leaves  of  these,  being  weak,  easily  split, 
so  that  it  is  difficult  for  our  little  sempetress 
to  unite  them,  and  so  to  form  the  skeleton  of 
her  fabric.  From  this  and  other  circumstances 
the  vernal  nests  of  these  birds  differ  so  widely 
from  those  made  in  the  autumn,  that  it  seems 
next  to  impossible  that  both  should  be  the  work 
of  the  same  artisan. 

.  The  latter  are  constructed  in  a  thick  bunch 
of  sedge  or  reed,  they  are  shaped  like  a  pear, 
being  ditated  below  and  narrowed  above,^  so  as 
to  leave  an  aperture  sufficient  for  the  ingress 
and  egress  of  the  bird.  The  greatest  horizontal 
diameter  of  the  nest  is  about  two  inches  and 
a  half,  and  the  vertical  is  five  inches  or  a  little 
moreu 

The  most  wonderful  thing  in  the  constructioa 
of  these  nests  is  the  method  to  which  the  little 
bird  has  recourse  to  keep  the  living  leaves 
united,  of  which  it  is  composed.  Tlie  sole 
interweaving,  more  or  less  delicate,  of  homo* 
geneous  or  heterogeneous  substances  forms  the 
principal  adopted  by  other  birds  to  bind  together 
the  parietes  of  their  nests ;  but  this  Sylmia  is  no 
weaver,  for  the  leaves  of  the  sedges  or  reeds 
are  united  by  real  stitches.     In  the  edge  of  each 

i  Plate  XV.  Fio.  2. 


BlRt>S.  4W 

leaf  she  makes,  probably  with  her  beak,  minute 
apertures,  through  which  she  contrives  to  pass, 
perhaps  by  means  of  the  same  organ,  one  or 
more  cords  formed  of  spidere'  web,  particularly 
of  that  of  their  egg-pouches.  These  threads  are 
not  very  long,  and  are  sufficient  only  to  pass 
two  or  three  times  from  one  leaf  to  another; 
they  are  of  unequal  thickness,  and  have  knots 
scattered  here  and  there,  which  in  some  places 
divide  into  two  or  three  branches. 

This  is  the  manner  in  which  the  exterior  of 
the  nest  is  formed ;  the  interior  consists  solely 
of  down,  chiefly  from  plants,  a  little  spiders' 
web  being  intermixed,  which  helps  to  keep  the 
other  substances  together.  In  the  upper  part 
and  sides  of  the  nest,  the  two  walls,  that  is  the 
external  and  internal,  are  in  immediate  contact ; 
but  in  the  lower  part  a  greater  space  intervenes, 
filled  with  the  slender  foliage  of  grasses,  the 
florets  of  Syngenesious  plants,  and  other  mate- 
rials which  render  soft  and  warm  the  bed  in 
which  the  eggs  are  to  repose. 

This  little  bird  feeds  upon  insects.  Its  flight 
is  not  rectilinear,  but  consists  of  many  curves, 
with  their  concavity  upwards.  These  curves 
equal  in  number  the  strokes  of  the  wing,  and  at 
every  stroke  its  whistle  is  heard,  the  intervals 
of  which  correspond  with  the  rapidity  of  its 
flight. 

Perhaps  of  all  the  instincts  of  Birds,  those 


470  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

connected  with  their  nidification  are  most  re- 
markable ;  and  of  all  these,  none  are  so  wonder- 
ful as  those  of  the  tribe  to  which  the  little  bird 
whose  proceedings  in  constructing  its  nest  I 
have  just  described,  belongs.  In  the  Indian 
tailor-birds,  the  object  of  their  sutorial  art  is 
stated  above ;  and  doubtless,  in  the  case  of  the 
Italian,  the  attack  of  some  enemy  is  prevented 
by  her  mode  of  fabricating  her  nest.  SitnBted* 
so  near  the  ground,  her  eggs,  but  for  this 
defence,  might  otherwise  become  the  prey, 
perhaps,  of  some  small  quadruped  or  reptile. 
He  who  created  the  birds  of  the  air  taught  every 
one  its  own  lesson,  and  how  to  place  and  con- 
struct its  nest  as  to  be  most  secure  from  inimical 
intrusion.  I  may  observe  here,  that  Professor 
Nitzch's  three  Orders,  or  rather  Sub-classes, 
mentioned  above,  receive  some  confirmation 
from  the  places  selected  by  the  individuals  com- 
posing them,  to  form  their  nests  and  deposit 
their  eggs  in.  The  aquatic  birds  generally  select 
places  in  the  vicinity  of  water;  the  terrestrial 
make  them  on  the  ground ;  and  the  great  body 
of  the  aierial  construct  their  nests  in'  trees^  shruhs^ 
and  plants. 

The  birds  of  this  Order  as  to  their  food  leave 
no  vegetable  or  animal  substance  untouched,  and 
the  humming-birds,  with  their  butterfly-tongue, 
imbibe  the  nectar  of  flowers.  Of  a  vast  number, 
insects  form  the  principal  part  of  their  food,  and 


BIRDS.  471 

they  are  the  chief  check  to  their  too  great  mul- 
tiplication;   and   sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of 

#  • 

the  locust-eating  thrush,^  they  devote  themselves 
to  a.  particular  tribe  of  insects,  but  most  of  the 
insectivorous  birds  vriU  also  eat  grain. 

Order  7.  —  The  last  Order  of  Birds,  the 
Haveners^  includes  those  that  are  most  perfect 
in  their  form,  and  all  are  remarkable  for  their 
predatory  habits.  Their  power  of  wing,  and 
talon,  and  beak,  distinguish  them  from  all  other 
birds  of  theotr;  and  though  some  of  the  ter- 
restrial birds  vie  with  them  in  magnitude,  and 
some  of  the  aquatic  ones,  as  we  have  seen,* 
exceed  them  in  extent  of  wing  and  untired 
flight,  yet  none  can  come  near  them  in  the 
union  of  all  those  qualities  which  constitute  their 
claim  to  the  first,  rank  amongst  the  birds ;  and 
the  eagle  has,  as  it  were,  been  consecrated  king 
over  them  all,  by  being  placed  in  the  Holy  of 
Holies  of  the  Jewish  temple  as  one  of  the 
symbols  of  those  powers  that  rule  under  God  in 
nature.' 

This*  Order  is  usually  divided  into  two  sec- 
tions, which  might  be  denominated  Sub-orders, 
the  nocturnal  birds  of  prey  and  the  diurnal. 
The  first  of  the  birds  of  these  sections  are  distin- 
guished by  their  large  eyes,  the  enormous  pupil 


*  Turdus  gryllivorui.  ^  See  Introd.  Ixxii. 

<  Eaek.  i.  10;  x.  1. 


472  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

of  which  receivei»  so  many  rays  of  lights  that  they 
are  dazzled  by  the  glare  of  day ;  but  by  it  are  ena- 
bled to  see  in  th^  night — they  fly  in  the  erening 
and  by  moonlight  Thus  they  are  fitted  best  to 
fulfil  their  Ainction,  and  to  be  very  beneficial 
to  man,  in  keeping  within  due  limits  animals 
that  are  often  extremely  detrimental  to  his  pro- 
perty, and  commit  their  ravages  more  or  less  in 
the  night;  on  this  account  owls  are  often  seen 
in  bams  where  mice  and  rats  abound,  and  are 
most  valuable  auxiliaries  to  die  cats.  The  white 
6wV  is  said  to  destroy  more  of  the  murine  race 
than  even  these  last  animals.  Had  not  the  pro- 
vident care  of  the  Father  of  the  universe  created 
these  mouse -and -rat -destroying  animals,  the 
tiller  of  the  soil  would  often  labour  in  vain. 

The  diurnal  Section  of  the  Haveners  contains 
all  the  birds  of  might  and  power.  I  have  before 
mentioned  the  secretary  bird,'  created  to  dimi* 
nish  the  number  of  serpents ;  so  similar  to  some 
of  the  wadersj  as  to  have  been  classed  with  them 
by  several  ornithologists;  but  Cuvier  says,  its 
whole  anatomical  structure,  as  well  as  its  beak 
and  other  external  characters,  vindicate  its  claim 
to  be  placed  in  the  present  Order.' 

Another  species  belonging  to  it  descends  to 
still  lower  food,  and  like  the  bee-eater,*  devours 


^  Strix  fiammean  '  See  above^  p.  178. 

'  Rkgne  iln.  i.  339.  ^  Merops  apiaster. 


KIRBtL  473 

bees. and  wasps  and  other  insects,  I  allude  to  the 
bee-falcan;^  but  in  general  the  aquiline  race 
attack  Tertebrated  animals,  reptiles,  fishes,  and 
birds  of  every  wing,  and  many  quadrupeds,  and 
the  giant  vultures  satiate  their  ravenous  appetites 
upon  any  carcases  that  their  piercing  sight,  from 
the  great  heights  to  which  they  ascend,  can 
discover.  Humboldt  says,  that  the  Condor^ 
soars  to  the  height  of  Chimborazo,  an  elevation 
almost  six  times  greater  than  that  at  which  the 
clouds  that  overshadow  our  plains  are  sus- 
pended.^ 

In  the  book  of  Deuteronomy  we  have  a  very 
animated  and  beautiful  allusion  to  the  eagle,  and 
her  method  of  exciting  her  eaglets  to  attenipt 
their  first  flight,  in  that  sublime  and  highly 
mystic  composition  called  Moses'  Song ;  in  which 
Jehovah's  care  of  his  people,  and  methods  of 
instructing  them  how  to  aim  at  and  attain 
heavenly  objects,  is  compared  to  her  proceedings 
upon  that  occasion.  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her 
nerif  Jlnttereth  over  her  young,  spreadeth  abroad 
her  wmgSy  taketh  them,  beareth  them  on  her  wings : 
so  Jehovah  aUme  did  lead  him.  The  Hebrew 
lawgiver  is  speaking  of  their  leaving  their  eyrie. 
Sir  H.  Davy  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing 
tbe  proceedings  of  an  eagle  after  they  had  left 
it.     He  thus  describes  them. 

1  Ptemis  apivorus.  ^  Sarcorhamphus  Orypkus, 

3  Zool.  i.  29.     See  above,  p.  165. 


474  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

*'  I  once  saw  a  very  interesting  s^ht  above 
one  of  the  crags  of  Ben  Nevis,  as  I  was  gmng 
on  the  20th  of  August  in  the  pursuit  of  black 
game.  Two  parent  eagles  were  teaching  their 
offspring,  two  young  birds,  the  manoeuvres  of 
flight.  They  began  by  rising  from  the  top  of  a 
mountain  in  the  eye  of  the  sun ;  it  was  about 
mid -day,  and  bright  for  this  climate.  They  at 
first  made  small  circles,  and  the  young  birds 
imitated  them;  they  paused  on  their  wings, 
waiting  till  they  had  made  their  first  flight,  and 
then  took  a  second  and  larger  gyration,  always 
rising  towards  the  sun,  and  enlaiging  their  circle 
of  flight  so  as  to  make  a  gradually  extending 
spiral.  The  young  ones  still  slowly  followed, 
apparently  flying  better  as  they  mounted ;  and 
they  continued  this  sublime  kind  of  exercise, 
always  rising,  till  they  became  mere  points  in 
the  air,  and  the  young  ones  were  lost  and  after- 
wards their  parents  to  our  aching  sight.'** 

What  an  instructive  lesson  to  Christian  parente 
does  this  history  read!  how  powerfully  does  it 
excite  them  to  teach  their  children  betimes  to 
look  toward  heaven  and  the  Sun  of  .righteous- 
ness, and  to  elevate  their  thoughts  thither  mere 
and  more  on  the  wings  of  faith  and  love ;  them- 
selves all  the  while  going  before  them,  and 
encouraging  them  by  their  own  example. 

'  Salmonia,  99. 


475 


Chapter  XXIV. 
Functions  and  Instincts.     Mammalians. 

.We  are  now  arrived  at  the  last  and  highest  Class 
of  the  Animal  Kingdom,  to  which  man  himself 
belongs,  and  of  which  he  forms  the  summit :  but 
though  he  may  be  said  to  belong  to  it  in  some 
respects,  in  others  he  stands  aloof  from  it,  as  an 
insulated  animal,  and  one.  exalted  far  above  it, 
being  created  rather  to  govern  its  members,  than 
to  be  tiie  associate  of  the  highest  of  them. 

This  Class  includes  many  animals  which  are 
of  the  greatest  utility  to  man,  and  without  which 
he  could  scarcely  exist,  at  least  not  in  comfort ; 
and  others  again  that  attack  him  and  his  pro- 
perty ;  and  though  the  fear  of  him,  in  some  de- 
gree, still  remains  upon  them,  also  often  excite 
that  passion  in  his  breast.  But  he  of  all  animals 
is  the  only  one,  that  by  the  exercise  of  his  rea- 
soning powers  and  faculties,  can  arm  himself 
with  fitctitious  weapons  enabling  him  to  cope 
with  the  superior  strength,  the  fierceness,  claws, 
and  teeth  of  the  tiger  or  the  lion,  and  to  lay  them 
dead  at  his  feet  when  in  the  very  act  of  springing 
upon  him. 


476  FUNCTIONS  aHd  instincts. 

The  animals  of  this  Class,  that  are  terrestrial^ 
are  all  qtuxdrupedsy^  and  are  mostly  covered  with 
fur  or  hair,  longer  or  shorter,  though  in  some, 
these  hairs  become  quills,  as  in  the  porcupine,  or 
spines,  as  in  the  hedgehc^ ;  others,  like  the  ser- 
pents and  lizards,  are  protected  by  scales,  as  the 
Manis ;  and  some  are  incased  in  a  hard  coat  of 
armour,  often  consisting  of  pieces  so  united  as  to 
form  a  kind  of  mosaic,  as  the  armadillo,  the  CMa- 
mypharus^^  and  probably  the  ilf^^a^Amiciii. 

In  the  aquatic  Mammalians  the  legs  are,  more 
or  less,  converted  into^^i^,  or  means  of  natation.' 
The  whole  body  constituting  the  Class,  though 
sometimes  varying  in  the  manner,  are  all  distin- 
guished by  giving  such  to  their  young,  aa  which 
account  they  were  denominated  by  the  Swedish 
naturalist,  Mammalians^ 

The  situation  and  number  of  the,  usually  protu- 
berant, organs  that  yield  the  milk,  vary  in  dif- 
ferent tribes  and  genera.  The  Creator  has  dis- 
tributed them  according  to  the  circumstances  of 
each  kind.  Physiologists  divide  them  into  pec- 
toral j  or  those  on  the  cficst ;  ahdomiikaly  or  those 
on  the  abdomen ;  and  inguinal^  or  those  <xl  the 
groin.  In  the  human  race,  the  Quadi'umemes^ 
and  the  hats^  and  some  others,  these  organs  are 

*  Tcrpafro^a  nyc  yi?C.  *  Pl-ATB  XVII. 
'  See  above,  p.  126.  143. 

*  Cuvier  calls  them  Mammiferaj  but  there  seems  no  re ason 
for  altering  the  original  term. 


MAMMALIANS.  477 

placed  between  the  arms.  For  an  erect  animal 
like  man,  it  is  evident  that  this  situation  for  the 
paps  was  the  only  convenient  one  for  suckling  an 
infant,  either  when  sitting  or  standing ;  the  mon- 
key tribes  also,  which  are  always  moving  about 
upon  trees,  and  among  the  branches,  could  not 
have  exercised  this  maternal  function,  had  their 
lactese^it  organs  been  placed  lower;  and  the 
bats,  which  carry  and  suckle  their  young  during 
flight,  required  that  their  nipples  should  be  simi* 
larly  placed,  to  enable  them  to  keep  fast  hold. 
AH  the  species  of  the  above  tribes  have  only  a 
pair  af  the  organs  in  question,  with  the  exception 
of  the  lory,  or  sloth-ape,^  so  called  from  the  ex* 
cessive  slowness  of  its  movements,  which  has 
yiner,  two  of  which  Cuvier  places  in  his  abdo-- 
minal  column,  under  the  name  of  epigastric. 

The  animals  which  prodnce  more  than  two  at 
a  birth,  as  might  be  expected,  have  a  proper^ 
tionaUe  number  of  nipples  differently  distributed. 
Thus  the  cat  has  foiir  pectoral,  and  four  abdo- 
minal. The  ten  nipples  of  the  swine  are  all  ab- 
dominal, and  those  of  the  oth»  Pachyderms, 
with  the  exception  <^  the  elephant,  which  has 
only  two  pectoral  nipples,  are  siAiilarly  situated* 
The  jerboa^  has  both  pectoral  and  inguinal  ones, 
while  the  lemming'  has  all  three  kinds;  the 
RumimmtSj  Solipeds,   Amphibians^    Carnivorous 

^  Sienops.  ^  Dipus  Sagitia,  ^  Lemmus. 


478  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

CetaceanSj  have  only  inguinal  dngs,  with  fimn 
two  to  five  nipples.  This  situation  is  evideDt- 
ly  best  suited  for  suckling  their  limited  num- 
ber of  young  ones.  Amongst  the  Marsupians, 
whose  young,  immediately  upon  their  birth,  pass 
into  a  second  matrix  as  it  were,  almost  the  entire 
skin  of  the  abdomen  forms  a  pocket,  imposing 
the  lactescent  organs ;  those  of  the  opossum  are 
arranged,  in  Cuvier's  table,  in  the  inguinal  co- 
lumn ;  but  in  the  Kanguroo^  which  has  four,  they 
appear  rather  to  be  abdominal .  These  y ariati  ons 
in  the  position  and  niimber  of  the  organs  furnish- 
ing the  sole  food  of  the  animals  of  the  present 
Class  in  their  state  of  in&ncy,  were  evidently 
planned  and  formed  by  the  hand  of  a  Being  su- 
preme in  Wisdom,  Power,  and  Groodness,  who 
adapted  every  organ  to  the  circumstances  in 
which  it  was  his  will  to  place  the  diversified  ani- 
mals that  compose  it,  and  to  their  general  struc- 
ture. To  those  which  produce  not  more  than 
two  at  a  birth,  only  two  organs  for  suction  w&e 
usually  given,  placed,  according  to  the  wants  of 
the  animal,  either  between  the  anterior  or  poste- 
rior extremities,  in  which  latter  case  the  posture 
was  never  erect  ^  but  where  he  decreed  an  ani- 
mal should  produce  a  more  numerous  progeny, 
he  planted  them  in  greater  numbers,  and  so  dis- 
tributed them  that  all  belonging  to  the  same 
litter  could  suck  at  the  same  time.  In  the  case 
of  the  Kanguroo  the  members  of  two  litters  are 


MAMMALIANS.  479 

Mmetimes  sucking  at  the  same  time»  \rhich  ac- 
coonto  for  their  haying /our  nipples,  a  fact  which 
^ow«  bow  accurately  every  thing  has  been  fore- 
seen,  weighed,  and  numbered,  by  a  Provident 
Intdlect. 

In  the  whole  animal  kingdom,  except  amongst 
the  Mammalians,  there  is  no  instance  of  the 
young  being  supported  by  their  parents  with  nu- 
triment derived  from  themselves,  nothing,  there- 
fore, atifords  a  clearer  character  for  a  definition 
d  the  Class  than  this  most  interesting  one :  the 
Birds,  indeed — ^with  the  exception  of  pigeons 
which  feed  their  nestlings  from  their  crop — as 
well  as  the  bees,  and  several  other  Hymenop- 
terous  insects,  provide  their  progeny  with  food 
which  they  collect  for  them  themselves ;  but  the 
great'  majority  of  invertebrated  animals,  confine 
their  care  for  them,  to  placing  their  eggs,  in  a 
situation  in  which,  when  hatched^  they  would 
meet  with  their  appropriate  food,  and  this  ap- 
pears to  be  all  that  is  generally  done  by  the  two 
first  classes  of  Vertebrates,  the  Fishes,  and  the 
Reptiles*. 

Mammalia.     (Beasts.) 

Animal  vertebrated,  ovoviviparous,  or  vivipa- 
rous. 

Extremities  ambulatory,  or  natatory ;  in  a  few 
organiaKed  for  flight. 


480  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Integument  piloBe;  sometimes  spinose,  or  armed 
with  hard  scales  or  plates;  and  sometimes  naked. 
Young  not  hatched  by  incubation,  but  when  first 
extruded  from  the  matrix,  receiving  their  nutri- 
ment by  suction,  till  they  can  support  thetnselves. 

Circulation  double.     Stood  red,  warm. 

Respiration  eimple.     Lungs  thoracic. 

Cuvier  seems  to  have  laboured  imdef  some 
difficulty  with  regard  to  the   Clasrificatian  of 
Mammalians,  and  to  have  regarded  the  Marsu- 
pians  and   Monotr^mes  as  forming  a  distinct 
Class,  divisible,  for  tlie  most  part,  into  Orden 
analogous  to  those  into  which  the  Class  of  com- 
mon Quadrupeds  is  divisible.^    Subsequent  ob- 
servations have  proved  the  general  correctness  of 
this  idea.     Mr.  Owen  observes  to  me,  in  a  letter, 
''  Dissections  of  most  of  the  genera  of  Marsur 
pians  have  tended  to  confirm  in  my  mind  the 
propriety  of  establishing  them  as  a  distinct  and 
parallel  group,  beginning  with  the  Mmatrhnes^ 
which  I  believe  to  lead  from  Reptiles^  not  birds. 
A  general  simplicity  in  the  structure  of  the  brain; 
a  less  perfect  condition  of  the  vocal  organs ;  some 
peculiar  dispositions  of  the  great  veins  and  ar- 
teries, as  the  presence  of  two  superior  ven^B  cavie^ 
and  the  absence  of  an  if\ferior  mesenteric  artery y 
are  among  the  circumstances  in  which  they,  the 

■  R^gn,  An,  i.  174. 


MAMMALIANS.  481 


Manmpians  and  Monolxemes  differ  from  the  true 
yiviparous  Mammalians,  and  agree  with  the  ovi-' 
parous  Vertebrates.  Recent  opportunities  of  ex- 
amining the  impregnated  uterus  of  the  KoHgu* 
TOO  and  Omitharhynchus  have  almost  determined 
that  they  are  both  OTOviviparous/' 

Under  these  impressions,  confirmed  and  illus* 
trated  by  the  observations  of  so  able  a  ccmipara- 
tive  anatomist,  I  shall  consider  the  Class  of  Mam- 
malians as  divisible  into  two  Subclasses^  viz.  Ovo-' 
viviparous  Mammalians,  and  Viviparous  Mam- 
malians. 

It  may  be  here  observed,  with  regard  to  the 
state  of  forwardness  in  which  the  different  tribes 
of  Mammalians  leave  the  matrix,  a  considerable 
variation  takes  place,  some  requiring  a  longer  time 
than  others,  before  they  can  be  considered  as  at 
all  independent  of  maternal  care  and  protection. 
The  young  ei  the  Ruminants,  Pachyderms,  and 
Solipeds,  come  into  the  world  with  the  organs  of 
die  senses,  and  of  locomotion,  in  a  state  to  be 
used  immediately ;  they  can  see  with  their  eyeSf 
and  bear  with  their  ears^  and  walkyniikL  their  legs^ 
as  soon  as  they  are  bom;  whereas  the  Preda- 
ceans  and  several  others,  when  first  born  are 
hUnd^  and  unable  to  waik^  and  do  not  attain 
to  the  full  use  of  their  eyes  and  legs  till  a 
considerable  time  after  birth.  In  man,  though 
the  infant  is  born  seeing^  yet  a  much  longer  pe- 

VOL.  II.  II 


482  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

riody  and  the  instruction  of  the  mother  or  BAurae, 
are  required  befinre  it  can  tcalk. 

In  the  first  case  h»e  noticed,  that  of  the  Ru' 
minants  and  Pachyderms,  the  young  aniinal 
requires  less  care  from  the  mother.  She  has 
little  to  do  besides  suckling,  and  watching  it 
in  order  to  protect  it  if  danger  fiifeatens.  But, 
in  the  second  case,  she  must  prepare  .a  kind  of 
nest,  not  exposed  to  the  lights  ^nd  removed  from 
observation,  in  which  she  can  attend  to  her 
young  unmolested^  tiU  they  can  see  and  move 
about  upon  their  legs.  Every  one  knows  how  at*- 
tentive  feline  animals  sure  to  these  cirehmstances, 
and  the  Bodents  ofien  excavate  burrMra  in 
which  they  bring  forth  and. suckle  their  young. 
The  Marsnpian  Mammalians  probably  are  ex- 
posed to  external  circumstances,  which  rewkr 
it  necessary  that  they  should  have  a  kind  of 
nidus  formed  of  the  skin  of  their  own  body,  to 
receive  their  young  wb^i  they  leave  the  matrix, 
at  which  period  they  seem  to  be  in  a  more  hdlp- 
less  state  than  any  of  the  animals  last  idlnded  to.^ 

From  this  statement  we  see  that  the  gramiiM* 
vorous  and  omnivorous  animals,  whose  food  is 
always  at  hand,  come  into  the  world  the  best 
prepared  for  action ;  while  the  carnivorous  tees, 
and  those  that  must,  if  I  may  so  speak,  procuie 
their  daily  bread  by  the  sweat  of  their  brovs, 

»  Owen  in  Philos,  Tr.  1834.  344. 


MAMMALIANS*  483 

reqoire  %o  hb  in  some  degree  educated  for  their 
function,^  before  fhey  can  duly  exercise  it.  In 
the  instance  of  the  OmilkM'kynchua^  a  burrow  5 
seems  to  supply  the  place  of  the  marsupial 
pouch,  -which  indicates  some  approach  to  many 
of  the  Rodents. 

Stih'class  1 .  Ovoviviparous  Mammalians. 

Chorion f  or  external  membrane  of  the  ^g  not 
rendered  vascular  by  the  extension  of  the  fietal 
vessels  into  it.  Embryo  not  adhering  to  the 
uterus. 

Only  one  passage  out  of  the  body. 

Marsupial  bones  in  all. 

This  Sitb-class  is  divided  into  two  Orders, 
MonotremeSy  and  Marsupians. 

Order    1.  — MonotremeB     ( Omithorhynckus ; 

No  marsupial  pouch.  Coracoid  bones  extended 
to  the  sternum.  Young  suckled  from  a  mammarjf 
-orifice :  brought  up  in  burrows.  Animal  preda-^ 
eeoiis. 

Or€kr2*  —  Ma$*supians  (Wombat;  Koala; 
Kangnroof  Plmlangist;  Flying  and  Common 
Opossum  J  &c.) 

A  marsupial  pouch  receiving  the  young  after 
birth,  in  which  they  are  suckled,  by  means  of 
nipples.  Ammal  herbivorous,  predaceous,  or  cex^ 
nivorous. 

'  See  alM)ve,  p.  261.  *  Owen,  nhi  supr.  564. 


484  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Sub'dass  2. — Viviparous  MammalianB. 

Chorion^  or  external  memlHraDe  of  the  egg 
Tendered  vascular  by  the  extension  of  the  foetal 
vessels  into  it. 

Embryo  adhering  to  the  uterus. 

Young  when  brought  forth  not  received  into 
a  pouch ;  suckled  by  a  nipple. 

This  sub-class  is  divided  into  eight  Orders 
thus  anranged  m  an  ascending  scale, 

1.  Cetaceans,  5.  Rodents, 

2.  Pachyderms,  6,  Predaceans, 

3.  Rumihanfs,  7.  Ckeirqpterans, 

4.  Edentates,  8.  Quadrumanes. 

.  Several  of  these  Orders  may  be  further  divided 
into  Sub-orders^  as  will  appear  when  I  come  to 
treat  of  them.  I  have  not  adhered  to  Baron 
Cuvier's  arrangement,  in  placing  the  Ruminants 
next  to  the  Cetaceans^  for.  it  always  appeared  to 
me  incongruous  to  place  at  the  foot  of  the  scale, 
animals  on  every  account  entitled  to  rank  higher: 
and  I  am  happy  to  find  my  opinion  backed  by 
Mr.  Owen's  judgment,  which  be  informs  me  is 
grounded  on  anatomical  consideraticms.  The 
Hippopotamus  appears  to  us  both  the  pn4>er 
successor  of  the  Cetaceans. 

Order  1 . — Cetaceans.  This  Order  may  be  di- 
vided into  two  Suh^ordersy  the  Jirst  consisting 
of  those  that  form  the  great  body  of  the  Order, 
which  are  predaceous  in  their  habits;  and  the 
second  of  those  that  are  herbivorous.  (To  the 
first    belong   the    Whales;    the    Cachalots;    the 


MAMMALIANS.  48^ 

Nanvhab ;  the  Porpoises ;  aiid  the  Dolphvis^ 
&c. :  and  to  the  second,  the  Manatee;  the 
Dugong ;  and  Rytina.) 

This  Order  is  principally  distinguished  from 
the  terrestrial  Mammalians  by  having  the  kind 
legs  converted  into  a  horizontal  (so  called)  fin 
moving  up  and  down.  They  have  little  or  ha 
neck,  and  their  anterior  extremities  are  covered 
with  a  tendinous  membrane,  which  enables  the 
animal  to  use  them  as  fins. 

The  Predaeeous  Cetaceans  are  distinguished 
from  the  Herbivorous  by  having  their  mammary 
organs  inguinal^  and  by  theur  Jins  not  being 
prehensory. 

In  the  Herbivorous  Sub-order,  the  mmmnary 
organs  are  pectoral,  and  they  can  use  their  ante- 
rior extremities,  in  some  degree,  as  hands,  to 
carry  their  young,  and  in  locomotion.*  They 
are  also  armed  with  tusks,  a  circumstance  which 
appears  to  connect  them  with  the  Morse  or 
Walrus^  which  is  said,  by  Cuvier,  to  be  both 
herbivorous  and  carnivorous,  and  to  differ  con-*" 
siderably  from  the  rest  of  the  Amphibians. 

Orders. — Pachyderms.  The  external  cha- 
racters which  distinguish  the  Solipeds  from  the 
typical  Pachyderms  are  so  striking,  that  they 
seem  almost  entitled  to  be  placed  in  a  separate 
Order.  I  shall,  however,  consider  them  as  form- 
ing a  Sub-order.     (To  this  Order  belong  the 

•  Sec  above,  p.  13().  '  Trichecus  rosmarus. 


486  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Hippopotanms ;  the  Tapir ;  the  Swineixihe ;  tlie 
Rhinoceros ;  the  Elephant ;  the  Hofse ;  and  the 
Ass;  &c.)  TPhe  principal  charactera  of  this 
Order,  are  Feet  armed  \i^itfa  hoofs  incapable 
of  prehension.  In  the  typical  Pachyderms  the 
hoof  is  divided  more  or  less,  but  in  the  SoUpeds 
it  is  not. 

Order  3*-^RumifUints.  The  Camd  tribe  seems 
to  form  another  Sub-order  in  the  present  Sub- 
class, distinguished  by  the  remaikaUe  circum* 
stance,  mentioned  upon  a  former  occasion,  that 
its  hoof,  though  superficially  divided,  has  an 
entire  dole,^  and  the  males  have  no  horns. 
(This  Order  includes  the  Camel;  Dromedary; 
Lama ;  Giraffe ;  the  Ox^  and  Sheep  tribes ;  the 
Goats ;  the  Antelopes ;  the  Deers ;  and  the  Elk.) 
The  principal  character  of  the  Order  is  that 
which  its  name  indicates,  that  the  animids 
belonging  to  it,  chew  the  cud^  that  is,'  masticate 
a  second  time  the  fiood  that  they  swallow^  which, 
owing  to  the  structure  of  their  stomachs,  they  can 
return  to  the  mouth  after  the  first  deglutition. 

Order  4. — Edentates.  (This  Order  contains  the 
Pangolin;  the  Ant-eaters ;  the  ArmadiUos ;  and 
the  Sloths ;  &c.)  Their  distiDctiye  cbaract^  is 
to  have  no  fore  teethe 

Order  6. -^Rodents.  (^Guinea-pigs;  Hare  nnd 
Rabbit;  Porcupine;  Beaver;  Mouse;  Rat;.  Dor- 

»  See  above,  p.  203. 


MAMMALIANS.  487 

mouse;  Jerboa;  Marmot;  Squirrels;  &c.)  The 
principal  character  of  this  order  are  its  front  or 
cutting  teeth;  of  these  there  are  two  in  each 
jaw,  separated  from  the  grinders  by  an  interval, 
so  that  they  can  neither  seize  any  living  prey^ 
or  lacerate  its  flesh;  they  cannot  even  cut  the 
aliments  which  form  their  subsistence,  but  they 
can,  as  it  were,  file  them,  and  by  constant  labour, 
nibbling  and  gnawing,  reduce  them  to  frag- 
ments proper  for  deglutition.  They  are  con- 
nected with  the  hanguroOy  the  wombat,  and 
other  MarsupianSi  and  the  beaver  exhibits  one 
of  tlie  distinctive  characters  of  the  Monotremes, 
it  has  only  one  passage  by  which  the  ex- 
crements are  ejected. 

Order  G* — Predaceans  or  Zoopfiagans.  Cuviei's 
subdivisions  of  this  Order  may  be  regarded,  for 
the  most  part,  as  Sub-orders,  but  there  is  one 
tribe  included  in  it  by  this  great  man,  the  Chei^ 
ropteransy  which  seems  rather  to  form  an  Oscu- 
lant Order,  between  it  and  the  Quadrumanes. 
(Walrus;  Seals;  Cat;  Leopard;  Panther;  Tiget'; 
Lion; Hyaena;  Ichneumon, Civet-cat;  Fox;  Wolf; 
JDog;  Otter;  Mai*tin;  Weasel;  Glutton;  Bear; 
Mole;  Hedgehog;  Shrew;  &c.)  The  animals  of 
this  Order  have  three  kinds  of  teeth,  viz.  cutting- 
teeth,  ca^nne  teeth,  and  grinders;  their  ;»a«^  are 
armed  with  claws;  their  muzzle  is  often  set 
with  whiskers,  usually  called  smellers ;  their 
mammary  organs  are  dispersed ;  their  intestines 


488  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

are  less  volumiuous  than  those  of  h6rbiv<m>u8 
animals,  a  provision^  the  object  of  which  is  to 
prevent  the  flesh  which  forms  their  food  from 
putrefying,  by  remaining  too  long  in  the  body. 

Order  7. — Cheiroptera?^  (Bats;  Vamp3fre8;snd 
Flying-cats).  The  animals  of  this  Order  are 
distinguished  by  real  organs  for  flight,  formed 
of  the  skin  extended  between  the  l^s»  as 
described  on  a  former  occasion  ;^  their  matt^ 
mary  organs,  as  in  the  Quadrumanes,  are  pec* 
toral ;  they  are,  in  some  points,  connected  with 
the  flying  opossum,  flying  squirrels,  &c. 

0$*der  8. — Quadrumanes.  (Monk^s;  Apes; 
Baboons ;  Oran-outans.)  The  great  character 
that  distinguishes  this  order  is,  a  meveahle  thumb 
on  their  lower  extremities  opposed  to  thefingersy 
so  that  they  can  use  the  carpuSy  metacafjms,  and 
phalanges  of  both  extremities  as  hands.  I  have 
more  than  once  had  <>ccasion  to  observe/  that 
certain  tribes  in  the  animal  kingdom  seem  occa- 
sionally to  form  centres  from  which  rays  di- 
verge towards  difierent  parts.  The  quadrumanes 
afibrd  another  example  of  this  disposition  in 
nature :  the  lory,  for  instance,  looks  towards 
the  sloths ;  the  baboon,  the  Cynoeephalus  of  the 
ancients,  towards  the  dogs  and  bears ;  the  aye 
aye^  amongst  the  Rodents,  also  might  be  taken 

'  See  above,  p.  156. 

'  Sec  Vol.  I.  p.  '27,5,  and  II.  p.  20.  35. 


.  MAMMALIANS^  .  489 

fiNT  a  quadrumane,^  Bjod  several  other  instances 
occur. 

Sub-class  ].  Ordef;  1. — ^The  animals  of  this 
Order  have  puzzled  Zoologists  to  ascertain  their 
place  and  character.  At  first  they  were  regarded 
as  oviparous  instead  of  mammiferous  quadru* 
peds,  and  the  Ornytharhynchus  in  particular,  was 
thought  to  be  something  between  bird  and  beast. 
The  researches  of  Mr.  Owen  have  almost  proved 
that  the  animal  just  named  does  not  leave  th^ 
womb  of  its  mother  as  an  egg,  requiring  her 
incubation,  to  complete  its  birth;  but  in  the 
form  it  is  afterwards  to  maintain,  in  which  case 
it  must  necessarily  dnive  its  support  from  her, 
by  some  lactescent  organ,  traces  of  which  have 
been  discovered*  Its  beak  resembling  ,  that 
of  a  duck,  and  its  webbed  feet  seem  to  cour 
nect  it,  in  some  degree,  with  the  first  Order  of 
the  Birds;  but  the  entire  scapular  apparatus^ 
the  developement  of  the  oviduct  and  uterus 
in  both  sides,  the  absence  of  the  ligamentum 
teres,  its  four  legs,  and  reptant  motions,  shew 
that  it  is  most  nearly  connected  with  the  Rep- 
tiles. The  £<!hidna,  by  its  extensile  tongue,  its 
food,  and  mode  of  taking  it,  approaches  the  ant- 
eaters  :  it  also  rolls  itself  up  like  an  armadillo. 
The  functions  of  the  Order  seem  to  be  to  keep 
in  check  the  numbers  of  small  animals;  the 

'  See  Vol.  II.  p.  210. 


490  FUNCTIONS  AND  IN&TINCTO. 

Echidna^  the  ants;  and  the  Ormthoryncfaua, 
which  frequents  the  waters,  some  that  awe 
aquatic.  But  we  know  very  little  of  their  habits 
and  history. 

Orilef'  2. — The  animals  of  this  Order  are  partly 
herbivorous,  and  partly  carnivorous.  The  wom- 
bat/ the  koala,'  the  kanguroo,'  and  other  New 
Holland  species,  are  herbivorous ;  thephalaagist^ 
of  the  Moluccas,  lives  upon,  the  trees,  and  devours 
insects  as  well  as  fruits.  The  New  Holland 
opossums^  are  very  voracious,  and  devour  car- 
casses as  well  as  insects:  they  enter  into  the 
houses,  where  their  voracity  is  very  troublesome. 
That  most  common  in  America,^  like  the  fox, 
attacks  poultry  in  the  night,  and  sucks  their 
eggs.  It  is  said  to  produce  often  sixteen  young 
ones  in  one  litter,  which,  when  Erst  bora,  do  not 
weigh  more  than  a  grain  each!  though  blind 
and  s^most  shapeless,  when  placed  in  the  pouch 
they  instinctively  find  the  nipple,  and  adhere  to 
it  till  they  attain  the  size  of  a  mouse,  which  does 
not  take  place  till  they  are  fifty  days  old,  at  which 
period  they  begin  to  see ;  after  this  they  do  not 
^  wholly  leave  the  pouch  ^ill  they  are  as  big  as  a 
rat !  I  This  statement  is  so  extraordinary,  that, 
though  apparently  believed  by  Cuvier,  on  the 
authority  of  Barton,^  it  seems  almost  incredible. 

1  Phascolomys,  «  Lipurus.  ^  Macrqpus. 

♦  Phalangista  orientalis,  *  Dasyurus, 

^  Didelphis  viryiniana.  '  Rkgn,  An.  I.  176. 


MAMMALIAKS.  491 

It  IS  strange,  as  the  animal  seems  common  in 
America,  that  Say,  or  some  other  Zoologist  of 
that  country,  has  not  turned  his  attention  to  it. 

I  have  mentioned,  on  another  occasion/ several 
particulars  of  the  history  of  the  kanguroo  and 
koala,  \i^hich  I  need  not  repeat  here.  Indeed 
our  knowledge  of  the  history  and  instincts  of 
the  Marsupian  animals  is  very  limited.  Europe 
produces  none.  New  Holland,  some  of  the 
Asiatic  islands,  and  North  and  South  America, 
are  their  principal  habitations.  As  the  young 
of  these  animals  leave  the  matrix  of  their  mother 
at  so  eariy  a  period,  and  when,  if  they  were 
exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  they  must  inevitably 
perish,  it  is  evident  that  some  such  protection, 
as  that  with  which  Providence  has  furnished 
them,  was  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  the 
race.  Doubtless  some  wise  and  beneficial  end 
is  aiiswered  by  the  seeming  premature  nativity 
of  these  little  creatures. 

The  opossums  are  peculiar  to  America,  and 
are  remarkable  for  having  a  greater  number  of 
teeth  than  any  other  animal,  amounting  in  all  to 
fifty ;  they  approach  the  Quadrumanes,  by  hav- 
ing the  thumb  of  their  hind  foot  opposed  to  the 
fingers,  whence  they  have  been  called  Pedi- 
manes,  but  it  is  not  armed  with  a  nail.  They  are 
usually  stationed  on  the  trees,  where  they  pursue 

# 

^  See  above,  p.  175,  211. 


49a  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

birds  and  insects,  tho!]^h,  like  the  monkeys,  they 
often  eat  fruity  and  by  this  structure  of  the  hind 
foot  they  can  probably  better  support  themselvea 
on  the  branches.  Many  of  the  animals  of  this 
Order  tend  also  to  the  Rodents,  and  others  to  the 
Predaceana. 

Sub-class  2.  Order  1 . — At  the  foot  of  the  pre- 
sent Clasa  are  found  the  most  gigantic  animals 
with  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  people  the 
globe  that  we  inhabit. 

The  destruction,  however,  at  least  in  the  Arctic 
seas,  of  these  animals,  is  so  great,  that  it  has 
been  supposed,  they  are  not  suffered  to  live  long 
enough  to  attain  their  full  dimensions ;  but  this 
has  been  doubted.  Mr.  Scoresby  sftw  none  in 
those  seas  that  exceeded  sixty-eight  feet  in 
length ;  but  some  are  said  to  reach  one  hundred 
and  twenty  feet.  I  saw  one,  which  was  ex- 
hibited two  years  ago,  in  the  King's  Mews,  the 
length  of  the  skeleton  of  which  wad  -more  than 
ninety  feet.  In  the  Antarctic  seas,  where  the 
cupidity  of  mercantile  enterprise  does  not  oc- 
casion any  great  destruction  of  them,  some  are 
said  even  to  reach  the  enormous  length  of  one 
hundred  and  sixty  feet  God  has  placed  these 
Leviathans^  where  their  enormous  bulk  can  have 
full  play,  and  their  enormous  appetite  be  fully 
satiated,  in  the  vast  and  teeming  depths  of  the 

'  See  above,  p.  432. 


MAMMALIANS.  49l8 

oce&n>  where,  wh^her  they  move  horizontally, 
or,  by  the  aid  of  that  powerful  organ,  their  forked 
tail,  seek  the  deep  waters,  there  is  space,  and  to 
spare,  even  for  them. 

The  oamiyorous,  or  predaceons  Cetaceans  may 
Tery  conveniently  be  divided  into  sections  by 
characters  which  distinguish  their  maxillary 
organs ;  the  common  whale,^  and  the  fin-whale,^ 
liave  their  jaws  armed  with  no  real  teeth,  but 
only  furnished  with  transverse  plates,  formed  of 
what  is  called  whalebone,  consisting  of  a  fibrous 
homy  substance,  sufficient  for  the  mastication 
of  their,  for  the  most  part,  gelatinous  food,  which 
«wam8  in  such  infinite  myriads  in  the  Arctic 
and  icy  seas,  that  Scoresby  calculates  it  would 
require  eighty  thousand  persons,  constantly  em* 
ployed  from  the  Creationv  to  count  the  number 
of  those  existing  simultaneously. 

Animals  of  this  section  are  further  subdivided 
into  those  .that  have,  and  those  that  have  not  a 
dorsal  fin.  To  the  latter  subdivision  belongs 
the  animal  commonly  distinguished  as  the  tvhak 
by  way  of  eminence,^  and  which  is  the  principal 
ofc^ct  of  the  whale  fish^y .  The  senses  of  seeing 
and  hearing  in  these  animals,  in  the  water,  are 
extremely  acute ;  and  their  eyes  are  so  placed 
lliat  they  can  see  behind  as  well  as  befare  and 
above  them,  and  for  a  great  distance ;  but  when 

'  Bal(Bna,         ^  Balmnoptera,  '  Balana  Mysitcetus, 


494  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  head  emerges  bom  the  water,  this  activity  of 
sight  and  hearing  teases. 

Their  motions  in  the  water  are  extremely  rapid. 
They  will  sometimes  assume  a  perpendicultf 
position,  with  their  head  downwards,  and  reltfing 
aloft  their  tremendous  tail,  lash  the  waler  with 
terrific  violence,  like  the  Indian  god^  churning 
the  sea  into  foam,  and  filling  the  air  with  vapour. 
Sometimes  by  the  motion  of  this  orgaj^^  they 
produce  a  thundering  noise.  They  will  dive  to 
the  bottom  of  the  ocean;  and  when  CQufined 
in  the  shallows,  these  unwieldy  monstefs  wiH 
sometimes  leap  out  of  the  water.  Their  brain» 
compared  with  that  of  man,  is  yery  smalL 
The  weight  of  the  brain  of  an  adult  man  is 
often  four  pounds;  that  of  a  whale,  nineteai 
feet  long,  only  three  pounds  and  a  half;  yet 
this  is  large  compared  with  that  of  some  other 
animals. 

The  second  section  of  Cetaceans  ciHKdsts  of 
those  which  have  teeth  only  in  their  Mpper  jaw. 
To  this  tribe  belongs  the  sea-uniav^  or  nar^ 
whal,^  distinguished  by  its  long  tusk,  or  tusks^ 
for  there  are  sometimes  two,  extended  in  a  hori- 
zontal direction. 

To  the  third  section  belong  those  that  have 
teeth  only  in  their  lower  jaw  :  of  this  description 
are  the  spermaceti  whales,  or  cachalots,^  remark- 

'  Moti&dan  Monoceros,  *  Physeier, 


MAMMALIANS^  495 

able  for  tbeir  euormons  head,  sometimes  occu-f 
pying  half  the  length  of  the  body.  Their  teetii 
are  long^  and  numer oa&»  and  all  point  outwards ; 
opposite  to  them,  in  the  uppier  jaw,  is  an  equal 
number  of  cavities,  in  which  the  ends  of  the 
teeth  are  lodged,  when  the  mbuth  is  closed. 
These  animals  are  said  to  grow  sometimes  to  an 
enormous  length;  and  to  be  very  criiel  and 
dangerous* 

The  fourth  and  last  section  of  carnivorous 
Cetaceans  consists  of  those  that  have  teeth  in 
both  upper  and  lower  jaws.  To  this  the  por* 
poise/  the  grampus,'  and  the  long  celebrated 
dolphin^  belong.  These  animals  are  more  active 
than  the  preceding  Cetaceans^  and  have  a  brain 
of  greater  volume.  The  common  dolphin  is  gre^ 
garious,  and  remarkable  for  its  frolicsome  gam^ 
bols,  often  foretelling  a  storm,  during  which  ih&y 
will  leap  entirely  out  oS  the  water.  They  pursue 
and  devour  the  gregarious  migratory  fishes,  and 
will  even  eat  offial  and  gaibage.  These  animal^ 
in  th^  tooth^armed  mouth,  often  opening  wide, 
seem  to  exhibit  some  affinity  to  the  aquatic 
Sauriasis  as  has  been  Remarked  witti  regard  to 
the  Cetaceans  in  general.^ 

The  end  for  which  all  these  carnivorous  C^ta^ 
ceans  were  brought  into  existence  by  the  Creator 

^  Phoccena.  «  Delpkinus  Orca. 

»  Delphinus  Delphis.  *  See  Vol.  L  p.  30,  31. 


496  FUNCTIONS  AND  INmNCTS. 

of  thie  universe,  was  evidently  to  keep  within  due 
limits,  those  animals,  inhabitants  of  the  northeni 
and  southern  oceans,  which  were  most  giyen  to 
increase,  and  which,  were  it  not  for  some  such 
check,  might  multiply  to  such  a  degree  as  would 
interfere  with  the  general  welfare/ 

'  But  the  vegetable  tenants  of  the  ocean  require 
to  be  kept  within  due  limits,  as  well  as  the  ani« 
mal,  amongst  other  creatures  to  whom  this  pro- 
vince is  assigned,  are  some  C^iaceans;  thus 
preserving  the  general  analogy  observable  in 
the  animal  Kingdom,  which,  in  almost  every 
Order,  has  its  cattte,  as  well  as  its  beasts  of 
prep.  Only  three  genera  have  been  hitherto 
discovered  to  which  this  function  is  assigned,* 
and  all  of  them  consisting  of  animals  now  in 
existence. 

The  Manatees,^  belonging  to  this  Sub*order, 
on  account  of  their  carrying  their  young  with 
their  flappers  or  fin^like  legs>  and  their  breasts, 
probably  gave  rise  to  the  fable  of  the  siren  ^ 
or  mermaid. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  the  herbivorous 
Cetaceans,  is  the  Dugong^^  which  is  the  only  ani«* 
mal  yet  known  that  grazes  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea 
usually  in  shallow  inlets,  which  it  is  enabled  to 

1  See  Vol.  1.  p.  199—202.         «  Manatus  Americanus. 
^  Halicare  Dxigong. 


MAMMALIANS.  497 

•ccompUrii  by  its  power  of  suspending  itself 
steadily  in  the  water,  and  by  having  its  jaws 
bent  down  at  an  angle,  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
bring  the  mouth  into  nearly  a  vertical  direction, 
so  that  it  can  feed  upon  the  sea-weeds  much  ia 
the  same  manner  as  a  cow  does  upon  the  herbage, 

Ruppel,  a  traveller  in  Africa,  discovered  a 
second  species  of  Dugong  in  the  Red  Sea ;  and 
he  is  of  opinion,  that  it  was  the  skin  of  this 
animal  with  which  the  Jews  were  commanded  to 
cover  the  tabernacle.^ 

Order  2.  Whoever  compares  the  genuine  Pa* 
chyderms  with  the  Cetaceans,  will  find  many 
points  in  which  they  resemble  each  other.  As 
the  latter  Order  contains  the  largest  nuxrine  ani« 
mals,  so  does  the  former  the  giants  that  inhabit 
the  earth.  With  respect  to  their  integument, 
the  skin  of  both  is  nearly  naked,  except  in  the 
case  of  the  swine,  the  daman,'  the  mammoth, 
and  some  others ;  a  very  small  eye  characterizes 
all,  and  a  short  tail;  the  blubber  of  the  whale 
seems  to  have  its  analogue  in  the  fat  that  covers 
the  muscles  of  the  swine.  One  of  the  most 
remarkable  animals  of  this  Sub-order,  is  the 
fosflil  one,  which,  on  account  of  its  enormous 
tusks,  is  named  Deinotherium^    It  is  found  in 

1  H.  Tabemaculum.    See  Exod.  xxn,  14.    Badgers*  skins  i^ 
our  Translation. 
*  Hyrax, 
^  From  the  Or.  itivoCf  terrible,  and  di^pcov,  wild  beast. 

VOL.  II.  K  K 


498  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS- 

the  north  of  Europe,  and  gpecimend  of  ite 
powerful  jaws  and  tusks  may  be  seen  in  die 
British  Museum.  From  its  lower  jaw  two 
powerful  tusks  rise  as  in  the  Hippopotamus,  to 
which  Mr.  Owen  regards  it  as  approaching  very 
near,  and  as  forming  the  link  that  unites  the 
Cetaceans  to  the  Pachyderms-  The  herbivorous 
Cetaceans,  in  common  with  the  generality  of 
the  Pachyderms,  are  likewise  armed  with  tusks; 
so  that  the  interval  that  separates  the  Hippo^ 
potamus  and  Deinotherium  from  the  Dugong 
is  not  very  wide. 

The  grand  function  of  the,  for  the  most  part, 
mighty  animals  which  constitute  the  tribe  I  am 
speaking  of,  seems  to  be  that  of  inhabiting  and 
finding  their  subsistence,  in  the  tropical  forests 
of  the  old  world ;  both  Africa  and  Asia  have 
each  their  own  rhinoceros,  and  elephant,  which, 
by  their  giant  bulk,  and  irresistible  strength,  can 
make  their  way  through  the  thickest  forests  or 
jungles.  Even  the  swine,  from  the  thickness  of 
its  skin,  suffers  nothing  from  pushing  through 
bushes  and  underwood  in  search  of  acorns ;  and 
most  of  these  animals,  by  means  of  their  tadcs, 
muzzle,  or  horns,  can  dig  up  the  roots  that  form 
their  food.  The  hippopotamus  seeks  his  pro? 
vender  in  the  African  rivers,  and  by  means  of 
the  tusks  with  which  the  under-jaw  is  armed, — 
in  this  differing  from  the  dugong,  in  which  the 
tusks  are  in  the  upper  jaw, — ^is  enabled  to  root 


MAMMALIANS^  49^ 

up  plaate  growing  under  the  water*  The  tapir 
acto  the  wme  part  nearly  in  the  New  World 
that  the  hippopotamus  does  in  the  old. 

By  the  efforts  of  the  Pachyderms,  in  generali 
in  pursuit  of  their  own  means  of  subsistence,  a 
way  is  often  made  for  man  more  readily  to  tra- 
verse and  turn  to  his  purpose  forests  and  wpody 
districts,  that  would  otherwise  mock  his  efforts  to 
penetrate  into  them.  When  we  consider  the 
vast  bulk  and  armour  of  the  rhinoceros,  for 
instance,  and  the  violence  with  which  he  endear 
vours  to  remove  obstacles  out  of  his  path,  we  may 
in  some  d^ree  calculate  the  momentum  by 
which  he  is  enabled  to  win  his  resistless  way 
through  the  thickest  and  most  entangled  under^ 
wood. 

I  need  not  enlarge  on  the  second  Sub-order  of 
the  Pachyderms,  the  Solipeds,  the  well-known 
equine  and  asinine  tribes;  every  one.  must  be 
struck  by  the  contrast  .that  their  structure  and 
characters  exhibit  to  those  of  thejirst  Sub-order, 
0£  typical  ones*  A  fiery  and  intelligent  eye ;  a 
neck  clothed  with  thunder^  to  use  the  words  of 
inspiration ;  a  graceful  form ;  speed  that  often 
outstrips  the  wind ;  are  the  distinctive  characters 
which  the  highest  tribe  of  them  exhibits;  while 
the  other,  though  less  beautiful,  still  has  the 
orga&a  of  sight  and  hearing  singularly  conspi* 
euous;  a  long  tail;  and  ita  integument  clothed 
with  a  shaggy  Ooarse  fur :  besides  these  charac* 


600  JUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

ters,  the  undivided  hoof  of  both  these  tribeg 
forms  also  a  most  striking  distinction.  No  «ai* 
mals,  indeed,  externally  present  chariK^eFB  more 
diverse  from  each  other  than  the  soliped  and 
typical  Pachyderms.  God  has  given  us  theae 
animals,  evidently,  that  we  may  employ  them  as 
our  servants,  and  their  great  function  is,  to  carry 
ourselves  and  our  burthens;  they  also  minister 
in  no  small  degree  to  our  innocent  pleasure  and 
amusements,  as  well  as  to  our  defence  and 
security* 

Order  3. — Of  all  the  different  Orders  of  the 
present  Class,  or  indeed  of  all  the  Classes  of  ani- 
mals, none  are  of  so  much  importance  to  their 
Lord  as  the  Ruminants,  which  we  are  next  to 
consider;  without  them,  hunger,  cold,  and 
nakedness  would  beset  him,  or,  at  least,  a  lai^e 
portion  of  his  comforts,  with  respect  to  articles 
of  food  and  clothing,  must  be  cut  off. 

Cuvier  divides  this  great  Order  into  those  that 
have  horns,  and  those  that  have  none»  and  we 
may  here  adopt  his  division,  considering  these 
two  sections  as  forming  two  Sub-orders.  The 
first  of  them,  being  the  beasts  of  burden  of  mors 
than  one  nation^  may  be  r^arded  as  succeedii^f 
the  solipeds ;  these  are  the  camels  ai^  drome* 
daries,  the  lamas ;  and  perhaps  what  is  called 
the  musk-deer,  also  wanting  horns,  may  be 
placed  amoni^t  them.  So  that  we  have  thus 
before  us  animals  that   may  be  regarded  as 


MAMMALIANS.  501 

looking  towards  the  Solipeds,  in  the  camel  genus-; 
towards  the  sheep  by  its  fleece,  in  the  lama;  and 
towards  the  antelope  tribes  in  the  musk. 

All  the  other  Ruminants,  the  males  at  least, 
are  armed  with  two  horns,  either  simple  or 
branching ;  either  hollow,  or  solid ;  either  per* 
sisteot  or  dedduous.  1  feel  disposed  to  consider 
the  giraffe,  or  camelopard,  as  an  intermediate 
form  between  the  animals  that  are  horned,  and 
those  without  horns,  for  its  short,  persistent; 
sc^d  horns,  clothed  with  a  velvet  skin,  seem 
almost  rudimentary.  It  may  be  regarded  as 
connecting,  in  some  degree,  the  long  necked 
animals,  the  camel  and  iama,  &c.  with  the  deer 
tribe. 

These  last,  the  most  elegant  and  airy,  both  in 
form  and  limb  and  motions,  of  the  whole  class, 
placed  in  contrast  with  the  clumsiness  and  bulk 
of  the  Pachyderms,  seem  intended  as  one  of 
the  principal  ornaments  of  the  globe  we  in- 
habit, and  originally  to  be  amongst  the  peculiar 
fitvourites  of  its  king  and  master  man.  Now, 
instead  of  the  innocuous  animals,  he  takes  into 
his  alliance,  as  his  most  intimate  associates, 
those  that  are  best  fitted  to  pursue  and  destroy, 
as  the  dog,  and  the  cheetah ;  and  thus  with  the 
help  of  the  horse,  he  overtakes  these  beautiful 
creatures,  and,  instead  of  caresses,  they  receive 
death  at  his  hands. 

The  head  of  these  animals,,  in  some,  as  the 


602  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS, 

rein-deer*  in  both  sexes,  but  generally  only  in 
the  males,  is  ornamented,  as  it  were,  with  a 
branching  forest,^  formed  by  its  antlers,  or  horns, 
which  are  sojid,  covered,  as  in  the  camelopard, 
with  a  velvet  skin,  but  only  during  the  period 
of  growth,  and  annually  deciduous;  these  are 
used  by  the  males  in  their  mutual  combats. 
Amongst  these  light  and  airy  animals,  however, 
some  of  a  larger  and  more  robust  stature  are 
thus  fitted  for  the  use  of  man,  as  the  rein-deer* 
The  elk,  or  moose,'  the  wapiti*  and  red  deers, 
emulate  the  horse  in  size,  and  are  of  great 
strength,  though  not  yet  employed  by  man.^ 
Lastly,  come  the  Ruminants,  whose  horns  are 
hollow  and  naked,  but  persistent.  To  these 
belong  the  Antelopes,  one  species  of  which  has 
four  horns,^  the  goats,  the  sheep,  and  the  bovine 
tribes.  The  species  of  the  two  last  of  these  great 
families  are  particularly  important  to  man,  and 
are  generally  so  well  known  as  not  to  require 
to  be  treated  of  in  detail.  The  bison ,^  with  his 
shaggy  mane,  presents  no  slight  analogy  to  the 
lion,  the  so  called  king  of  beasts ;  and  the  gnu, 
reckoned  amongst  the  antelopes,  seems  to  com* 
bine  characters  borrowed  from  the  ox  and  the 
horse. 

'   Cervus  Tarandus,  2  French.  Bois.  ^  C,  alces. 

*  C.  strongyloceras,  *  See  above,  p.  184. 

^  A,  Chickara.  ^  Bos  Urus. 


MAMMALIANS.  503 

The  function  of  this  great  Order  of  Ruminants, 
is  not  only  to  browse  the  herbage,  and  provide,  by 
constantly  trimming,  and  as  it  were  mowing  it, 
for  its  renewed  verdure;  many  of  them  are 
/employed  also  in  pruning  the  trees,  by  feeding 
ui)on  their  branches ;  and  there  is  not  one  that, 
in  its  place,  does  not  contribute  its  part  to  the 
general  welfare.  The  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills 
are  distributed  by  their  Great  Creator  according 
to  certain  laws,  and  by  their  actions  in  their 
several  spheres,  to  promote  certain  ends,  which 
neglected,  or  imperfectly  provided  for,  would 
produce  derangements  that  might  affect  a  wide 
circumference. 

Order  4. — Having,  in  a  former  part  of  the 
present  volume,  given  an  account  of  the  prin- 
cipal tribes  of  this  Order,  I  need  not  here  do 
more  than  mention  it,  except  by  observing,  that 
the  members  of  it  are  principally  inhabitants  of 
the  new  world,  the  Manis  and  OrycleropuSy  being 
the  only  genera  it  contains  that  are  found  in 
the  old. 

Order  5.— The  animals  included  in  the  Order 
of  Rodents,  or  gnawers  and  nibblers,  as  I  have 
before  observed,^  seem  to  occupy  the  same  station 
amongst  the  Mammalians,  that  the  Hymenoptera 
do  amongst  Insects,  since  they  are  the  most 

I  See  above,  p.  209. 


504  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

remarkable  of  any  for  the  arte  which  Providence 
has  instructed  them  to  exercise.  This,  as  well 
as  the  preceding  Order,  seems  very  slighdy 
connected  with  the  great  tribe  of  Raminants: 
the  Patagonian  hare/  however,  of  the  Pampas^ 
belonging  to  the  Rodents,  seems,  in  its  light 
and  elegant  form,  to  make  the  nearest  approxi^ 
mation  to  that  tribe. 

Several  of  the  animals  of  the  Order  before  us 
copy  the  members  of  the  class  of  insects  in  one 
of  their  most  remarkable  peculiarities;  during 
the  cold  or  winter  season,  they  become  torjudi 
This  is  the  case  with  the  dormouse,*  the  mar-, 
mots,^  the  prairie-dog,^  and  many  other  Rodents, 
as  well  as  with  many  predaceous  Mammalians, 
especially  the  insectivorous  ones,  as  the  hedge- 
hogs/ The  mole,  and  the  bats,  and  even  some 
of  the  largest  animals,  as  the  bear,  are  subject  to 
the  same  law.  When  we  consider  the  case  of  th^ 
insectivorous  animals  of  the  present  class,  we  sea 
at  once  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  La^^ver 
in  this  enactment.  The  reduction  of  the  tempe- 
rature, and  other  causes,  have  driven  the  insects 
from  the  theatre  they  usually  frequent,  to  remain 
for  a  time  without  motion  under  the  earth  and 

1  Cavia  paiagonica.  ^  Myoxus  avellanarius. 

'  Arctomys, 

*  Spermophilus  ludovidanus.     Faun.  BareaL  Americ  i.  156. 
^  Erinaceut, 


MAMMALIANS.  506 

otber  places  of  security,  where  they  are  safe  from 
these  their  enemies ;  it  was,  therefore  a  kind  an4 
wise  provision,  that  as  their  accustomed  food  was 
heyoad  their  reach,  they  themselves  should  also 
be  placed  in' a  state  not  to  require  it*  Many 
other  animals  amongst  the  Rodents,  though  they 
do  not  pass  the  winter  in  a  state  of  absolute 
torpidity,  retreat  to  what  may  be  called  their 
winter  quarters^  in  which  they  have  }aid  up  a 
store  of  provisions  against  the  evil  days  of  winter^ 
Of  this  description  are  many  of  the  murine  tribes^ 
particularly  the  humstert^  which  is  furnished 
with  a  pouch  on  each  side  of  its  mouth,  that  it 
fills  with  grain  to  deposit  in  its  burrow,  for  9 
winter  store.  Some  will  thus  carry  as  much  as 
three  ounces  at  a  time.  The  lemmings'  also« 
whose  destructive  ravages  I  have  before  noticed,^ 
especially  that  called  the  eamomist^^  have  similar 
habits,  storing  up  roots  instead  of  grain. 

G^ierally  speaking,  it  is  the  lowering  of  ihe 
temperature  that  induces  Mammalians,  as  well 
as  cold-blooded  animals,  to  hybemate,  and  brings 
on  a  state  of  torpidity,  or  a  cessation  of  the 
usual  stimulus  to  locomotion  and  action:  in 
which  state,  Mr.  Owen  remarks,  warm-Hooded 
animals  become,  as  it  were,  cold-blooded.  As  a 
watch  not  wound  up  remains  without  motion, 

^  Cricetus.  ^  Arvicola,  Lemmtis, 

3  Vol.  i.  p.  91.  *  L,  ceconomus. 


606  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

Still  retaining  the  power  of  resuming  it,  aiid 
when  the  mainspring  recovers  its  elasticity  is 
again  enabled  to  act  upon  its  wheels :  so  to  ani- 
mals heat  is  the  key  that  winds  up  the  wheels, 
and  restores  to  the  mainspring  its  pow^ns  of 
reaction.  Hybemating  animals  have  supernu- 
merary cells,  and  generally  become  very  fet  in 
autumn,  and  it  has  been  said  that  this  fat  sup- 
ports them  in  their  torpid  state;  it  is  founds  how- 
ever, that  there  has  been  but  little  of  it  consumed 
during  the  state  of  torpidity,  but  that  it  wastes 
very  fast  immediately  after  that  state  is  ended. 
The  Indians  remark,  with  respect  to  the  black 
bear,  that  it  comes  out  in  the  spring  with  the 
same  fat  which  it  carries  in  in  the  autumn ;  but 
after  the  exercise  of  only  a  few  days  it  becomes 
lean.^  A  state  of  periodical  rest  may  be  neces- 
sary to  the  animals  we  are  speaking  of,  not  only 
as  a  means  of  protection  from  the  effects  of  a 
low  temperature,  and  on  account  of  the  impossi- 
bility of  procuring  their  usual  means  of  subsist- 
ence; but  since  alternate  rest  and  action  are 
necessary  to  most  animals,  so  a  longer  period  of 
sleep  may  be  required  in  some  cases,  by  such 
cessation  of  action  to  keep  the  machine  from 
wearing  out  too  soon.  Excess  of  heat  we  know 
produces  the  same  effect  as  excess  of  cold,  it 
disposes  to  sleep.^    The  tenrec,^.  a  Madagascar 

*  Fr,  Boreal,  Americ,  i.  20. 

«  N,  D.  D'H.  N,  xxxi.  387—390.  »  Setiger.. 


MAMMALIANS.  t07 

ammal,  and  the  jerboa,  fall  into  a  kind  of  sum* 
mer  lethargy  from  that  cause,  which  lasts  some 
months.^ 

From  the  numerous  instances  of  remarkably 
instincts  exhibited  by  the  animals  of  this  Order^ 
which  might  be  selected,  I  must  confine  myself 
to  one  or  two  of  the  most  singular.  The  hare 
is  only  noticed  for  its  extreme  timidity  and 
watchfulness,  and  the  rabbit  for  the  burrows 
which  it  excavates  for  its  own  habitation,  and 
as  a  nest  for  its  young :  but  there  is  an  animal 
related  to  them,  the  rat-Jiare,^  which  is  gifted  by 
by  its  Creator  with  a  very  singular  instinct,  on 
account  of  which  it  ought  rather  to  be  called  the 
hay-makei\  since  man  may  or  might  have  learned 
that  part  of  the  business  of  the  agriculturist, 
which  consists  in  providing  a  store  of  winter 
provender  for  his  cattle,  from  this  industrious 
animal.  Professor  Pallas  was  the  first  who 
described  the  quadruped  exercising  this  remark- 
able  function  and  gave  an  account  of  it.  The 
Tungusians,  who  inhabit  the  country  beyond  the 
lake  of  Baikal,  call  it  Pika,  which  has  been 
adopted  as  its  Trivial  name. 

These  animals  make  their  abode  between  the 
rocks,  and  during  the  summer  employ  them- 
selves in  making  hay  for  a  winter  store.  Inhabit^ 
ing  the  most  northern  districts  of  the  old  world, 

*  N.  D.  D*H.  N.  xxxiii.  53.  «  Lagomys. 


608  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

the  chain  of  Altaic  Mountains,  extendin'g^  fixmi 
Siberia  to  the  confines  of  Asia  and  Kamt"- 
schatka/  they  never  appear  in  the  plains,  or  in 
places  exposed  to  observation ;  but  always  select 
the  rudest  and  most  elevated  spots,  and  often  the 
centre  of  the  most  gloomy,  and  at  the  same  time 
humid  forests,  where  the  herbage  is  fresh  and 
abundant*  They  generally  hollow  out  their  bur- 
rows between  the  stones  and  in  the  clefts  of 
the  rocks,  and  sometimes  in  the  holes  of  trees. 
Sometimes  they  live  in  solitude  and  sometimes  in 
small  societies,  according  to  th^  nature  of  Che 
mountains  they  inhabit. 

About  the  middle  of  the  month  oi  August 
these  little  animals  collect  with  admirable  pre* 
caution  their  winter's  provender,  which  is  formed 
of  select  herbs,  which  they  bring  near  their  habi^ 
tation  and  spread  out  to  dry  like  hay.  In 
September,  they  form  heaps  or  stacks  of  the 
fodder  they  have  collected  under  the  rocks  or  in 
other  places  shdtered  from  the  rain  or  snow. 
Where  many  of  them  have  laboured  together 
their  stacks  are  sometimes  as  high  as  a  man, 
and  more  than  eight  feet  in  diameter.  A  sub- 
terranean gallery  leads  from  the  burrow,  below 
the  mass  of  hay,  so  that  neither  frost  nor  snow 
can  intercept  their  communication  with  it.    Pal- 


I  Mr.  DaJDes  Barrington  presented  to  the  Royal  Society  an 
animal  resembling  the  Pika  found  in  Scotland,  but  probably  a 
different  species. 


MAMMALIANS.  509 

las  had  the  patience  to  examine  their  provision 
of  hay  piece  by  piece,  and  found  it  to  consist 
chiefly  of  the  choicest  grasses,  and  the  sweetest 
herbs,  all  cut  when  most  vigorous,  and  dried  so 
slowly  as  to  form  a  green  and  succulent  fodder ; 
he  found  in  it  scarcely  any  ears,  or  blossoms, 
or  hard  and  woody  stems,  but  some  mixture  of 
bitter  herbs,  probably  useful  to  render  the  rest 
more  wholesome.  These  stacks  of  excellent 
forage  are  sought  out  by  the  sable-buiiiters  to 
feed  their  harassed  horses,  Bxxd  the  (Jakutes) 
natives  of  that  part  of  Siberia,  pilfer  them,  if  1 
may  so  call  it,  for  the  subsistence  of  their  cattle. 
Instead  of  imitating  the  foresight  and  industry 
of  the  Pika,  they  rob  it  of  its  means  of  support, 
and  so  devote  the  animals  that  set  them  so  good 
an  example  to  famine  and  death  .^  How  much 
better  would  it  be  if  instead  of  robbing  and 
starving  these  interesting  animals,  they  learned 
from  them  to  provide  in  the  proper  season  a 
supply  of  hay  for  the  winter  provender  of  their 
horses. 

But  no  animals  in  this,  or  indeed  any  other 
Order  of  Mammalians,  are  so  admirable  for  their 
instincts  and  their  results  as  the  beavers. 

I  have  more  than  once  alluded  to  some 
proceedings  of  these,  seemingly,  half*reas<ming 
animals,  and  shsdl  now  as  briefly  as  possible 

»  N.  2).  D'H.  N,  xxvi.  407—410.  .      . 


610  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

give  some  account  of  those  fabriokd  in  which 
thieir  wonderful  instinct  k  principally  maaifested^ 
There  are  two  writers  who  had  great  opportuni* 
ties  of  gaining  information  concerning  them; 
Samuel  Hearne,  during  his  journey  to  the  North* 
ern  Ocean,  in  the  years  1769,  1770,  1771,  and 
1772;  and  Captain  Cartwright,  who  resided 
nearly  sixteen  years  on  the  coast  of  Labrador* 
To  them  I  am  principally  indebted  for  the  par-^ 
ticulars  of  the  history  here  given. 

From  the  breaking  up  of  the  frost  to  tlie  && 
of  the  leaf,  the  beavers  desert  their  lodges,  and 
roam  about  unhoused,  and  unoccupied  by  their 
usual  labours,  except  that  they  have  the  fore- 
sight to  begin  felling  their  timber  early  in  the 
summer.  They  set  about  building  some  time  in 
the  month  of  August.  Those  that  erect  their 
habitations  in  small  rivers  or  creeks,  in  which 
the  water  is  liable  to  be  drained  off,  with  wonder- 
ful sagacity  provide  against  that  evil  by  f<»ining 
a  dike  across  the  stream,  almost  straight  where 
the  current  is  weak,  but  where  it  is  more  rapid^ 
curving  more  or  less,  with  the  convex  side 
opposed  to  the  stream.  They  construet  these 
dikes  or  dams  of  the  same  materials  as  they  ds 
their  lodges,  namely,  of  pieces  of  wood  of  any 
kind,  of  stones,  mud,  and  sand.  These  ranns 
ways  oppose  a  sufficient  hairier  to  the  foice,  both 
of  water  and  ice;  and  as  the  willows,  poplars,  &c. 
employed  in  constructing  them,  often  strike  root 


MAMMALIANS.  511 

in  it,  it  becomes  in  time  a  green  hedge,  in 
which  the  birds  build  their  nests*  Cartwright 
says  that  he  occasionally  used  them  as  bridges, 
but  as  they  are  level  with  the  water,  not  without 
wetting  his  feet.  By  means  of  these  erections 
the  water  is  kept  at  a  sufficient  height,  for 
it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  there  should  be  at 
least  three  feet  of  water  above  the  extremity 
of  the  entry  into  their  lodges,  without  which, 
in  the  hard  frosts,  it  would  be  entirely  closed. 
This  entry  is  not  on  the  land  side,  because  such 
an  opening  might  let  in  the  wolverene,  and  other 
fierce  beasts,  but  towards  the  water. 

Cuvier,  in  his  table  above  alluded  to,*  assigns 
only  four  pectoral  teats  to  the  female  beaver ; 
but  Dr.  Richardson  states  that  she  has  eighty  and 
the  maximum  of  her  young  ones  at  eight  or 
nine.*  The  number  inhabiting  one  lodge  seldom 
exceeds  four  old  and  six  or  eight  young  ones ;  the 
size  of  their  houses,  therefore,  is  regulated  by  the 
number  of  the  family.  Though  built  of  the 
same  materials,  they  are  of  much  ruder  structure 
than  their  causeways,  and  the  only  object  of 
their  erection  appears  to  be  a  dry  apartment  to 
Impose  in,  abd  where  they  can  eat  the  food  they 
occasionally  get  out  of  the  water.  It  frequently 
happens,  says  Heame,  that  some  of  the  large 
bouses  have  one  or  more  partitions,  but  these  are^ 

1  866  above,  p;  476.  -  *  Fn.  Boreal.  Amer.  i.  p.  107; 


SV2  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

merely  part  of  the  building  left  to  support  the 
roof.  He  had  seen  one  beaver  lodge  that  had 
pearly  a  dozen  apartments  under  the  same  roof, 
and,  two  or  three  excepted,  none  had  any  com- 
munication but  by  water.  Cartwright  says,  that 
when  they  build,  their  first  step  is  to  make  choice 
of  a  natural  basin,  of  a  certain  depth,  near  the 
bank  where  there  is  no  rock ;  they  thmi  begin 
to  excavate  under  water,  at  the  base  of  the  bank, 
which  they  enlarge  upwards  gradually,  and  so 
M  to  form  a  declivity,  till  they  reach  the  aurface; 
and  of  the  earth  which  comes  out  of  this  cavity 
they  form  a  hillock,  with  which  they  mix  small 
pieces  of  wood,  and  even  stones :  they  give  this 
hillock  the  form  of  a  dome,  from  four  to  sevm 
feet  high,  from  ten  to  twelve  long,  and  from  eight 
to  nine  wide.  As  they  proceed  in  heightening, 
they  hollow  it  out  below,  so  as  to  form  the  lodge 
which  is  to  receive  the  family.  At  the  antericv 
part  of  this  dwelling,  they  form  a  gentle  decli- 
vity terminating  at  the  water ;  so  that  they  ^iter 
and  go  out  under  water.  The  hunters  name  this 
entrance  the  angle.  The  interior  forms  only  a 
single  chamber  resembling  an  oven.  At  a  little 
distance  is  the  magazine  for  provisions.  Here 
they  keep  in  store  the  roots  of  the  yellow  water* 
lily,  and  the  branches  of  the  black  spruce,^  the 
aspin,'  and  birch,'  which  they  are  careful  to 

'  Abies  nigra.         <  Populns  tremula.         *  BtimU  aUa. 


MAMMALIANS.  513 

plant  ill  the  mud.  These  form  their  sabsistence. 
T%^ir  magazines  sometimes  contain  a  cart-load  of 
these  articles,  and  the  beavers  are  so  industrious, 
that  they  are  always  adding  to  their  store. 

There  is  a  species  of  beaver  found  in  the  great 
rivers  in  Europe — ^the  Danube,  the  Rhine,  the 
Rhone,  and  the  Weser,  which  has  been  regarded 
as  synonymous  with  the  beaver  of  Canada,  but 
which,  though  it  forms  burrows  or  holes  in  the 
banks  of  those  rivers  which  it  frequents,  does  not, 
like  them,  erect  any  lodges,  as  above  described. 
Does  this  instinct  sleep  in  them,  and  require  a 
certain  degree  of  cold  to  awaken  it,  or  are  they  a 
distinct  species?  Linn6  mentions  one  in  Lapland^ 
where  the  cold  is  sufficiently  intense.  Cuvier 
seems  uncertain  whether  they  ought  to  be  con* 
sidered  as  distinct.  Beavers  seem  formerly  to  have 
existed  in  England ;  the  town  of  Beverley  {Bea- 
ver'field)^  in  Yorkshire,  seems  to  have  taken  its 
name  from  them,  and  its  arms  are  three  beavers^ 

Such  are  the  principal  operations  that  these 
wonderful  animals,  probably  by  the  mixture  of 
intellect  with  instinct,  are  instructed  and  adapted 
by  their  Creator  to  execute,  that  man,  by  study- 
ing them  and  their  ways,  may  acknowledge  the 
Power,  Wisdom,  and  Goodness  that  formed  and 
guides  them. 

The  functions  of  the  numerous  tribes  of  this 
Order  are  various.    The  great  majority  may  be 

VOL.  11.  L  L 


514  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

said  to  be  grauivorous,  or  nucivorous,  or  even 
graminiverous ;  but  many  live  upon  dried  ve- 
getable substances,  and  wood.  The  aye  «ye, 
which  approaches  the  Quadrumanes,  appears  to 
be  insectivorous.  Though  many  of  them  are 
great  plagues  to  man,  yet,  by  exciting  his  vigi- 
lance, they  are  useful  to  him,  and  they  fona  the 
food  of  many  of  the  lesser  predaceous  animals. 

Order  6.  The  connection  between  the  animab 
of  which  this  Order  consists,  and  the  Rodents, 
seems  not  easily  made  out.  The  lowest  tribes 
the  Amphibians,  which  Cuvier  has  placed  imme- 
diately before  the  Marsupians,  appears  bo  have 
no  connection  with  that  Order,  or  any  of  the 
Rodents;  and  the  morse,  which  forms  his  last 
genus  of  the  tribe  in  question,  appears  evidently 
to  look  more  towards  the  herbivorous  cetaceans, 
the  manatee,^  &c.  than  to  any  other  animals ; 
the  seals,  indeed,  may  be  regarded  as  tending 
towards  the  feline  tribe.  Amongst  the  other 
Predaceans,  the  hedgehog  and  tenrec  present, 
I  apprehend,  something  more  than  an  analogy 
to  the  porcupines  and  some  of  the  rets.  The 
bear  seems  to  look  towards  the  sloth;  aiid  the 
feline  race,  in  their  whiskers  and  feet,  look  to 
the  hares  and  rats. 

The  general  functions  of  this  Order  are  to 
check  the  tendency  to  increase  not  only  in  th^r 

*  Chetratnys, 


MAMMALIANS.  515 

own  Class,  the  Mammalians,  but  in  most  of  the 
other  Classes  of  animals,  more  particularly  those 
which  man  has  taken  into  alliance  with  him,  as 
cattle,  and  poultry,  and  game  of  every  descrip- 
tion. But  where  his  action  is  greatest,  theirs  is 
usually  least ;  and  the  most  powerful  devastators 
of  the  animal  kingdom^  the  lions  and  the  tigers, 
are  found  in  the  warmest  climates,  where  nature 
is  most  prolific,  and  where  man  has  not  fully 
established  his  dominion,  in  the  trackless  and 
burning  deserts  of  Libya,  and  in  the  impene- 
trable forests  and  jungles  of  India. 

In  more  northern  regions,  the  bears,  the  foxes, 
and  other  Mammalians,  are  employed  in  this 
department,  though  the  former  also  eat  roots  and 
other  vegetable  substances,^  and  thus  in  the  wild 
countries  of  the  north  supply  the  place  of  man, 
and  keep  the  animal  population  under,  and  at 
a  certain  level,  so  that  one  may  not  encroach 
upon  another.  If  the  matter  is  closely  investi- 
gated, we  shall  find  that  God  has  distributed 
and  divided  these  predaceous  animals  to  every 
country,  in  measure  and  momentum,  as  every 
one  had  need. 

The  necrophagous  Mammalians'  also,  or 
those  that  devour  dead  carcases,  such  as  the 
hyaenas,  dogs,  and  similar  animals,  are  equally 
us^l  in  removing  infectious  substances,  which 

'  F7i.  Bareali  Amenc.  i.  15,  23,  28.        '  Camivara.  Cuv. 


516  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 


in  hot  climated  soon  generate  disease,  and  are 
always  disgusting  objects,  and  exercise  a  very 
important  and  beneficial  function,  devolved  upoR 
them  by  their  Creator;  for  if  all  the  anioMls 
exercising  this  function  were  removed  from  the 
earth,  it  would  soon  be  depopulated,  and  a  uni- 
versal pestilence  would  destroy  man,  and  all  his 
subject  animals. 

Order  7.  The  animals  of  this  Order,  though 
evidently  leading  towards  the  Quadrumanes, 
seems  less  nearly  connected  with  the  insectivo- 
rous Predaceans  of  Cuvier,  the  hedgehog,  mole, 
&c.,  and  to  approach  nearer  to  some  Marsupians, 
as  the  flying  squirrel  and  the  flying  opossum. 
I  therefore  consider  them  as  forming  an  Osculant 
Order,  distinguished  by  their  powers  and  organs 
of  flight  before  sufficiently  noticed.'  They  are 
nocturnal  animals,  and  live  entirely  upon  in- 
sects. In  the  winter,  they  become  torpid,  and 
suspend  themselves  by  the  claw  of  the  thumb  of 
the  fore-foot,  which  is  left  free  for  this  and  other 
purposes. 

Order  8.  Linne  evidently  degraded  num  when 
he  placed  him  in  the  same  Order  with  the  tnomk^^ 
and  even  considered  his  genus  Homo  as  consist- 
ing of.  two  species,  advancing  the  Ouran  Outan^ 
to  the  honour  of  being  his  congener,,  and  a 


»  See  above,  p.  156. 

*  Written  also  Ourang  Outang^  and  Orang  Otang, 


•      'KfAMMTALIANS.  517 

second  species  of  man.  Cuvier  has,  with  great 
propriety,  separated  man,  the  heir  of  immor* 
tftlity,  BMxd. whose  spirit  goetk  upward^  from  the 
beast  that  perisheth,  and  whose  spirit  goeth  down- 
wardy^  and  placed  them  in  different  Orders. 
Man  has  emj^oyed  some  animals  in  almost 
every  Order,  or  taken  them  under  his  care ;  but 
there  is  only  a  single  instance  of  a  Quadruraane 
being  so  used.  There  is  a  kind  of  monkey,^  a 
native  of.  Madagascar,  which,  being  of  a  gentle 
disposition,  the  natives  of  the  southern  part  of 
that  island  take  when  they  are  young,  and  edu- 
cate, as  we  do  hounds,  for  the  chase.^ 

The  principal  function  of  these  animals  is  to> 
live  and  move  in  the  trees,  amongst  the  branches 
in  tropical  countries,  and  they  subsist  upoa 
fruits,  roots,  the  eggs  of  birds»  and  insects..  One 
object  of  their  creation  seems  to  be  to  hold  the 
mirror  to  man,  that  he  may  see  how  ugly  and 
disgosting  an  object  he  becomes,  when  he  gives 
himself  up  to  vice  and  the  slave  of  his  pas^ 
sions.  In  fact,  in  every  department  of  the  animal 
kingdom,  the  moral  instruction  of  his  reasonaUe 
creature  seems  ta  have  been  one  of  the  objectsof 
Creative  Wisdom :  and  the  sloth  and  the  glutton 
may  be  added  to  the  mandril  and  baboon  as 
equally  calculated  to  cause  him  to  view  vice  with 


*  Eccfes.  iii.  21.  ^  fndrk  brevicaudutus. 

5  N.  D.  D'H,  N,  xvi.  171. 


51^  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

disgust  and  abhorrence;  as  the  bee,  tiie  ant, 
and  the  beaver,  to  excite  him  to  industry,  and 
prudence,  and  foresight ;  or  the  doye  to  peace 
and  mutual  love. 


Chapter  XXVi 

FuTiCtions  and  Instincts — Man. 

After  traversing  the  whde  Animal  Kingdom 
from  its  very  lowest  grades,  and  having  arrived 
at  Man,  who  confessedly  stands  at  the  head, 
and  is  the  only  visible  king  and  lord  of  all  the 
rest,  it  will  be  expected  that  I  should  devote  a 
few  pages  to  the  world's  master. 

Baron  Cuvier,  wilii  great  propriety,  places 
him  by  himself  in  a  separate  Order,  distin- 
guished from  that  which  succeeds  it,  in  his 
system,  by  the  significant  appellation  of  Bimanej 
indicating  that  his  two  hands  are  the  instru- 
ments by  which  he  subdues  and  governs  the 
planet  that  he  inhabits;^  by  which  also  he  is 
^oiabled  to  embody  his  conceptions,  and,  as  it 
were,  to  convert  his  thoughts  into  material 
subsistences. 

I  shall  consider  him  both  physically  and  me- 
taphysically;  physically,  as  to  his  actual  past- 

^  See  above,  p.  215. 


MAN.  519 

ii09i,  aad  as  to  bis  action  upon  his  subjects  and 
{MToperty,  whether  vegetable  or  animal ;  and  me- 
taphysically as  to  his  connection  with  that  world, 
to  which  his  mind  or  spirit  belongs.  When  I 
say  that  Man  stands  at  the  head  of  the  creation, 
I  do  not  mean  to  affirm  that  he  combines  in 
himself  every  physical  attribute  in  perfection 
that  is  found  in  all  the  animals  below  him ;  for 
it  is  manifest  to  every  one,  that  many  of  them 
far  exceed  him  in  the  perfection  of  many  of 
their  organs,  and  in  their  qualities  of  various 
kinds.  For  sights  he  cannot  compete  with  the 
eagle;  for  scent ,  with  the  hounds  or  the  shark; 
for  swiftness^  with  the  roe-imck ;  for  strength  and 
bulk,  with  the  elephant:  but  it  is  in  his  mind 
that  his  superiority  lies.  There  is  in  him  a 
SPIRIT,  an  immaterial  substance  which  consti- 
tutes him  the  sole  representative  here  on  earth, 
of  the  8P1RIT  OF  SPIRITS.  He  is  the  only  member 
of  the  Animal  Kingdom  that  partakes  both  of 
a  heavenly  and  of  an  earthly  nature, — that 
belongs  both  to  a  material  and  an  immaterial 
world:  and  on  this  account  it  was  that  God, 
when  he  had  created  man,  constituted  him  king 
over  the  whole  sphere  of  animals  with  which  he 
had  peo]ded  this  globe  that  we  inhabit.  When 
his  unhappy /a/^  took  place,  the  Divine  Image 
was  impaired,  and  consequently  the  dominion 
over  those  creatures,  which  formed  a  part  of  it, 
was  proportionably  weakened,  and  reduced  to 


520  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

ltd  present  standard.  But  still,  though  weak- 
ened, it  is  not  abrc^ated  ;  his  subjects  have  not 
universally  broken  the  yoke  and  burst  the  bonds 
of  his  dominion — a  large  portion  of  them  still 
acknowledge  him  as  their  king  and  master ;  and 
those  that  he  has  not  subdued  so  as  to  make 
them  do  his  bidding,  still  fear  him  and  flee  him : 
and  even  of  these,  there  is  none  so  fierce  and 
intractable,  that  he  has  not  found  means  to  tame 
and  subdue.  And  this  is  the  position  in  which 
he  now  stands  with  respect  to  the  animal  king- 
dom ;  he  has  that  within  him  that  enables  him 
to  master  them,  and  9pply  such  of  them  as  are 
of  a  convertible  nature,  if  I  may  so  speak,  to 
work  his  will  and  answer  his  purpose. 

The  functions  of  man,  with  r^ard  to  the 
world  in  which  he  is  now  placed,  are  all  in- 
cluded in  his  action  upon  the  sphere  of  animals 
and  vegetables,  and  in  then*  re-action  upon  hiln. 
If  we  survey  all  nature,  wherever  we  turn  our 
eyes,  or  wherever  we  direct  our  thoughts,  we 
see  the  action  of  antagonist  powers,  a  flux  and 
reflux,  by  which  the  Great  Builder  of  the 
universe  supports  the  vast  machine,  and  main- 
tains all  the  motions  that  he  has  generated  in  it. 
The  same  principle  is  at  work  in  every  descrip- 
tion  of  beings  in  our  own  planet ;  every  action 
of  man  upon  any  object  of  the  world,  without 
him,  produces  a  reaction  from  that  object,  at* 
fended  often  by  important  results. 


MAN.  5*11 

The  action  of  man  upon  the  world  without 
him,  is  threefold.  His  Jirst  action  upon  them 
is;  that  of  the  mind  to  contemplate  them,  so  as 
to  ^in  a  knowledge  of  their  forms  and  struc- 
ture—of their  habits  and  instincts — of  their 
meaning  and  uses.  His  second  action  upon 
them,  having  studied  their  natures,  and  dis- 
covered how  they  •  may  be  made  profitable  to 
him,  is  to  .collect  and  multiply  such  species  as 
he  finds  will,  in  any  way,  answer  his  purpose. 
His  third  action  upon  them  is  to  diminish  and 
keep  within  due  limits  those  species  that  ex* 
perience  teaches  him  are  noxious  and  prejudicial 
either  to  himself,  or  those  animals  that  he  has 
taken  into  alliance  with  him,  which  are  prin-* 
cipal  sources  of  wealth  to  him,  and  minister  to 
his  daily  use,  comfort,  and  enjoyment. 

If  we  consider  the  predaceous  animals,  we 
^hall  find  in  them  a  greater  tendency  to  multiply 
than  in  those  that  content  themselves  with  graz- 
ing the  herbage ;  they  generally  produce  more 
yoiitig  at  a  birth ;  and  their  period  of  gestation  is 
often  shorter,  so  as  to  admit  of  more  than  one 
litter  in  the  year ;  so  that,  unless  some  means  were 
used  to  reduce  their  numbers  within  a  certain 
limit,  the  whole  race  of  herbivorous  animals 
must  perish.  Hence  arose  the  first  kind  of  war. 
Man  armed  himself  to  destroy  such  of  his  sub- 
jects as  had  rejected  his  dominion,  and  even 
contended  with  him  for  the  possession  of  the  earth. 


522  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

and  to  have  license  to  devour  at  will  its  niore 
peaceful  inhabitants.  A  similar  cause  generated 
the  other  and  more  fearful  kind  of  war,  of  man 
with  man.  Whence  came  wars  and  fightings 
amongst  you,  saith  the  Apostle ;'  come  they  not 
hence^  even  of  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  members  ? 
The  highest  view  that  we  can  take  of  man  is 
that  which  looks  upon  him  as  belonging  to  a 
spiritual  as  well  as  a  material  world.  The  end 
of  the  creation  of  the  earth,  says  the  father  and 
founder  of  Natural  History,  is  the  glory  of  God, 
from  the  works  of  nature,  by  man  only.'  And, 
as  the  same  pious  author  observes,  *'  How  con- 
temptible is  man,"  if  he  does  not  aim  at  this  end 
of  his  creation,  if  he  does  not  strive  to  raise 
himself  above  the  low  pursuits  that  usually 
occupy  his  mind  !'  The  heavens  indeed  declare 
the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  sheweth 
the  work  of  his  hands.  Day  unto  day  uttereth 
speech,  and  night  unto  n^ht  sheweth  know- 
ledge."*  The  beasts  of  the  field  honour  him,  and 
all  creatures  that  he  hath  made  glorify  him. 
But  man  must  study  the  book  open  before  him ; 
and  the  more  he  studies  it,  the  more  audible  to 
him  will  be  the  general  voice  to  his  spiritual  ear, 

*  James,  it.  1. 

'  Finis  creationis  telluris  est  gloria  Dei  exopere  naturm  per 
hominem  solum.  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  i.   Intrait.  i. 

*  0  quam  contempta  res  est  konue  nisi  supra  humana  se 
erexerit.  Ibid. 

♦Ps.  xix.  1,2. 


HAN.  523 

and  he  will  clearly  perceive  that  every  created 
thing  glorifies  God  in  its  place,  by  fulfilling  his 
will,  and  the  great  purpose  of  his  providence ; 
but  that  he  himself  alone  can  give  a  tongue  to 
every  creature,  and  pronounce  for  all  a  general 
doxology. 

But  fiirther,  in  contemplating  them,  he  will 
not  only  behold  the  glory  of  the  Godhead  re- 
flected, but,  from  their  several  instincts  and 
characters,  he  may  derive  much  spiritual  in- 
struction. Whoever  surveys  the  three  kingdoms 
of  nature  with  any  attention,  will  discover  in 
every  department  objects  that,  without  any  affi- 
nity, appear  to  represent  each  other.  Thus  we 
have  minerals  that,  under  certain  circumstances, 
as  it  were,  vegetate,  and  shoot  into  various  forms, 
representing  trees  and  plants :  there  are  plants 
that  represent  insects,  and,  vice  versa,  insects 
that  simulate  plants ;  and  the  Zoophytes  have 
received  their  name  from  this  resemblance.^ 
And  as  we  ascend  the  scale,  every  where  a  series 
of  references  of  one  thing  to  another  may  be 
traced,  so  as  to  render  it  very  probable  that  every 
created  thing  has  its  representative  somewhere 
in  nature.  Nor  is  this  resemblance  confined  to 
forms ;  it  extends  also  to  character.  If  we  begin 
at  the  bottom  of  the  scale,  and  ascend  up  to 
man,  we  shall  find  two  descriptions  in  almost 
every  class,  and  even   tribe  of  animals  :  one, 

'  Vol.  I.  p.  149, 156,  169. 


324  FUNCTIONS  XSD  INSTINCTS. 

ferocious  in  their  aspect,  ofl^n  rapid  in  their 
motions,  predaceous  in  their  habits,  preying  upon 
their  fellows,  and  living  by  rapine  and  bloodshed ; 
while  the  other  is  quiet  and  harmleas,  makiDg 
no  attacks,  shedding  no  blood,  and  sufosistiDg 
mostly  on  a  vegetable  diet. 

Since  God  created  nothing  in  vain,  we  may 
rest  assured  that  this  system  of  representation 
was  established  with  a  particular  view.  -  The 
most  common  mode  of  instruction  is  placing  cer^ 
tain  signs  or  symbols  before  the  eye  of  the 
learner,  which  represent  sounds  or  ideas ;  and  so 
the  great  Instructor  of  man  placed  this  world 
before  him  as  an  open  though  mystical  book,  in 
which  the  different  objects  were  the  letters  and 
>f  ords  of  a  language,  from  the  study  of  which  bef 
might  gain  wisdom  of  various  kinds,  and  be 
instructed  in  such  truths  relating  t6  thai  spiritual 
world,  to  which  his  soul  belonged,  as  God  saw 
fit  thus  to  reveal  to  him.  In  the  ;first  place,  by 
observing  that  one  object  in  nature  represented 
another,  he  would  be  taught  that  all  things  are 
significant,  as  well  as  intended  to  act  a  certain 
part  in  the  general  drama ;  and  further,  as  he 
proceeded  to  trace  the  analogies  of  character,  in 
its  two  great  branches  just  alluded  to  upwards, 
he  would  be  led  to  the  knowledge  of  the  doctrine 
thus  symbolically  revealed — that  in  the  invisible 
world  there  are  two  classes  of  spirits— one  bene-' 
volent  and  beueficcut,  and  the  other  malevolent 


MAN.  525 

^nd<  mischievous ;  characters  which,  after  his 
fiall,  ha  would  find  even  exemplified  in  indivi- 
duals of  his  own  species. 

Bat  after  the  unhappy  fall  of  man,  this  mode 
of  instruction  by  natural  and  other  objects  used 
symbolically,  though  it  pervades  the  whole  law 
of  Moees,  and  the  writings  of  the  prophets,  as 
well  as  several  parts  of  the  New  Testament, 
gradually  gave  place  to  the  clearer  light  of  a 
Revelation,  not  by  symbols,  but  by  the  words  and 
language  of  man,  which  he  that  f^mis  may  ofi:en 
read;  yet  still  it  is  a  vei'y  useful  and  interesting 
study,  and  belongs  to  man  as  the  principal  inha- 
bitant of  a  world  stored  with  symbols,  to  ascer- 
tain what  God  intended  to  signify  by  the  objects 
that  he  has  created  and  placed  before  him,  as 
well  as  to  know  their  natures  and  uses.  When 
we  recollect  what  the  Apostle  tells  us,  that  tlie 
invisible  things  of  God  from  the  creation  of  the 
world  are  clearly  seen^  being  understood  by  the 
things  that  are  made,'  and  that  spiritual  truths 
are  reflected  as  by  a  mirror,  and  shewn,  as  it 
were,  enigmatically,^  we  shall  be  convinced  that, 
in  this  view,  the  study  of  nature,  if  properly  con- 
ducted, may  be  made  of  the  first  importance. 


In  this  enumeration  and  history  of  the  prin^ 


1  Rom,  i.  20.  «  1  Cor.  xiii.  12. 


526  FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTINCTS. 

cipal  tribes  of  the  Animid  Kingdom,  we  have 
traced  in  every  page  the  footsteps  of  infinite 
Wisdom,  Power,  and  Goodness.     In  our  ascent 
from  the  most  minute  and  least  animated  parts 
of  that  Kingdom  to  man  himself,  we  have  seen 
in  every  department  that  nothing  was  left  to 
chance,  or  the  rule  of  circumstances,  but  every 
thing  was  adapted  by  its  structure  and  oi^ani- 
zation  for  the  situation  in  which  it  was  to  be 
placed,  and  the  functions  it  was  to  discharge; 
that  though  every  being,  or  group  of  beings,  had 
separate  interests,  and  wants,  all  were  made  to 
subserve  to  a  common  purpose,  and  to  promote  a 
common  object;  and  that  though  there  was  a 
general  and  unceasing  conflict  between  the  mem- 
bers of  this  sphere  of  beings,  introducing  appa^ 
rently  death  and  destruction  into  every  part  of 
it,  yet  that  by  this  great   mass  of  seeming  evil 
pervading  the  whole  circuit  of  the  animal  crea- 
tion, the  renewed  health  and  vigour  of  the  entire 
system  was  maintained.    A  part  suffers  for  the 
benefit  and  salvation  of  the  whole ;  so  that  the 
doctrine  of  the  sufferings  of  one  creature,  by  the 
will  of  God,  being  necessary  to  promote  the  wd- 
fare  of  another,  is  irrefragably  established  by 
every  thing  we  see  in  nature ;  and  further,  that 
thwe  is  an  unseen  hand  directing  all  to  accom- 
plish this  great  object,  and  taking  care  that  the 
destruction  shall  in  no  case  exceed  the  necessity. 


MAN.  527 

Well,  then,  may  all  finally  exclaim,  in  the  words 
of  the  Divine  Psalmist : — 

O  iMrdy  haw  manifold  are  thy  works^  in 
WISDOM  hast  thou  made  them  all;  the  earth 
is  full  of  thy  riches ; 

So  is  the  great  and  wide  sea  also^  wherein  are 
things  creeping  innumerable  both  small  and  great 
beasts. 

These  wait  all  upon  thee :  that  thou  may  est  give 
them  meat  in  due  season. 

When  thou  givest  them  they  gather  it:  and 
when  thou  openest  thy  hand  they  are  filled  with 

good. 

When  thou  hidest  thy  face  they  are  troubled : 
when  thou  takest  away  their  breath  they  diCy  and 
are  turned  again  to  their  dust. 

When  thou  lettest  thy  breath  go  forth  they  shall 
be  made :  and  thou  shalt  renew  the  face  of  the 
earth. 


( 


INDEX. 


Abyss,  L  24,  374 
Acalepha,  i.  195, 402 
Accipenser,  i.  107 
Acephala,  i.  237 
Achatina,  i.  291 
Acorn  barnacle,  ii.  3 
Acrita,  i.  149 
Acrocinus,  ii.  179 
Actheres,  ii.  25,  31,  118,  124 
Actinia,  i.  244 
Adanson,  i.  147 
AddisoTiy  ii.  241 
Ailian,  ii.  85 
Aeroscepsy,  ii.  112 
Agardhy  i.  146 
AgcLSsizj  ii.  390 
Agastria,  i.  150 
Aggregate  animals,  i,  220 
Air,  Introd.  xcii 
Albatross,  ii.  453 
Alca,  ii.  450 
Alcyonium,  i.  157 
Alcyon,  i.  160 
Alitrunk,  ii.  147 
Alligator,  i.  32  ;  ii.  431 
Ambulacra,  i.  203 
American  animals,  i.  390 
Ametabolians,  ii.  314 
Ammonites,  i.  20,  315 
Ammophila,  ii.  330 
Amoreux,  i.  182 
Amorpba,  i.  147 
Ampbitrite,  i.  345;  ii.  103 
Ampbibians,  ii.  137,  143 
Ampbiuma,  ii.  421 
Amymone,  ii.  25 
Anableps,  ii.  380 

VOL.  II. 


Anancbinia,  i.  223 

Anancbitis,  i.  213 

Anas,  i.  104 

Anas  acuta,  ii.  169 

Anatifa,  ii.  3 

Androctonus,  ii.  300 

Anbyma,  ii.  454 

Animals  and    plants,  i.    139, 

206,  399 ;  ii.  246 
Animalcules,  i.  149,  152;   ii. 

98 
Aonelidans,  i.  332 ;  ii.  127 
Annulosans,  i.  320 
Anolius,  Anolis,  ii.  124,  430 
Anomalon,  ii.  334 
Anser,  i.  104 
Ants'  nests,  ii.  340 
Ants,  ii.  330,  344 
Ants  of  visitation,  ii.  344 
Ants,  black,  ii.  242 
Antagonist     powers,     Introd. 

Ixxxi.  i.  142;  ii.  520 
Antilope  Cbickara,  ii.  502 
Antilope  furcata,  i.  97 
Antilope  rupicapra,  i.  131 
Antennce,  ii.  112 
Antbobians,  ii.  365 
Anticbrist,  ii.  394 
Antipatbes,  i.  177 
Ape,  ii.  213 

Apbaniptera,  ii.  317,  323 
Apbides,  i.  92 
Apbrodita  aculeata,  i.  348 
Apbrodita  magnifica,  ii.  1 32 
Aplysia,  i.  305 

Aporobrancbians,  ii.  282,  309 
Aptenodytes,  i.  134 

M  M 


530 


INDEX. 


Apteryx,  li.  457 

Aquila,  ii.  71 

Ara,  i.  71 

Arachnidans,  ii.  81,  281    . 

Aranea,  ii,  284 

Aranea,  notacantha,  ii.  299 

Araneidans,  ii.  283 

Ararat,  i.  45 

Arctomys,  ii.  504 

Arg;onauta,  i.  136,  306 

Argulus,  ii.  35 

Argyronauta,  ii.  296 

Aristotle,  i.  175, 205, 253,  drc. 

Arm,  ii.  267 

Armadillo,  i.  399;  ii.  61 

Arvicola,  i.  92 ;  ii.  505 

Ascalabotes,  ii.  121 

Ascaris,  i.  325 

Ascidians,  i.  218 

Ass,  ii.  499 

Astacus  Gammanis,  ii.  44,  50 

Astacus  fluviatilis,  ii.  44,  52 

Asteria,  i.  201 

Ateles,  ii.  73 

Athatiasius,     Introd.     xxxix. 

xcviii 
Audoin.l  126;  ii.  22,  287 
Aurelia,  ii.  101 
Aye-Aye,  ii.  210,  488,514 
Azote,  i.  147 

Baboon,  ii.12l3,  517 
Baciliaria,  i.  350 
BacoTiy  Friar,  Introd,  xlviii 
Baculites,  i.  20 
Baddeley,  ii.  353 
Baker  J  ii.  305 
Balsna,  ii.  493 
Balcenoptera,  ii.  493 
Balanites,  ii.  3 ' 
Balanus,  i.  277  ;  ii.  4 
Barnacle,  ii.  1 
Barbs,  ii.  112 
Barrington,  ii.  508 
Barton,  ii.  490 
Bat-louse,  ii.  307 
Bat-mite,  ii.  305 


Batrachians,  ii.  179 

Bauer,  i.  150,  159,  342 

Bdella,  i.  336,  338 

Beak  of  birds,  ii.  195 

Bear,  ii.  212,  506 

Beattie,  ii.  225 

Beaver,  ii.  209,237,  276,  610 

Beechey,  183,  185;  ii.  454 

Bee-cuckow,  ii.  463 

Beetles,  ii.  180,  354,  359 

Bellevue,  i.  248 

Bembex,  ii.  330 

Bennett,  ii.    279,   288,    350, 

453 
Bimane,  ii.  215,  518 
Bipes,  i.  121 :  ii.  179 
Birds,  i,  5,  99;   ii,  56,    151, 

177,261,270 
Birgus,  ii.  48 
Bison,  ii.  502 
Bivalve  moUuscans,  i.  237 
Blackwall,  ii.  283,  295 
Bladder-kelp,  i.  294 
Blatta,  ii.  356 
Boa,  ii.  174,427 
Bocfiart,  i.  297 
Bodianus,  ii.  380 
Boerhave,  i.  327 
Boltenia,  i.  230 
Bones,  ii.  361 
Bonito,  ii.  452 
Bonnie,  i.  13,  327;  ii.  426 
Booby,  ii.  452 
Borassus,  i.  123 
Bos  americanus,  i.  94 
Bos  urus,  ii.  502 
Bosc,  i.   32,  122,    196,  291, 

312,  336 
Botryllus,  i.  215 
Botryocephaliis,  i.  324,  327 
Brain-mite,  i.  360 
Branchiopod,  i.  161  ;  ii.  21 
Branchipus,  ii.  20 
Branchiremes,  ii.  133 
Brayleyy  i.  282 
Bristles,  ii.  133 
Bron^iar^,  ii.  411 


INDEX. 


531 


Brown,  I  147,  399 
Brus^uim,  i.  155,201 
Baccmom,  i.  274,  279 
Buckland,i.  185;  ii.  208 
Bugong,  ii.  350 
Bugs,  ii.  355 
Bolimus,  i.  291 
Built,  i.  274 
Bulleea,  i.  274 

Burrowing  Molluscans,  i.  241 
Burying  Beetles,  ii.  361 
Byssus,  i.  238,  251,  254,  406 

Cactus,  i.  354 
Calandra,  ii.  366 
Caligus,  ii.  35 
CallKthys,  U.  142,  384 
Calosoma,  ii.  360 
Calyptrea,  i.  274 
Camel,  ii.  203,  205,  500 
Camelopardalis,  ii.  174,  501 
Campagool,  i.  92 
Campbell,  i.  122 
Cancer  stagnalis,  ii.  29 
Cancer  meenas,  ii.  80 
Canis,  i.  65;  ii.  71 
Carabus,  ii.  71 
Carcases,  ii.  361 
Cardium,  i.  241 
Carinaria,  i.  307 
Carlisle,  i.  327 
Camiyora,  ii.71,  515 
Cartwright,  ii.  210,  510 
Caru#,  1.207, 244;  ii.  16, 311 
Cassida,  ii.  364 
Cassiopea,  ii.  101 
Castor,  i.  133;  ii.  309,510 
Casuarius,ii.l56,  178,459 
Cat,  i.  67,  72 ;  ii.  260 
Cateott,  I  50 
Catoblepas,  ii.  203,  502 
Caucaiiao,  i.  73 
Cavia,  ii.  504 
Cavitaries,  i.  319 
Cellarif ,  i.  168 
Cenomyce,  i.  96 
Centipedes,  ii.  65, 71 


Centres,  i.  275;  ii.20,  85 
Cephalopods,  i.  303 ;    ii.  105, 

115,  132 
Cephalothorax,  ii.  31,  87 
Cerambyx,  ii.  364 
Cermatia,  ii.  67 
Cervus,  ii.  181 

Cetaceans,  ii.  136, 143, 484, 492 
Cetonia,  ii.  365 
Chabrier,  ii.,  147,  150 
Chsetodon,  ii.  405 
Chalk  eggs,  i.  186 
Chameleon,  ii.  192 
Chamois,  i.  131 
Charadrius  ^gyptius,  i.  339 
Cheetah,  ii.  501 
Cheiromys,  ii.  210,  514 
Cheiroptera,  ii.  156,  488,  516 
Chela,  ii.  37 
Chelifer,  ii.  90,  303 
Chelonia,  i.  134;  ii.  143,484, 

492 
Cherub,  Introd,  Ixx 
Cherubim,    Inirod,     Ivii,    Ixi, 

xcix ;  ii.  244 
Chilognathans,  ii.  64,  74 
Chilopodans,  ii.  65,  70 
Chimsra,  i.  112 
Chirotus,  ii.  429 
Chiton,  i.  270,  278 
Chlamyphorus,  i.  399 ;  ii.  207, 

209,  476 
Chrysomela,  ii.  364 
Cicada,  ii.  354 
Cicindela,  ii.  275,  359 
Ciconia  alba,  ii.  456 
Ciconia  argula,  i.  338 
Ciconia  nig^,  ii.  456 
Ciripedes,  i.  235 ;  ii.  I 
Clamp-shell,  i.  251 
Classification,  ii.  480 
CUusilia,  i.  276 
Clavellina,  i.  215 
Clio,  i.268;  ii.  Ill 
Clouds,  Introd,  Ixxxvii 
Clupanodon,  i.  115 
Clupea,  i.  116 


532 


INDEX. 


Cnide,  i.  402 
Coala,  see  Koala 
CochleoctonuSy  ii.  361 
Cockles,  i.  245,  263 
Cock-roach,  ii.  356 
Cod-fish,  i.  110;  ii.  386 
Coluber,  i.  131 
Coleoptera,  ii.  336,  358 
Colymbus,  i.  104 
Comatula,  ii.  11 
Conchifers,  i.  235 
Concbolepas,  i.  274 
Condor,  ii.  251 
Condylopes,    i.   236;'  ii.     17, 

132,  170 
Coral,  i.  177 
Cordylia,  ii.  366 
Coronula,  ii.  5 
Crabs,  ii.  39,  79 
Crab-spider,  ii.  298 
Crangon,  ii.  38 
Cricetus,  ii.  505 
Crinoideans,  ii.  9 
Crocodile,  i.  31 ;  ii.  431 
Crosse y  ii.  431 
Cteniza,  ii.  287 
Cuculus,  i.  100 
Culex,  i.  134,  160 
Cuvier,  i.  193,  206, 292,  307 ; 

ii.  115,138 
Cyamus,  ii.  59 
Cychrus,  i.  104 
Cyclops,  ii.  20,  25,  28 
Cyclopterus,  ii.  121 
Cyclostoma,  i.  276 
Cynocephalus,  ii.  213,  488 
Cyprea,  i.  274,  300 
Cyprinus  auratus,  i.  161 
Cyprinus  Brama,  i.  355 
Cypris,  ii.  20,  134 
Cypselus   i,  100 

Dactyle,  i.  240,  405 
Daldorf,  i.  123 
Daly  ell,  i.  152  321 
Daphnia,  ii  20 
Darkness,  Introd,  xciii 


Dasyurus,  ii.  490 
Davy,  i.  35,  340;  ii.  254,418 
De  Blainville,  i.  150,  205 
Deer,  ii.  181,  198,502 
De  Gear,  ii.  20 
Deinotherium,  ii.  497 
De  la  Motte,  ii.  226 
Delphinus,  ii.  495 
Deluge,  i.  25,  376 
Denon,  ii.  431 
Depurators,  i.  159 
Dermaptera,  ii.  318 
Dermestes,  ii.  71,  362 
DeukelzooHy  i.  115 
Dhawalagiri,  i.  25,  45 
Dibranchiata,  i.  306,  313 
Didelphis,  ii.  490 
Didemnum,  i.  215 
Didus,  i.  55 
Digitigrades,  ii.  212 
Diomedea,  it.  452 
Diplostomum,  i.  330,  353 
Diplozoon,  i.  330,  335,  359; 

11.  116 
Dipneumones,  ii.  285 
Diptera,  ii.  319,  323 
Dipus,  ii.  175. 
Discoboles,  ii.  121 
Discocephalus,  i.  349;   ii.  97 
Distoma,  i.  320 
Dodo,  i.  55;  ii.  458 
Doras,  i.  121 ;  ii.  384 
Draco,  ii.  160 
Dragons,  i.  30;  ii.  409 
Dragon-flies,  ii.  148,  352 
Drapamaudf  i.  321. 
Dromaius,  ii.  459 

Dromedary,  ii.  205 
Dufaur,  it.  87 
Dugong,  ii.  496 
Du  Trochet,  ii.  97 
Dynastidans,  ii.  365 
Dytiscus,  i.  134;  ii.  121 

Eagle,  i.  70;  ii.  471,  473 

Ears,  i.  60 

Earthworm,  i.  341;  ii.  96 


INDEX. 


533 


Echeneis,  ii.  122 
Echidna,  ii.  82,  206,  489 
Echinococcus,  i.  324 
Echinoderms,  i.   195,  201 ;  ii. 

118 
Echinus,  i.  203 ;  ii.  7 
Edentata,  ii.  205,  486,  503 
Edwards f  i.  126 
Eggs  of  Frogs,  ii.  265 
Egg-placer,  ii.  331. 
Ekrenberg^  i.  148 
Elater,  ii.  251 
Electric-eel,  ii.  402 
Electric-fishes,  ii.  396 
Electricity,  ii.  250 
Elephant,  ii.  199,  235,  498 
Ellis,  i.  245 ;  ii.  10 
Elytra,  ii.  145 
Emu,  i.  46;  ii.  156 
Enchelis,  i.  153 
Encrinites,  ii.  10 
Encrinus,  ii.  13 
Enhydra,  i.  134 
Entimus,  ii.  366 
Entomostracans,  ii.  19,  36,  129 
Entozoa,  i.319,  352;  ii.  22 
Epeira,  ii.  186 
Ephemera,  i.  127  ;  ii.  163 
Equorea,  ii.  101 
Erinaceus,  ii.  213 
Escallop-shells,  i.  254 
Esox,  It.  71 
Eudora,  ii.  101 
Euplcea,  ii.  350 
Exocoetus,  i.  122 ;  iL  142 
Extinct  animals,  i.  16,  37 
Eye  of  Fishes,  ii.  379 
Eye-worms,  i.  353 

Fabricius,  ii.  85 
Falco,.ii.  71 
Fasciola,  i.  320,  324 
Feathers,  ii.  153 
Feelers,  ii.  112 
Felis,  ii.  71 
Filaria,  i.  324 
Fins,  ii.  135, 141 


Fire,  Intrad.  xci 
Fire-flies,  ii.  351,  366 
Firmament,  Intrad.  Ixxxiv 
Fishes,  ii.  270,  371,  388 
Fishing.frog,  ii.  113,389 
Fistulidans,  i.  201,  244 
Flagnun,  ii.  78 
Flea,  ii.  323 
Flesh-fly,  ii.  231,  325 
Flight,  ii.  155 
FlightofBaU,  ii.  156 
Flight  of  Birds,  ii.  155,  193 
Flight  of  Insects,  ii.  146 
Fly-shooter,  ii.  405 
Fluke,  i.  325,  352 
Food  of  Animals,  ii.  246 ' 
Forest-fly,  ii.  317 
Forflcula,  ii.  358 
Fossil  Animals,  i.  387 
Fox,  ii.  269 
French,  ii.  225,  331 
Freycinet,  ii.  46 
Frigate-bird,  ii.  452 
Frog-hopper,  ii.  357 
Fuhca,  I  104 
Furia,  i.  361 

Oad-fly,  ii.  325 

Gadus  iSgelfinus,  i.  1 1 1 

Gadus  Morbua,  i.  1 1 0 

Galathea,  ii.  134 

Galeodes,  ii.  86,  88 

Galeopithecus,  ii.  159 

Gallinago,  i.  104 

Gallinula,  i.  104 

Galls,  ii.  331 

Gall-flies,  ii.  332 

Gallus,  ii.  461 

Grally-worm,  ii.  66 

Gamasus,  ii.  32 

Grarum,  i.  112 

Gaspard,  i.  288 

Gastropods,   i.  267,  269;    ii. 

108 
Gecko,  ii.  121,  123,  192 
Gecarcinus  carnifex,  i.  125 
Grecarcinus  Uca,  i.  126 


/ 


634 


INDEX. 


r 

Gelasimus  pugillator,  ii.  44 

Gelasimus  vocans,  ii.  43 

Gelatines,  i.  195;  ii.  101 

Qeoffroyy  ii.  431 

Geophilu8  electricas,  ii.  69, 129 

Gills,  ii.  374 

GirajQTe,  ii.  174,501 

Globuiina,  i.  162 

Glomeris,  ii.  ^S 

Glow- worm,  ii.  251,  366 

Glutton,  ii.  71 

Omelin,  i.  108 

Gnat,  ii.  327 

Gnu,  ii.  203,  502 

Groats-beard,  ii.  248 

Goby,  ii.  380 

Grods  of  the  Heathen,  Introd. 

Ixxix.  i.  365,  368 
Qoldfuss,  ii.  432 
Gonyleptes,  ii.  303 
Gordius,  i.  13 
Gouldy  ii.  467 
Grallatoies,  i.  106 
Grant,  ii.  16,  107 
Grasshoppers,  ii.  180,  356 
Gravitation,  ii.  241 
Gray,  i.  205,  347 
Gregarious  animals,  i.  220 
Ground-beetles,  ii.  359 
Gryllotalpa,  ii.  172,  189 
Guana,  ii.  430,  434 
Gubernacula,  ii.  161 
Guettard,  ii.  13 
Guilding,  i.  271,  347  ;  ii.  429 
Guinea- worm,  i.  352 
Gymnotus,  ii.  400 
Gyrinus,  i.  134 

Haddock,  i.  Ill 
Hag,  ii.  395 
Hagenhach^  ii.  359 
Hair,  i.  64,  370 ;  ii.  151 
Halicore  Dugong,  ii.  496 
HalicoreTabernaculum,  ii.  497 
Haliotis,  i,  274.  278 ;  ii.  1 1 1 
Haltica,  ii.  181,364 
Hamster,  i.  20 ;  ii.  505 


Hancock,  i.  122 
Hand,  ii.  215 
Harpalus,  ii.  71 
Harris,  i.  155 
Hearing  of  Fishes,  ii.  38 1 
Heame,  ii.  210 
Heat,  ii.  250 

Heavens,  Introd.  Ixxv.  i.  336 
Hectocotyle,  i.  358 
Hedgehog,  ii.  213,  504 
Hedysarum,  i.  147 ;  ii.  248 
Heliconia,  ii.  351 
Heliocentris,  ii.  285 
Helix,  i.  274,  281;  ii.  Ill 
Helix  hortensis,  i.  283 
Helix  pomatia,  i.  283 
Helminthologists,  i.  15 
Helsham,  ii.  464 
Hemiptera,  ii.  355,  358 
Hermas,  i.  137 
Hermit-crabs,  ii.  245 
Herodotus f  Introd.  Ixix.  i.  336 
Herring,  i.  113 
Herschel,  i.  21 
Hesychius,  i.  338  ;  ii.  1 
Heteropods,  i.  267,  301 
Hexapods,  ii.  74 
Hexastoma,  i.  358 
Hippodamia,  ii.  351 
Hippopotamus,  ii.  199, 498 
Homdineans,  i.  324 
Hirudo,  i.  334 ;  u.  1 17 
Hinindo  esculenta,  ii.  263 
Hirundo  riparia,  ii.  263 
Hirundo  rustica,  i.  102 ;  ii,  262 
Hirundo  urbica,  ii.  263 
Hister,  ii.  363 
Hive-bee,  ii.  247,  337 
Holman^  ii.  336 
Holothuria,  ii.  102 
Homaloptera,  ii.  319,  323 
Home,  i.  244 ;  ii.  395 
Homoptera,  ii.  319,  353 
Hooke,  i.  154 
Hop,  ii.  247 
Hope,  ii.  334 
Hoplia,  ii.  366 


INDEX. 


535 


HonieU,  ii.  335 
Hornet-flies,  ii.  357 
Moms,  i.  59 ;  ii.  354 
Hone,  ii.  499 
Harsfield,  it.  467 
House-crickety  ii.  356 
Humble-bees,  ii.  188 
Humboldt,  i.  80 ;  ii.  402 
Humming-birds,  i.  71 
Hump,  i.  62 
Hurry y  i.  338 
Huso,  i.  107 
Hysena,  ii.  71 
Hyalsea,  i.  268 
Hybernation,  ii.  24^,  252 
Hydatigera,  i.  324 
Hydatis,  i.  329,  353 
Hydra,!.  149,  166;  ii.  100 
Hydrargyra,  i.  122 
Hydrocampa,  i.  134 
Hydrophilidse,  i.  134 
Hydrophytes,  i.  163 
Hyla,  ii.  192 

Hymenoptera,    ii.    209,    328, 
335,  345,  504 

lanthina,  i.  291 
Ichneumon,  ii.  333,  368 
Ichthyosaurus,  i.  368 
Idotea,  ii.  77 

Jenner,i.99,  102;  ii.  262 
Jews,  i.  81,  396 
Iguana,  i.  40;  ii.  417 
Iguanodon,  i.  38,  40 
Indicator,  ii.  463 
Indris,  ii.  517 
Infusories,  i.    135,  149,    155, 

401 
Ink  of  Cuttle  Fish,  i.  309 
Inoceramus,  i.  20 
Insects,  ii.  316 

Instinct,  ii.  220,  243,  245,  253 
Integuments,  i.  399 ;  if.  476 
Intellect,  ii.  235,  358 
Interagents,  ii.  242 
Invertebrata,  ii.  169 
Jobtonf  i.  32 


Johfison,  i.  321 
Jones,  i.  380 
loterium,  ii.  77 
IrencBUS,  Introd.  xcviii 
Irradiation,  Introd,  xcvi 
Isis,  ii.  13,  244 
Isopods,  ii.  77  * 
lulus,  i.  348 ;  ii.  65,  74 
Jurine,  ii.  147 
Justin,  M.  Introd.  xlviii 
Ivy,  ii.  248 

Kanguroo,  i.  46,  48;  ii.  175, 

478 
Kamichi,  ii.  454 
Kircker,  i.  21 
Kidd,  ti.  191 
King,  i.  154,  264 
King-crab,  ii.  19,  23,  32, 173 
Koala,  ii.  48,  211 
Kotzebue,  ii.  28 
Kraken,  i.  307 

L€Lcepede,  i.  115 
Lacordaire,  ii.  251,  361,  365 
Lace-winged  flies,  ii.  357 
Lagomys,  ii.  507 
Lamark,  Introd.  xxii.  i.  150^ 

155, 226 
Langouste,  ii.  49 
Lanthorn-flies,  ii.  354 
La  Place,  Introd.  xji,   i.  21, 

27 
Laplysia,  i.  270,  275,  305 ;  ii, 

111 
Larvse,  ii.  173 
Latham,  ii.  438 
Latreille,  L  236 ;  ii.  8, 17,  87, 

&c. 
Law,  Introd.  xxxviii.  i.  302 
Leach,  ii.  306 
Leather-devourers,  ii.  362 
Leech,  i.  334;  ii.  95 
LeClerc,  i.  13 
Leeuwenhoeck,  i.  326 
Legs,  ii.  161,  172 
Lemmings,  ii.  505 


536 


INI>EX. 


Lemur,  ii.  213 

Lemmus  amphibius,  i.  133 

Lemmus  oeconomus,  i.  91  ;  ii. 

505 
Lemmus  vulgaris,  i.  91 
Lepadites,  ii.  3,  5 
Lepas,  ii.  1 
Lepidoptera,  ii.  319 
Lerneans,  ii.  22,  30 
Le  Sueur,  i.  226,  264 
Leucophrys,  i.  153 
Leviathan,  ii.  409,  432 
Libellulina,  i.  134 
Lice,  i.  13,  371 
Lightfoot,  i.  9 
Ligia,  ii.  77 
Limax,  i.  274;  ii.  Ill 
Limnia,  i.  317 
Limnoria,  i.  243 
Limulus,  ii.  19,  32 
Limpets,  i.  272 
Linguatula,  i.  324 
Linni,  i.  15,  269 
Lipurus,  ii.  211,  490 
Lister,  ii.  285 
Lithotrya,  ii.  3 
Lobster,  common,  ii.  50, 78 
Lobster,  thorny,  ii.  49 
Locusts,  i.  89 ;  ii.  356 
Loligopsis,  ii.  107 
Lophius,ii.  137,  389,  406 

Loricaria,  ii.  142 
Loxia,  ii.  163 
Lumbricinans,  i.  334 
Lumbricus,  i.  13,  341 
Lycoris,  i.  347 
Lyell,  Introd.  xxxii.  i.  53 

Mackarel,  i.  1 1 1 
Mackenzie,  i.  117 
Mac  Leay,  i.  319 ;  ii.  2,  7 
Macrocercus,  i.  71 
Macropodia,  ii.  39 
Macropus,  ii.  175,  40 
Madox,  i.  337 
Madrepora,  i.  179 
Malacostracans,  ii.  19,  59 


Malte-Brun,  i.  22,  51,  397 
Malapterurus,  ii.  397 
Malthus,  ii.  389,  407 
Mammalians,  ii.  260,  269,  476 
Mammary  .organs,  i.  476 
Mammoth,  i.  372 
Man,  i.  8;  ii.  516 
Manatee,  ii.  136,  496 
Manis,  i.  399 ;  ii.  206,  476 
Manitrunk,  ii.  147 
Mantell,  i.  36,  38 ;  ii.  1 1 
Manticora,  ii.  359 
Mantis,  ii.  356 
Mantis-crabs,  ii.  38 
Marmot,  ii.  504 
Marsupians,  ii.  211,  478,  4S7, 

490 
Marsupites,  ii.  1 1 
Martin,  i.  339 
Mastodon,  i.  374 
Matter,  ii.  254 
Medusa,  u  199 ;  ii.  101 
Megaiosaurus,  i.  37,  40 
Megatherium,  i.  399 ;  ii.  476. 
Meleagrina,  i.  259 
Melolonthidans,  ii.  365 
Menopoma,  ii.  421 
Mergus,  i.  104 
Merian,  ii.  344 
Metabolians,  ii.  314,  316 
Metamorphosis,  ii.  26,  321 
Migrations,  i.  88 
Millepedes,  ii.  ^5,  71 
Miller,  ii.  10,  13 
Mites,  ii.  304 
Mola,  i.  358 ;  ii.  384 
Mole,  ii.  213 

Mole-cricket,  ii.  172,  182,  356 
Molluscans,  i.  234,  265,  293 ; 

ii.  125 
Monas,  i.  162,  354;  ii.  94. 
Mongol,  i.  73 
Monitor,  i.  40 ;  ii.  430 
Monkey,  ii.  213 
Monoceros,  i.  279 
Monodon,  ii.  494 
MoBOculus,  ii.  2,21 


INDEX. 


537 


Monothyra,  i.  266 
Monotremes,  ii.  83,  206,  483, 

489 
Montague,  ii.  307 
Moongeeara,  ii.  340 
More,  ii.  StM 
Mormolyce,  ii.  359 
Motion,  ii.  93 
Muller,  i.  155,  321,  356 
Murex,  i.  296 
Muskdeer,  ii.  501 
Mycetophagus,  ii.  363 
Mygale,  ii.  286 
Myriapods,  ii.  64,  74,  129 
Myrmecophaga,  ii.  336 
Myrmica,  ii.  340 
Mytilus,  i.  259 
Myxine,  ii.  123 
Myoxus,  ii.  504 

Nais,  i.  323 

Nandu,  ii.  459 

Narwhal,  ii.  494 

Natatores,  i.  106 

Natatory  Organs,  ii.  131 

Nature,  Inirod.  xxxiii 

Nauplius,  ii.  25 

Nautilus,  i.  301 ;  ii.  105 

Necrophaga,  ii.  70 

Necrophagus,  ii.  70 

Necrophorus,  ii.  71 

Negro,  i.  73 

Nephrops,  ii.  50 

Nereideans,  i.  333, 346;  ii.  128 

Nereis,  i.  348 

Nerita,  i.  274 

Neritina,  i.  274 

Nests,  Birds,  ii.  263 

Ne^,  Fishes,  ri  384 

Neiiropteni,  ii.  319,  351 

Nibblers,  ii.  209 

Nicholson,  ii.  401 

Nipples,  ii.  476 

Nicothoe,  ii.  35 

Nirmus,  i.  132 

Nitrogen,  i.  139 

Nitzch,  ii.  470 


Nordmann,  i.  355 ;  ii.  22 
Numenius,  i.  104 
Nycteribia,  ii.  307 

Oak-gall,  ii.  332 

Obisium,  ii.  90,  303 

Oeypode,  ii.  43 

Ocythoe,  i.  311 

Octopus,  i.  308 ;  ii.  105 

Oestrus,  ii.  325 

Olivier,  ii.  43,  86 

Oniscus,  ii.  77 

Operculum,  i.  277,  279 

Ophidians,    ii.  71,   130,   179, 

264 
Ophiotheres,  ii.  178 
Opossum,  i.  37;  ii.  491 
Oppian,  i.  312 
Orbicula,  i.  275 
Orders,  of  Animals,  Infiistories, 
i.  156 

Polypes,  i.  166 
Radiaries,  i.  195 
Tunicaries,  i.  218 
Molluscans,  i.  237,267 
Cephalopoda,  i.  306 
Worms,  i.  319 
Annelidans,  i.  -333 
Cirripedes,  ii.  3 
Entomostracans,  ii.  21 
Crustaceans,  ii.  41 
Myriapods,  ii.  64 
Arachnidans,  ii.  282 
Pseudarachnidans,    ii. 

303 
Acartdans,  ii.  305 
Insects,  ii,  317 
Fishes,  ii.  388 
Reptiles,  ii.  415 
Birds,  ii.  444 
Mammalians,  ii.  483 
Orchesia,  ii.  42 
Ornithorhynehus,  i.  48 ;  ii.  82, 

206,  489 
Osculant  Orders,  ii.  317 
Oscillatoria,  i.  145,  162 
0*/tfr,  i.  241,  247     • 


538 


INDEX, 


Osphronemus,  ii.  384 

Ostrich,  i.  31 ;  ii.  166,  459 

Ovibos,  i.  95 

Ovifl  Aries,  i.  63 

Owen,  i.  207,301,  310;   ii. 

105,  412,  &c.  &c. 
Oxygen,  i.  139,  147 
Oxyurus,  i.  325 
Oyster,  i,  257 

Pachyderms,  ii.  97,  485,  497 

Paddles,  ii.  143 

PagdSf  ii.  451 

Pagurus,  ii.  45 

Pagurus  Bemhardus,  ii.  47 

Pagurus  clibanarius,  ii.  46 

Paffurus  Diogenes,  ii.  47 

Pafsemon,  ii.  38 

Palamedea  cornuta,  ii.  454 

Paleyy  I  225 

Palinurus,  ii.  49 

Pallas,  i.  107;  ii.  86,507 

Palpi,  ii.  78,  83,  112 

Pandalus,  ii.  38 

Papilio,  ii.  349 

Parasites,  ii.  30,  315,  332 

Pamassius,  i.  131 

Parrot,  i.  71 

Parts  reproduced,  iii  382 

Patella,  i.  272 

Pearls,  i.  259 

Pearl-fishery,  i.  260 

Pecten,  i.  254 

Pedimane,  ii.  491 

Pediculus,  i.  13 

Pediculus  Nigritarum,  i.  85, 372 

Pedipalps,  ii.  299 

Pediremes,  ii.  123 

Peeasus,  ii.  142 

Pelecanus,  ii.  195 

Pennant,  i.  92 

Pentacrinites,  ii.  12 

Pentacrinus,  ii*  13 

Pentelasmis,  i.  278 :  ii.  3 

Perca  fluviatilis,  ii.  31 

Perca  lucioperca,  ii.  31 

Perca  scandens,  i.  123 ;  ii.  48 


Perch-pest,  ii.  31 
Perchers,  ii.  465 
Perdvaly  i.  340 
Periophthaloius,  ii^  380 
Peripatus,  i.  347 ;  ii.  128 
Peron,  i.  178,  224,  226 
Periwinkle,  i.  274 
Petaurus,  ii.  159 
Petricola,  i.  248 
Phalangista,  ii.  159, 490 
Phalangium,  ii.  90 
Phalaropes,  ii.  457 
Phaneeus,  ii.  365 
Phascochcerus,  ii.  200 
Phascolomys,  ii.  490 
Philo,  Introd.  Ixxxii,  xcrii,  i. 

137 
Phoca,  i.  134;  u.  232 
Pholas,  i.  245,  250,  405 
Phosphoric  animals,  i.  179,  190 
Phrynus,  ii.  87,  90 
Phyllium,  ii.  356 
Phyllodoce,  i.  347 
Phyllosoma,  ii.  59 
Physalis,  i.  198 
Physsophora,  i.  195 
Phytomyza,  ii,  354 
Picus,  ii.  194 
Pika,  ii.  507 
Pileopsis,  i.  274 
Pimetodus,  ii.  421 
Pinna,  i.  252 
Pinnophylax,  i.  253 
Pinnotheres,  i.  253 
Pioneer-spider,  ii.  289 
PisicUtu,  ii.  224 
Plague  of  flies,  ii.  357 
Planaria,  i.  320,  353 
Planorbis,  i.  316 
Plant-animals,  i.  156 ;  ii.  94 
Plantigrades,  ii.  212 
Plants  and  animals,  i.  139, 216; 

u.  246 
Platalea,  ii.  125. 
Plato,  i.  148 
Plesiosaurus,  i.  31,  368 
Pliny,  i.  l57,  253,  312. 


INDEX. 


539 


Ploceus,  ii.  466 
Pluffder,  i.  299 
PoBcilopods,  ii.  22,  35 
Poison-fangs,  ii.  82 
Poll,  i.  249,  262,  257 
PoUyxenua,  ii.  66 
Polygastrica,  i.  156 
Polypary,  i.  173,  182 
Polype,  i.  5,  156,  166 
Polypi  natantes,  i.  178 
Polypi  tubiferi,  i.  168 
Polypi  vaginati,  i.  173 
Polystoma,  i.  358 
Pompilus,  ii.  330 
Pontoppidan,  i.  307 
Population,  i.  397 
Poulpe,  i.  308 
Poultry,  i.  60. 
Power,  i«  154 
Prairie-dog,  ii.  504 
Predaceans,  ii.  212,  487,  514 
Prehensory  toe,  ii.  214 
Proboscis,  ii.  201 
Proteus,  i.  35,40;  ii.  418 
Protophyta,  i.  145 
Protozoa,  i.  145,  156 
Pseudoscorpions,  ii.  203 
Psophia,  ii.  455 
Pterodactylus,  ii.  342 
Pteromyzon,  ii.  123 
Pteropodi,  i.  267,  302 ;  ii.  132 
Pteroptes,  ii.  305 
Pulex  irritans,  ii.  323 
Pniex  penetrans,  i.  13 
Pulmonaries,  ii.  28 1 
Punitive  animals,  i.  12 
Pupipara,  u.  317,  324,  332 
Purple  die,  i.  29D 
Purpura,  i.  298 
Pygolampi8,ii.  251,367 
Pyrites,  i.  193 

Pyiosoma,  i.  178,  223 ;  ii.  95 
Python,  U.  427 

Quadrumanes,  i.  71 ;   ii.  213, 

488,  516 
Quadrupeds,  i.  5 


Qui^a,  i.  99 

Radiaries,  i.  319 

Raffles,  i.  174 

Rafinesque,  i.  311 

Raia,  ii.  137 

Ramondy  i.  70 

Ranatra,  i.  134 

Rat,  i.  92 

Rat-hare,  ii.  507 

Ratkke,  ii.  79 

Raveners,  ii.  470 

Rays,  ii.  385 

Razor-shell,  i.  240 

Reaumur,  i.  246 ;  ii.  52 

Rectrices,  ii.  163 

Rein-deer,  i.  95;  ii.  182 

RepUles,  ii.  264,  271 

Reptiles,  system  of,  ii.  414 

Requins,  ii.  385 

Rhea,  ii.  497 

Rhinoceros,  i.  19,374;  ii.  199, 

498 
Rhizostoma,  i.  198 
Rhizotrogus,  ii.  365 
Richardson,  i.  63,  90,  94,  97  ; 

ii.  209,  511 
Ripiphorus,  ii.  334 
Rodents,  ii.  209,  260, 485, 503, 

514 
Roget,  ii.  130 
Rosa,  i.  180 
Rosel,  ii.  190 

Rotatories,  i.  150,  156;  ii.  97 
Rotifera,  ii.  97 
Roye-beetles,  ii.  360 
Ruminants,  ii.  203,  486,  500 
Rumphius,  i.  180 
Ruppel,  ii.  497 
Rusconi,  ii.  423 

SabeUa,  i.  343,  345 
Salamandra,  ii.  424 
Salamandra  aquatica,  i.  134 
Salamandra  platycaula,  ii.  265^ 

421 
Salmo  alpinus,  i.  1 16 


d40 


INPEX. 


Salmo  eperlanus,  i.  116 
Salmo  Huchoy  i.  116 
Sal  mo  Fario,  i.  1 16 
Salmo  Salar,  i.  116 
Salmo  th^mallus,  i.  1 1 6 
Salmo  TrutU,  i.  116 
Salpa,  i.  222,  350 ;  ii.  95 
Sanguisuga,  i.  334;  ii.  117 
Sarcophaga  carnaria,  ii.  71 
Sarcophagus,  it  325 
Sarcoptes  scabiei,  i.  13 
Sarcorhamphus,  i.  131 
Saurians,  i.  31 ;  ii.  143, 179, 264 
Sauvages,  ii.  287 
Savigny,  i.  223,228, 333,  336; 

ii.  88 
Saw-flies,  ii.  318 
Saxicava,  i.  248 
Say,  ii.  491 
Scales  of  fishes,  ii.  376 
Scales  of  wings,  ii.  150 
Scaphites,  i.  20 
Scarabseus,  ii.  359,  362 
Scheuchzerj  u  86 
SciUfiea,  i.  269 
Scolex,  i.  338 
Scolopax  gallinago,  ii.  195 
Scolopax  gallinula,  ii.  195 
Scolopax  rttsticola,  ii.  195 
Scolopendra,  i.  347 ;  ii.  65,  67 
Scolopendra  phosphorea,  ii.  69 
Scomber  Pelamis,  i.  358 
Scomber  Scombrus,  i,  1 1 2 
Scomber  Thyimus>  i.  112 
Scoresby,  ii.  493 
Scorpions,  ii.  89,  90,  300 
Soatigera,  ii.  67 
Sea-anemones,  i.  244 
Sea-devils,  ii.  386 
Sea-pens,  i.  164 
Sea-urchins,  i.  186 
Sea-unicorn,  ii.  494 
Segestria  pei*fida,  ii.  294 
Segestria  senocukitor,  ii.  294 
Sepia,  i.  306 
Sepiola,  ii.  165 
Seps,  ii.  179 


Seraphim,  Introd.  c,  note 
Serpents,  i.  32;  ii.  130,  409 
Serpula,  i.  343 
Serpuleans,  i.  334 
Sertularia,  i.  168 
Setiger,  ii.  506 
Setiremes,  ii.  133 
Shark,  i.  31 ;  ii.  379,  385 
Shaw,  ii.  29 
Sheep,  Guinea,  i.  64 
Sheep,  Merino,  i.  64 
*Sheep,  Pamassiam,  i.  65 
Ship-worms,  i.  243,  249 
Siliquaria,  i.  344 
Silpha,  ii.  71 
Siluridans,  ii.  140 
Simla,  ii.  213 
Singing-birds,  ii.  436 
Siren,  i.  31 ;  ii.  413,  417 
Sky,  Introd.  Ixxxi. 
Sloths,  ii.  208 
Slugs,  ii.  112 

Snails  (eyes),  i.  282 ;  ii.  Ill 
Scent  of  fishes,  ii.  381 
Solen,  1.  238 
Soliped,  ii.  192 
Solomon's  Ant,  ii.  345 
Solpuga,  ii.  85,  88,  127 
Spallanzaniy  i.  100, 151 
Sparrman,  i.  94 ;  ii.  426 
Spatangus,  i.  213 
Spence/u  101;  ii.  222,  273 
Spermophilus,  ii.  504 
Sphargis,  i.  31 ;  ii.  143 
Sphinx,  ii.  349 
Sphodrus,  i.  52 
Spiders,  ii.  183,271,283 
Spiders,  retiaries,  ii.  185,  295 
Spiders,  trap-door,  ii.  288,  292 
Spider's  web,  ii.  283 
Spines,  i.  205 
Spirit,  ascent  to,  ii.  254 
Spirit,  evil,  ii.  387 
Spirit  of  Nature,  ii.  254 
Spirula,  i.316;  ii.  108 
Spondylus,  i.  256 
Spongia,  i.  167,  175 


INDE1(. 


54 1 


Spoon-l)ill,  ii.  195 
Squilla  Mantis,  ii.  39,  58 
Squalus,  maximus,  ii.  385 
Squirrel,  common,  ii.  163 
Squirrel,  flying,  ii.  145,  159 
Stag-beetles,  ii.  148 
Stapelia,  ii.  231 
Stapbylinus,  ii.  360 
Staunton,  i.  397 
Star-fish,  i.  201 
Stetchbury,  i.  264 
Stelleridans,  i.  201,235 
Stenosoma,  ii.  71,  143 
Stone-borers,  i.  239 
Stone-eaters,  i.  247 
Storge,  ii.  258,  279,  440 
Stratyomis,  i.  160 
Strepsiptera,  ii.  318 
Strix,  ii.  472 
Strongylus,  i.  324 
Struthio-camelus,  ii.  459 
Subterranean-fishes,  ii.  420 
Succinea,  i.  291 
Suckers,  i.  205,  335;  ii.  114 
Sula  Bassana,  ii.  452 
Sun-flower,  ii.  247 
Sus  Babyrussa,  ii.  200 
Sus  Scrofa,  ii.  200 
Swallow,  i.  102;  ii.  262 
Swimmers,  ii.  449 
Swine,  i.  61,79;  ii.  199,498 
Sycophant-beetle,  ii.  360. 
Sykes,  ii.  339 
Sylvia  cisticola,  ii.  467 
Symbols,  i.  149 
System,  nervous,  ii.  274 
Systems,  i.  234 

Tabernacle,  Introd,  Iv,  Iviii 
Tachypetes,  aquila,  ii.  452 
Tttnia,  i.  324,  327 
Tailor  bird,  ii.  466 
Tails,  ii.  165 
Talpa,  ii.  213 
Tape  worms,  i.  326 
Tapir,  ii.  499 
Tardigrades,  ii.  208 


Teeth  of  fishes,  ii.  38 1 

Tellina,  i.  265 

Tettigonia,  ii.  257 

Tettix,  ii.  354 

Temperature,    connected    with 

torpidity,  ii.  249,  506 
Temple  of  God,  Introd.  Iv 
Tenrec,  ii.  506 
Tentacles,  Polypes,  ii.  99 
Tentacles,    Annelidans,    Cirri-. 

pedes,  ii.  113 
Tentacles,  Cephalopods,  ii.  104 
Tentacles,  Fishes,  ii.  112 
Tentacles,  Molluscans,  ii.  110 
Tentacles,  Radiaries,  ii.  101 
Tentacles,  Tunicaries,  ii.  102 
Tenthredo,  ii.  331 
Terebratula,  i.  262 

Teredo,  i.  238,  243 

Termes  lucifuga,  ii.  346 

Tethydans,  i.  218 

Tethys,  i.  269 

Tetrabranchiata,  i.  306 

Tetragnatha,  ii.  85 

Tetrao,  ii.  164 

Tetrapneumones,  ii.  285 

Thalassina,  ii.  39 

Thalydans,  i.  218 

Thelyphonus,  ii.  87,  90 

Theocritus,  i.  338 

Thompson^  ii.  8 

Thunny,i.  112;  ii.  379 

Thysanura,  ii.  314 
,  Tiger-beetles,  ii.  272,  350 

Tiger-beetles,  grubs  of,  ii.  360 

Toads  in  marble,  ii.  411 

Todus,  i.  339  - 

Trachelipods,  i.  267, 276,  295 

Tree  Ant,  ii.  340,  345 

Tree  Lobster,  ii.  48 

Trembley/i.  165,  171 

Trichechus,  i.  134 

^'richoptera,  i.  134  ;  ii.  318, 352 

Trichocephalus,  i.  325 

Tridacne,  i.  251 

Trigonia,  i.  263 
Trigoxo,  ii.  28a 


542 


INDEX. 


Trilobites,  ii.  61 
Trionyx,  ferox,  ii.  417,  433 
Tristoma,  i.  358 
Trochilus,  i.  336,  337  ;  ii.  194 
Trochus,  i.  280 
Trox,  ii.  363 
Tubicinella,  i.  277 
Tubularia,  i.  345 
Tunicaries,  i.  217 
•Turbo,  i.  274 
Turdus,  ii.  474 
Turdus  gryllivorus,  i.  92 
Turdus  pilaris,  i.  104 
Turtle,  ii.  442 
Twining  plants,  ii.  247 
Two  bands  of  Nature,  Introd. 

xxxix. 
Typhon,  ii.  301 

Unclean  animals,  ii.  69 

Univalves,  i.  266 

Unger,  i.  146 

Uropoda  vegetans,  ii.  309 

Ursus,  ii.  212 

Ursus  Americanus,  i.  97 

Varieties,  i.  59 

Vehicle  for  the  soul,  i.  369 

Vellela,  i.  195, 197 

Vermetus,  i.  344 

Vertebrata,  ii.  169 

Verulam,  Lord,  Introd,  xxxix, 

xliii 
Vespa,  ii.  334 
Vibrio,  i.  150,  154,  159 
Virey,L  124;  ii.  243 
Volucella,  ii.  326 


Voluta  sethiopica,  ii.  1 1 1 
Von  Baer,  i.  320 ;  ii.  35 
Vorticella,  ii.  32,  97,  350 
Vultur  barbatus,  i.  69 
Vultur  percnopterus,  i.  69 

Wasps,  ii.  335,  336 
Waders,  ii.  177 
Walckenaer,  ii.  87,  285 
Weavers,  ii.  293 
Weaver  birds,  ii.  46 
Web,  spider's,  ii.  283 
Westwoody  ii.  80 
Whale,  i.  30,69,  157,  199;  ii. 

493 
WheeUanimal,  ii.  97 
White  anU,  ii.  346,  352 
White  coral,  i.  180 
Windpipe,  ii.  437 
Wings,  ii.  144,  152 
Wings  of  insects,  ii.  147 
Wing-shell,  i.  292 
Wryneck,  ii.  464 

Xiphias,  1.  358 

Yarrel,  ii.  438,  457 
Yunx  torquilia,  ii.  464 

Zebu,  i.  68 
Zoea,  ii.  8 
Zoobotryon,  i.  351 
Zoomyza,  ii.  355 
Zoophaga,  ii.  70,  487 
Zoophagous  animals,  ii.  70 
Zoophytes,  i.  54 


FINI9. 


C.   WBITTINOnAllv  TOOKS  COURT*  CHANC^KT  LAMS. 


