ILoution : LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, & ROBERTS,

AND

TRUBNER & Co.

JItH 1'1'I.iX.

T. RICHARDS, 37, OT5KVT QUF.KS STREET.

PREFACE.

THE contents of this volume appeared for the first time as an introduction to a larger work now in course of publication, under the title of Contributions to the Natural History of the United States.1 Friends in whose opinion I have great confidence, having expressed the desire that a separate edition of that part of my book which relates to the general principles of Zoology should be published in England, I gladly complied with the request of Messrs. Triibner and Co., that I should authorize such a reprint, and have availed myself of the opportunity to make such corrections as seemed necessary, and also to complete the references up to the latest possible date. Besides this, I have also added a new chapter upon the Categories of Analogy, a subject which, until

1 Thus far, two volumes quarto, ton by Messrs. Little, Brown, and Co., with thirty-four plates, have ap- in October 1857. The third volume peared. They were published in Bos- is now in the press.

VI PREFACE.

now, I have not felt fully prepared to discuss in all its bearings. Having, however, made no essential alterations in this Essay on Classification, it may not be out of place for me to repeat here such parts of the preface to the first edition as may explain the special purpose of the treatise, and also the frequent allusions, which could not have been omitted without remodelling the wiiole, referring to chapters which belong to other parts of the work.

The preface to the complete work above alluded to states that, in consequence of the liberality of the subscription in America, " this volume, which, according to the original plan, was designed to be one of special descriptive Zoology, contains, in addition to a description of the North American Turtles, a review of the classification of the whole animal kingdom. I have also endeavoured to make it a text-book of reference for the student, in which he may find notices of all that has been accomplished in the various departments of Natural History alluded to, and which I trust young naturalists will take, not only as an indication of what has been done, but as an earnest of what remains to be done in the fields now open to our investigation.

PHEFACE. Vll

" I must beg my European readers to remember that this work is written in America, and more especially for Americans ; and that the community to which it is particularly addressed has very different wants from those of the reading public in Europe. There is not a class of learned men here, distinct from the other cultivated members of the community. On the contrary, so general is the desire for knowledge, that I expect to see my book read by operatives, by fishermen, by farmers, quite as extensively as by the students in our Colleges or by the learned professions, and it is but proper that I should endeavour to make myself understood by all.

" Of the two volumes now complete of this series, the First Part contains an exposition of the general views I have arrived at, thus far, in my studies of Natural History." (It is this First Part, entitled Essay on Classification, which is here reprinted). "The Second Part shows how I have attempted to apply these results to the special study of Zoology, taking the order of Testudinata as an example. The Third Part exemplifies the bearing of Embryology upon these general questions, while it contains the fullest illustration of the embryonic growth of the Testudinata. "

Vlll PREFACE.

In conclusion, I have to acknowledge my indebtedness to Mr. Philip Lutley Sclater, of Corpus Christ! College, Oxford, for his kindness in revising the proofs of this edition, — a tedious task, which could only be entrusted to one extensively conversant with the literature of our science, and which he has executed with great care.

2nd December, 1858.

THE FUNDAMENTAL RELATIONS OF ANIMALS TO ONE ANO-

MODERN classifications of animals and plants are based upon the peculiarities of their structure ; and this is generally considered as the most important, if not the only safe guide in our attempts to determine the natural relations which exist between animals. This view of the subject seems to me, however, to circumscribe the foundation of a natural system of Zoology and Botany within too narrow limits, to exclude from our consideration some of the most striking characteristics of the two organic kingdoms of nature, and to leave it doubtful how far the arrangement thus obtained is founded in reality, and how far it is merely the expression of our estimate of these structural differences. It has appeared to me appropriate, therefore, to present here a short exposition of the leading features of the animal kingdom, as an introduction to the study of Natural History in general and of Embryology

B

2 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

in particular, as it would afford a desirable opportunity of establishing a standard of comparison between the changes animals undergo during their growth, and the permanent characters of full-grown individuals of other types; and, perhaps, of showing also what other points beside structure might with advantage be considered in ascertaining the manifold relations of animals to one another, and to the world in which they live, upon which the natural system may be founded.

In considering these various topics, I shall of necessity have to discuss many questions bearing upon the very origin of organized beings, and to touch upon many points now under discussion among scientific men. I shall, however, avoid controversy as much as possible, and only tryto give the results of my own studies and meditations in as clear a manner as I possibly can in the short space of an essay like this.

There is no question in Natural History on which more diversified opinions are entertained, than on that of classification ; not that naturalists disagree as to the necessity of some sort of arrangement in describing animals or plants; for since nature has become the object of special studies, it has been the universal aim of all naturalists to arrange the objects of their investigations in the most natural order possible. Even Buffon, who began the publication of his great Natural History by denying the existence in nature of anything like a system, closed his work by grouping the birds according to certain general features exhibited in common by many of them. It is true that authors have differed in their estimation of the characters on which their different arrangements are founded; and it is equally true that they have not viewed their arrangements in the same light, some having plainly acknowledged the

artificial character of their systems, while others have urged theirs as the true expression of the natural relations •which exist between the objects themselves. But, whether systems are presented as artificial or natural, they have, to this day, been considered generally as the expression of man's understanding of natural objects, and not as devised by the Supreme Intelligence, and manifested in these objects.1

There is only one point in which all these innumerable systems seem to meet, namely, the existence in nature of distinct species, persisting with all their peculiarities, for a time at least; for even the immutability of species has been questioned.2 Beyond species, however, this confidence in the existence of the divisions generally admitted in zoological systems diminishes greatly. With respect to genera, we already find the number of the naturalists who accept them as natural divisions much smaller; few of them having expressed a belief that genera have an existence in nature as distinct as species. And as to families, orders, classes, or any kind of higher divisions, they seem to be universally considered as convenient devices, framed with the view of facilitating the study of innumerable objects, and of grouping them in the most suitable manner. The indifference with which this part of our science is generally treated becomes unjustifiable, considering the progress which Zoology in general has made of late. It

1 The expressions constantly used own making ; which can, however,

with reference to genera and species if the views I shall present below are

and the higher groups in our systems, at all correct, only be true in so far

such as, Mr. A. has made such a species as these groups are not true to nature, agenus; Mr.B.r/«^0_ysthisorthat spe- - LAMARCK ( J. B. DE), Philosophic

cies to form his genus; and those in zoologique, Paris, 1809, 2 vols. Svo. ;

which most naturalists indulge when 2de edit., 1830. — POWELL (TiiE REV.

speaking of their species, their genera, BADEN), Essays on the Spirit of the

their families, their systems, — exhibit Inductive Philosophy, etc., London,

in an unquestionable light their con- 1855, 1 vol. 8vo. Compare, also, Sect,

viction, that such groups are of their 15, below.

B 2

4 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

is a matter of consequence, whether genera are circumscribed in our systematic works within these or those limits ; whether families inclose a wider or more contracted range of genera ; whether such or such orders are admitted in a class, and what are the natural boundaries of classes ; as well as how the classes themselves are related to one another, and whether or not all these groups are considered as resting upon the same foundation in nature.

Without venturing here upon an analysis of the various systems of Zoology, — the prominent features of which are sufficiently exemplified for my purpose by the systems of Linnaeus and Cuvier,1 which must be familiar to every student of Natural History — it is certainly a seasonable question to ask, whether the animal kingdom exhibits only those few subdivisions into orders and genera, which the Lhmaean system indicates, or whether the classes differ among themselves to the extent which the system of Cuvier would lead .us to suppose. Or is, after all, this complicated structure of classification merely an ingenious human invention which every one may shape, as he pleases, to suit himself? When we remember that all works on Natural History admit some system or other of this kind, it is certainly an aim worthy of a true naturalist, to ascertain what is the real meaning of all these divisions.

Embryology, moreover, forces the inquiry upon us at every step, as it is impossible to establish precise comparisons between the different stages of growth of young animals of any higher group, and the permanent characters of full-grown individuals of other types, without first ascertaining what is the value of the divisions with which we may have to compare embryos. My studies in this department have led me for many years to pay the most

1 riompare Chap. III.

careful attention to this subject, and to make special investigations for its solution.

Before I proceed any further, however, I would submit one case to the consideration of my reader. Suppose that the innumerable articulated animals, which are counted by tens of thousands, nay, perhaps by hundreds of thousands, had never made their appearance upon the surface of our globe, with one single exception: suppose, for instance, that our Lobster (ffomarus americanus) were the only representative of that extraordinarily diversified type, -how should we introduce that species of animal into our systems 1 Simply as a genus with one species, by the side of all the other classes with their orders, families, etc., or as a family containing only one genus with one species, or as a class with one order and one genus, or as a class with one family and one genus 1 And should we acknowledge, by the side of Vertebrata, Mollusca, and Badiata, another type, Articulata, on account of the existence of that one Lobster, or would it be natural to call it by a single name, simply as a species, in contradistinction to all other animals 1 It was the consideration of this supposed case which led me to the investigations detailed below, which, I hope, may end in the ultimate solution of this apparently inextricable question.

Though what I have now to say about this supposed case cannot be fully appreciated before reading my remarks in the following chapter,1 respecting the character of the different kinds of groups adopted in our systems, it must be obvious that our Lobster, to be what we see this animal is, must have had its frame constructed upon that very same plan of structure which it exhibits now. And, if I should succeed in showing that there is a difference be-

1 See Chap. II.

6 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

tween the conception of a plan and the manner of its execution, upon which classes are founded in contradistinction to the types or branches to which they belong, we might arrive at this distinction by a careful investigation of that single Articulate, as well as by the study of all of them ; and we might recognize its type and ascertain its class-characters as fully as if the type embraced several classes, and these classes thousands of species. Secondly, this animal has a form, which no one would fail to recognize; so that, if form can be shown to be characteristic of families, we could thus determine its family. Again : besides the general structure, showing the fundamental relations of all the systems of organs of the body to one another in their natural development, our investigation could be carried into the study of the details of that structure in every part, and would thus lead to the recognition of what constitutes everywhere generic characters. Finally: as this animal lias definite relations to the surrounding world, as the individuals living at the time bear definite relations to one another, as the parts of the body show definite proportions, and its surface exhibits a special ornamentation, the specific characters could be traced as fully as if a number of other species were at hand for comparison; and they might be drawn and described with sufficient accuracy to distinguish it at any future time from any other set of species discovered afterwards, however closely these new species might be allied to it. In this case, then, we should have to acknowledge a separate branch in the animal kingdom, with a class, a family and a genus, in order to introduce one species into its proper place in the system of animals. But this class would have no order, if orders determine the rank, as ascertained by the complication of structure ; for, where there is but one representative of a type, there is

no room for the question of its superiority or inferiority in comparison to others within, the limits of the class, orders being groups subordinate to one another in their class. Yet, even in this case, the question of the standing of Articulata, as a type among the other great branches of the animal kingdom, would be open to our investigations ; but it would assume another aspect from that which it now presents, as the comparison of Articulata with the other types would then be limited to the Lobster, and would lead to a very different result from that at which we may arrive, now that this type includes such a large number of most extensively diversified representatives, belonging even to different classes. That such speculations are not idle must be apparent to any one who is aware, that, during every period in the history of our globe in past geological ages,1 the general relations, the numeric proportions, and the relative importance of all the types of the animal kingdom, have been ever changing, until their present relations were established. Here, then, the individuals of one species, as observed while living, simultaneously exhibit characters, wThich, to be expressed satisfactorily and in conformity to what nature tells us, would require the establishment, not only of a distinct species, but also of a

1 A series of classifications of ani- rate knowledge of the relative standmals and plants, exhibiting each a ing of all animals and plants, which, natural system of the types known at present, can only be inferred from to have existed simultaneously dur- the perusal even of those palaeontoing the several successive geological logical works in which fossil remains periods, considered singly and with- are illustrated according to their asout reference to the types of other sociation in different geological formages, would show in a strong light ations ; for, in all these works, the the different relations in which the remains of past ages are uniformly classes, the orders, the families, and referred to a system established upon even the genera and species, have the study of the animals now living, stood to one another during each thus lessening the impression of their epoch. Such classifications would peculiar combination for the periods illustrate, ia the most impressive under consideration, manner, the importance of an accu-

8 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

distinct genus, a distinct family, a distinct class, a distinct branch. Is not this in itself evidence enough that genera, families, orders, classes and types have the same foundation in nature as species, and that the individuals living at the time have alone a material existence, they being the bearers, not only of all the different categories of structure upon which the natural system of animals is founded, but also of all the relations which animals sustain to the surrounding world, — thus showing that species do not exist in nature in a different way from the higher groups, as is so generally believed \

The divisions of animals according to branch, class, order, family, genus, and species, by which we express the results of our investigations into the relations of the animal kingdom, and which constitute the primary question respecting any system of Zoology, seem to me to deserve the consideration of all thoughtful minds. Are those divisions artificial or natural ? Are they the devices of the human mind to classify and arrange our knowledge in such a manner as to bring it more readily within our grasp and facilitate further investigations, or have they been instituted by the Divine Intelligence as the categories of his mode of thinking ril Have we, perhaps, thus far been only the unconscious interpreters of a Divine conception, in our attempts to expound nature ? and when in our pride of philosophy we thought that we were inventing systems of science, and classifying creation by the force of our own reason, have we followed only, and reproduced, in our imperfect expressions, the plan

i It must not be overlooked here but merely as the expression of a

that a system may be natural, that fact existing in nature — no matter

is, may agree in every respect with how — which the human mind may

the facts in nature, and yet not be trace and reproduce in a systematic

considered by its author as the mani- form of its own invention, festation of the thoughts of a Creator,

whose foundations were laid in the dawn of creation, and the development of which we are laboriously studying,— thinking, as we put together and arrange our fragmentary knowledge, that we are introducing order into chaos anew 1 Is tins order the result of the exertions of human skill and ingenuity; or is it inherent in the objects themselves, so that the intelligent student of Natural History is led unconsciously, by the study of the animal kingdom itself, to these conclusions ; the great divisions under which he arranges animals being indeed but the headings to the

o o *— >

chapters of the great book which he is reading \ To me it appears indisputable, that this order and arrangement of our studies are based upon the natural, primitive relations of animal life, — those systems, to which we have given the names of the great leaders of our science who first proposed them being in truth but translations into human language of the thoughts of the Creator. And if

O o O

this is indeed so, do we not find in this adaptability of the human intellect to the facts of creation,1 by which we become instinctively, and, as I have said, unconsciously, the translators of the thoughts of God, the most conclusive proof of our affinity with the Divine mind \ and is not this intellectual and spiritual connection with the Almighty worthy of our deepest consideration ? If there is any truth in the belief that man is made in the image of God, it is surely not amiss for the philosopher to endeavour, by the study of his own mental operations, to approximate the workings of the Divine Eeason, learning from the nature of his own. mind better to understand the Infinite

1 The human mind is in tune with may be considered as a school in

nature, and much that appears as a which man is taught to know himself,

result of the working of our intelli- and his relations to his fellow beings,

gence is only the natural expression as well as to the First Cause of all

of that preestablished harmony. On that exists. the other hand the whole universe

^LIBRARY?

10 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Intellect from which it is derived. Such a suggestion may, at first sight, appear irreverent. But, who is the truly humble ? He who, penetrating into the secrets of creation, arranges them under a formula, which he proudly calls his scientific system ? or he who in the same pursuit recognizes his glorious affinity with the Creator, and in deepest gratitude for so sublime a birthright strives to be the faithful interpreter of that Divine Intellect with whom he is permitted, nay, with whom he is intended, according to the laws of his being, to enter into communion \

I confess that this question, as to the nature and foundation of our scientific classifications, appears to me to have the deepest importance ; an importance far greater, indeed, than is usually attached to it. If it can be proved that man has not invented, but only traced, this systematic arrangement in nature ; that these relations and proportions, which exist throughout the animal and vegetable world, have an intellectual, an ideal connection, in the mind of the Creator ; that this plan of creation, which so commends itself to our highest wisdom, has not grown out of the necessary action of physical laws, but was the free conception of the Almighty Intellect, matured in his thought before it was manifested in tangible external forms ; — if, in short, we can prove premeditation prior to the act of creation, we have done, once and for ever, with the desolate theory which refers us to the laws of matter as accounting for all the winders of the universe, and leaves us with no God but the monotonous, unvarying action of physical forces, binding all things to their inevitable destiny.1 I think our science has now reached

1 I allude here only to the doc- necessary to add, that there are phytriues of materialists. But I feel it sicists who might be shocked at the

that degree of advancement, when we may venture upon such an investigation.

The argument for the existence of an intelligent Creator

o o

is generally drawn from the adaptation of means to ends, upon which the Bridgewater treatises, for example, have been based.1 But this does not appear to me to cover

not be considered as accounting for the existence of living beings, even though these have a material body, unless it be actually shown that these laws imply by their very nature the production of such beings. Thus far, Cross' experiments are the only ones offered as proving such a result. I do not know what physicists may think about them now ; but I know that there is scarcely a zoologist who doubts that they only rested upon mistake. Life, in appropriating the physical world to itself, with all its peculiar phenomena, exhibits, however, some of its own, and some of a higher order, which cannot be explained by physical agencies. The circumstance, that life is so deeply rooted in the inorganic nature, affords, nevertheless, a strong temptation to explain one by the other ; but we shall see presently how fallacious these attempts have been.

1 The Bridgewater Treatises, on the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as Manifested in the Creation : CHALMERS (THOMAS), The Adaptation of External Nature to the Moral and Intellectual Constitution of Man; Glasgow, 1839, 2 vols. 8vo. — KIDB (JOHN), On the Adaptation of External Nature to the Physical Condition of Man ; London, 1833, 1 vol. 8vo. — WHEWELL (WiLL.), Astronomy and General Physics considered with Reference to Natural Theology ; London,1839,lvol.8vo. — BELL(CHAELES), The Hand, its Mechanism and Vital Endowments, as evincing Design ; London, 1833, 1 vol. 8vo. — ROGET (PETER MARK), Animal and Vegetable Physiology, considered with Reference to Natural Theology ; Lonidea of being considered as materialists, who are yet prone to believe, that, when they have recognized the laws which regulate the physical world, and acknowledged that these laws were established by the Deity, they have explained everything, even when they have considered only the phenomena of the inorganic world : as if the world contained no living beings ; and as if these living beings exhibited nothing that differed from the inorganic world. Mistaking for a casual relation the intellectual connexion observable between serial phenomena, they are unable to perceive any difference between disorder, and the free, independent, and self-possessed action of a superior mind ; and call mysticism, even a passing allusion to the existence of an immaterial principle in animals, which they acknowledge themselves in man. [POWELL'S Essays, etc., p. 478, 385, and 466.] I would further remark, that, when speaking of creation iu contradistinction with reproduction, I mean only to allude to the difference there is between the regular course of phenomena in nature, and the establishment of that order of things, without attempting to explain either ; for, in whatever manner any state of things which has prevailed for a time upon earth may have been introduced, it is self-evident that its establishment and its maintenance for a determined period are two very different things, however frequently they may be mistaken as identical. It is, further, of itself plain that the laws which may explain the phenomena of the material world, in contradistinction from the organic, can-

12 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the whole ground ; for we can conceive that the natural action of objects upon each other should result in a final fitness of the universe, and thus produce an harmonious whole. Nor does the argument derived from the connection of organs and functions seem to me more satisfactory ; for, beyond certain limits, it is not even true. We find organs without functions, as, for instance, the teeth of the whale, which never cut through the gum, and the breast in all males of the class of mammalia. These and similar organs are preserved in obedience to a certain uniformity of fundamental structure, true to the original formula of that division of animal life, even when not essential to its mode of existence. The organ remains, not for the performance of a function, but with reference to a plan,1 and might almost remind us of what we often see in human structures, when, for instance, in architecture the same external combinations are retained for the sake of symmetry and harmony of proportion, even when they have no practical object.

I disclaim every intention of introducing into this work any evidence irrelevant to my subject, or of supporting any conclusions not immediately flowing from it; but I cannot overlook or disregard here the close connection which

don, 1834, 2 vols. 8vo. — BUCKLAKD logie de la Nature; Paris, 1852, 3 (WiLL.), Geology and Mineralogy vols., 8vo. — MILLER (HUGH), Footconsidered with Reference to Natural prints of the Creator ; Edinburgh, Theology; London, 1836, 2 vols. 8vo., 1849, 1 vol. 12mo.— BABBAGE (C.), 2nd edit., 1837. — KIRBY (WiLL.), The Ninth Bridgwater Treatise, a The Power, Wisdom, and Goodness Fragment ; London, 1838, 1 vol. 8vo.? of God, as Manifested in the Creation 2nd edit.

of Animals, and in their History, 1 The unity of structure of the

Habits, and Instincts; London, 1835, limbs of club-footed or pinnated ani-

2 vols. 8vo. — PROUT (WiLL.), Chemis- inals, in which the fingers are never

try, Meteorology, and the Function moved, with those which enjoy the

of Digestion, considered with Refer- most perfect articulations and freeence to Natural Theology; London, dom of motion, exhibits this reference

1834, 1 vol. 8vo. Compare also : — most fully. STRAUSS-DDRKHEIM (HERC.), Theo-

there is between the facts ascertained by scientific investigation, and the discussions now carried on respecting the origin of organized beings. And, though I know those who hold it to be very unscientific to believe that thinking is not something inherent in matter, and that there is an essential difference between inorganic and living and thinking beings, I shall not be prevented, by any such pretensions of a false philosophy, from expressing my conviction that, as long as it cannot be shown that matter or physical forces do actually reason, any manifestation of thought is to be considered as evidence of the existence

o

of a thinking being as the author of such thought, and that an intelligent and intelligible connection between the facts of nature must be looked upon as a direct proof of the existence of a thinking God,1 as certainly as man exhibits the power of thinking when he recognises their natural relations.

As I am not writing a didactic work, I will not enter here into a detailed illustration of the facts relating to the various subjects submitted to the consideration of my

1 T am well aware that even the either by the fear of being supposed

most eminent investigators consider to share clerical or sectarian prejuthe task of science at an end, as soon dices, or because it may be dangerous

as the most general relations of natu- for them to discuss freely such quesral phenomena have been ascertained, tions without acknowledging at the

To many the inquiry into the prirni- same time the obligation of taking

tive cause of their existence seems the Old Testament as the standard

either beyond the reach of man, or as by which the validity of their results

belonging rather to philosophy than is to be measured. Science, however,

to physics. To these the name of can only prosper when confining itself

God appears out of place in a scien- within its legitimate sphere; and notific work ; as if the knowledge of thing can be more detrimental to its

secondary agencies constituted alone true dignity than discussions like

a worthy subject for their investiga- those which took place at the last

tions, and as if nature could teach meeting of the German Association

nothing about its Author. Many, of Naturalists in Gottingen, and which

again, are no doubt prevented from have since then been carried on in

expressing their conviction that the several pamphlets in which bigotry

world was called into existence and vies with personality and invective, is regulated by an intelligent God,

14 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

reader beyond what is absolutely necessary to follow the argument, nor dwell at any length upon the conclusions to which they lead ; but will simply recall the leading features of the evidence, assuming in the argument a full acquaintance with the whole range of data upon which it is founded, whether derived from the affinities or the anatomical structure of animals, or from their habits and their geographical distribution, from their embryology, or from their succession in past geological ages, and the peculiarities they have exhibited during each,1 believing, as I do, that isolated and disconnected facts are of little consequence in the contemplation of the whole plan of creation ; and that, without a consideration of all the facts furnished by the study of the habits of animals, by their anatomy, their embryology, and the history of the past ages of our globe, we shall never arrive at the knowledge of the natural system of animals.

Let us now consider some of these topics more specially.

1 Many points little investigated bridge in 1849; Boston, 1850, 1 vol.

thus far by most naturalists, but to 8vo., p. 432.) Meanwhile, I refer in

which I have of late years paid par- foot notes to such works as contain

ticular attention, are here presented the materials already on hand for the

only in an aphoristic form, as results discussion of these subjects, even

established by extensive investiga- when presented in a different light.

tions, though unpublished, most of I would only beg leave to add, that

which will be fully illustrated in my in these references I have by no

following volumes, or in a special means attempted to quote all the

work upon the Plan of the Creation, writers upon the various topics under

(See AGASSIZ (L.), On the Difference consideration, but only the most probetween Progressive, Embryonic, and minent and most instructive, and

Prophetic Types in the Succession of here and there some condensed ac-

Organized Beings ; Proceed. 2nd counts of the facts in more elemen-

Meeting Amer. Assoc. for the Ad- tary works, by the side of the origivancement of Science, held at Cam- nal papers.

It is a fact, which seems to be entirely overlooked by those who assume an extensive influence of physical causes upon the very existence of organized beings, that the most diversified types of animals and plants are everywhere found under identical circumstances. The smallest sheet of fresh water, every point upon the sea-shore, every acre of dry land teems with a variety of animals and plants. The narrower the boundaries which are assigned as the primitive home of all these beings, the more uniform must be the conditions under which they must be assumed to have originated ; so uniform, indeed, that in the end the inference would be, that the same physical causes can produce the most diversified effects.1 To concede, on

1 In order to appreciate fully the pearance, the conditions necessary to difficulty alluded to here, it is only their growth must have been pronecessary to remember how compli- vided for, if, as I believe, they were cated, and at the same time how created as eggs, — which conditions localized, the conditions are, under must have been conformable to those which animals multiply. The egg in which the living representatives of originates in a special organ, the the types first produced now reproovary ; it grows there to a certain" duce themselves. If it were assumed size, until it requires fecundation, — that they originated in a more adthat is, the influence of another liv- vauced stage of life, the difficulties ing being, or, at least, of the product would be still greater, as a moment's of another organ, the spermary, — to consideration cannot fail to show, determine the further development especially if it is remembered how of the germ, which, under the most complicated the structure of some of diversified conditions, in different the animals was which are known to species, passes successively through have been among the first inhabitall those changes which lead to the ants of our globe. When investigatformation of a new perfect being. I iiig this subject, it is of course neceswould ask then, Is it probable that sary to consider the first appearance the circumstances under which ani- of animals and plants upon the basis rnals and plants originated for the of probabilities only, or even simply first time can be much simpler, or upon that of possibilities ; as with reeven as simple, as the conditions ference to the first-born, at least, the necessary for their reproduction only transmutation theory furnishes no after they have once been created ? explanation of their existence. For Preliminary, then, to their first ap- every species belonging to the first

1 6 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the contrary, that these organisms may have appeared in the beginning over a wide area, is to grant, at the same time, that the physical influences under which they existed at first were not so specific as to justify the assumption that these could be the cause of their appearance. In whatever connection, then, the first appearance of organized beings upon earth is viewed, whether it is assumed that they originated within the most limited areas, or over the widest range of their present natural geographical distribution, animals and plants being everywhere diversified to the most extraordinary extent, it is plain that the physical influences under which they subsist cannot logically be considered as the cause of that diversity. In this, as in every other respect, when considering the relations of animals and plants to the conditions under which they live or to one another, we are inevitably led to look beyond the material facts of the case for an explanation of their existence. Those who have been led to take another view of this subject have mistaken the action and reaction which exist everywhere between organized beings, and the physical influences under which they live,1 for a casual or genetic connection, and carried their mistake so far as to assert that these manifold influences could really extend to the production of these beings; not considering how inadequate such a cause would be, and that even the action of physical agents upon organized beings presupposes the very existence of those beings.2 The simple fact that there

fauna and the first flora which have while, in a wider area, physical agents existed upon earth, special relations, are too uniform in their mode of acspecial contrivances must, therefore, tion to have laid the foundation for have been provided. Now, what would so many specific differences as exbe appropriate for the one would not isted between the first inhabitants suit the other, so that, excluding one of our globe, another in this way, they cannot J See below, Sect. 16. have originated upon the same point; 2 A Critical examination of this

has been a period in the history of our earth, now well known to geologists,1 when none of these organized beings as yet existed, and when, nevertheless, the material constitution of our globe and the physical forces acting upon it were essentially the same as they are now,2 shows that these influences are insufficient to call into existence any living being.

point may dispel much of the confusion which prevails in the discussions relating to the influence of physical causes upon organized beings. That there exist definite relations between animals as well as plants and the mediums in which they live, no one at all familiar with the phenomena of the organic world can doubt ; that these mediums, and all physical agents at work in nature, have a certain influence upon organized beings, is equally plain. But, before any such action can take place and be felt, organized beings must exist. The

O O

problem before us involves, therefore, two questions, the influence of physical agents upon animals and plants already iu existence, and the origin of these beings. Granting the influence of these agents upon organized beings to the fullest extent to which it may be traced (see Sect. 16), there remains still the question of their origin, upon which neither argument nor observation has yet thrown any light. But, according to some, they originated spontaneously by the immediate agency of physical forces, and have become successively more and more diversified by changes produced gradually upon them by these same forces. Others believe that there exist laws in nature which were established by the Deity in the beginning, to the action of which the origin of organized beings may be ascribed ; while, according to others, they owe their existence to the immediate intervention of an intelligent Creator. It is the object of the following paragraphs to show that

there are neither agents nor Jaws in nature known to physicists, under the influence, and by the action of which, these beings could have originated ; that, on the contrary, the very nature of these beings and their relations to one another and to the world in which they live exhibit thought, and can therefore be referred only to the immediate action of a thinking being, even though the manner in which they were called into existence remains for the present a mystery.

1 Few geologists only may now be inclined to believe that the lowest strata known to contain fossils are not the lowest deposits formed since the existence of organized beings upon earth. But, even those who would assume that still lower fossiliferous beds may yet be discovered, or may have entirely disappeared, by the influence of plutouic agencies (POWELL'S Essays, etc., p. 424), must acknowledge the fact, that, everywhere in the lowest rocks known to contain fossils at all, there is a variety of them found together. (See Sect. 7.) Moreover, the similarity in the character of the oldest fossils found in different parts of the world goes far, in my opinion, to prove that we actually do know the earliest types of the animal kingdom which have inhabited our globe. This conclusion seems fully sustained by the fact, that we find everywhere, below this oldest set of fossiliferous beds, other stratified rocks, in which no trace of organized beings can be found.

2 See below, Sect. 21.

1 8 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Physicists, indeed, know these physical agents more accurately than the naturalists who ascribe to them the origin of organized beings. Let us then ask them, whether the nature of these agents is not specific, and whether their mode of action is not specific 1 They will all answer that they are. Let us further inquire of them, what evidence is there, in the present state of our knowledge, that at any time these physical agents have produced any thing they no longer do produce, and what probability is there that they ever have produced any organized being \ If I am not greatly mistaken, the masters in that department of science will, one and all, answer, none whatever.

But the character of the connections between organized beings and the physical conditions under which they live is such as to display thought ; l these connections are therefore to be considered as established, determined and regulated by a thinking being. They must have been fixed for each species at its beginning ; while the fact of their permanency through successive generations2 is further evidence, that with their natural relations to the surrounding world were also determined the relations of individuals to one another,3 their generic as well as their family relations, and every higher grade of affinity;4 showing, therefore, not only thought in reference to the physical conditions of existence, but such comprehensive thoughts as would embrace simultaneously every characteristic of each species.

Every fact relating to the geographical distribution of animals and plants might be alluded to in confirmation of this argument, but especially the character of every fauna and every flora upon the surface of the globe. How great

1 See below, Sect. 16. 3 See below, Sect. 17.

2 See below, Sect. 15. 4 See below, Sect. 6.

the diversity of animals and plants living together in the same region may be, can be ascertained by the perusal of special works upon the Zoology and Botany of different countries, or from special treatises upon the geographical distribution of animals and plants.1 I need not enter, therefore, into further details upon this subject, especially since it is discussed more fully below.2

It might, perhaps, be urged, that animals living together in exceptional conditions, and exhibiting structural peculiarities apparently resulting from these conditions, such as the blind fish,3 the blind crawfish, and the blind insects of the Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, furnish uncontrovertible evidence of the immediate influence of those exceptional conditions upon the organs of vision. If this, however, were the case, — how does it happen that that remarkable fish, the AmUyopsis spdceus, has only remote affinities to other fishes ? Or were, perhaps, the sum of influences at work to make that fish blind, capable also of devising such a combination of structural characters as that fish has in common with all other fishes, with

1 SCHMARDA, Die geographische nee; 2 vols., 8vo., Paris, 1855. Re-

Verbreitung der Thiere ; 3 vols. 8vo., ferences to special works maybe found

Wien,1853.— SWAINSON (W.),ATrea- below, Sect. 9.

tise on the Geography and Classifica- 2 See below, Sect. 9.

tion of Animals; London, 1835, 1 vol. 3 WYMAN (JEF.), Description of a

12mo.— ZIMMERMANN (E. A. G.), Spe- Blind Fish, from a Cave in Kentucky,

cirnen Zoologize geographic^, Quad- SILLIMAN'S Jour., 1843, vol. 45, p. 94,

rupedum domicilia et rnigratioues and 1854, vol. 17, p. 258.— TELLsistens; Lugduni-Batav., 1777, 1 vol., KAMPF (Tn. G.), Ueber den blinden

4t0. — HUMBOLDT, Essai sur la geo- Fisch der Mammuthhohle in Kengraphie des Plantes ; 4to., Paris,1805; tucky, in Miiller's Archiv, 1844, p.

and Ansichten der Natur, 3rd edit., 381.— TELLKAMPF (Tn.G.), Beschrei-

12mo., Stuttgardt and Tubingen, bung einiger neuer in der Mammuth-

1849. — ROBERT BROWN, Generate- hohle aufgefundener Gattungen von

marks on the Botany of Terra Aus- Gliederthieren, WIEGMAN'S Archiv,

tralis; London, 1814. — SCHOUW, 1844, vol. i, p. 318.— AGASSIZ (L.),

Grundziige einer allgemeinen Pflan- Observations on the Blind Fish of the

zengeographie; 1 vol. Svo., with atlas Mammoth Cave, SILLIMAN'S Journal,

in fol., Berlin, 1823.— ALPH. DE CAN- 1851, vol. 11, p. 127. DOLLE, Geographic botanique raisonc 2

20 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

those peculiarities which at the same time distinguish it ? Does not the existence of a rudimentary eye discovered by Dr. J. Wyman in the blind fish show, on the contrary, that these animals, like all others, were created, with all their peculiarities, by the fiat of the Almighty, and that this rudiment of eyes was left them as a remembrance of the general plan of structure of the great type to which they belong ? Or will, perhaps, some one of those naturalists who know so much better than the physicists what physical forces may produce, and that they may produce, and have produced every living being known, explain also to us why subterraneous caves in America produce blind fishes, blind Crustacea, and blind insects, while in Europe they produce nearly blind reptiles ? If there is no thought in the case, why is it, then, that this very reptile, the Proteus anguinus, forms, with a number of other reptiles living in North America and in Japan, one of the most natural series known in the animal kingdom, every member of which exhibits a distinct grade1 in the scale I

After we have freed ourselves from the mistaken impression that there may be some genetic connection between physical forces and organized beings, there remains a vast field of investigation, to ascertain the true relations between both, to their full extent, and within their natural limits.2 A mere reference to the mode of breathing of different types of animals, and to their organs of locomotion, which are more particularly concerned in these relations, will remind every naturalist of how great importance in Classification is the structure of these parts ; and how much better they might be understood, in this point of view, were the different structures of these organs more

1 See below, Sect. 12. 2 See below, Sect. 16.

extensively studied in their direct reference to the world iii which animals live. If this had been done, we should no longer call by the same common name of legs and wings, organs so different as the locomotive appendages of insects and those of birds ! We should no longer call the breathing cavities of snails lungs, as well as the airpipes of mammalia, birds and reptiles ! A great reform is indeed needed in this part of our science ; and no study can better prepare us for it than the investigation of the mutual dependence of the structure of animals and of the conditions in which they live.

As much as the diversity of animals and plants living under identical physical conditions shows the independence of organized beings of the medium in which they dwell, so far as their origin is concerned, so independent do they appear again of the same influences when we consider the fact that identical types occur everywhere upon earth under the most diversified circumstances. If we sum up all these various influences and conditions of existence under the common appellation of cosmic influences, or of physical causes, or of climate in the widest sense of the word, and then look around us for the extreme differences in that respect upon the whole surface of the globe, we find still the most similar, nay, identical types, (and I allude here, under the expression of type, to the most diversified acceptations of the word,) living normally under then- action. There is no structural difference between the herrings of the Arctic and those of

22 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the Temperate zone, or those of the Tropics and those of the Antarctic regions : there is none between the foxes and the wolves of the most distant parts of the globe.1 Moreover, if there were any, and the specific differences existing between them were insisted upon, could any relation between these differences and the cosmic influences under which they live, be pointed out, which would at the same time account for the independence of their structure in general ? Or, in other words, how could it l)e assumed, that, while these causes produce specific differences, they at the same time produce generic identity, family identity, ordinal identity, class identity, typical identity 1 Identity in every thing that is truly important, high, and complicated in the structure of animals, produced by the most diversified influences, while at the same time these extreme physical differences, considered as the cause of the existence of these animals, produce diversity in secondary relations only ! What logic !

Does not all this show, on the contrary, that organized beings exhibit the most astonishing independence of the physical causes under which they live, — an independence so great that it can only be understood as the result of a power governing the physical causes themselves, as well as the existence of the animals and plants, and bringing all into harmonious relations by adaptations which can never be considered as cause and effect ?

When naturalists have investigated the influence of physical causes upon living beings, they have constantly overlooked the fact that the features which are thus

1 Innumerable other examples naturalists. Those mentioned above might be quoted, which will readily may suffice for my argument, present themselves to professional

modified are only of secondary importance in the life of animals and plants, and that neither the plan of their structure nor the various complications of that structure are ever affected by such influences. What, indeed, are the parts of the body which are in any way affected by external influences 1 Chiefly those which are in immediate contact with the external world, such as the skin, and in the skin chiefly its outer layers, its colour, the thickness of the fur, the colour of the hair, the feathers, and the scales ; then the size of the body and its weight, as far as it is dependent on the quality and quantity of the food ; the thickness of the shell of Mollusks, when they live in waters or upon a soil containing more or less limestone, etc. The rapidity or slowness of the growth is also influenced in a measure by the course of the seasons in different years ; so are also the fecundity, the duration of life, etc. But all this has nothing to do with the essential characteristics of animals.

A book has yet to be written upon the independence of organized beings of physical causes ; for most of what is generally ascribed to the influence of physical agents upon organized beings ought to be considered as a connexion, established between them, in the general plan of the creation.

Nothing is more striking, throughout the animal and vegetable kingdoms, than the unity of plan in the structure of the most diversified types. From pole to pole, in every longitude, mammalia, birds, reptiles and fishes ex-

liibit one and the same plan of structure,1 involving abstract conceptions of the highest order, far transcending the broadest generalizations of man ; for it is only after the most laborious investigations that man has arrived at an imperfect understanding of this plan. Other plans, equally wonderful, may be traced in Articulata, in Mollusks, in Radiata,2 and in the various types of plants.3 And yet this logical connection, these beautiful harmonies, this infinite diversity in unity, are represented by some as the result of forces exhibiting no trace of intelligence, no power of thinking, no faculty of combination, no knowledge of time and space. If there is any thing which places man above all other beings in nature, it is precisely

1 With reference to this point consult : OKEN (LoR.), Ueber die Bedeutung der Schadel-Knochen ; Frankfort, 1807, 4to. (pamphlet.)— SPIX (J. B.), Cephalogenesis, sive capitis ossei structura, formatio et significatio ; Monachii, 1815, fol. — GEOFFROY ST. HIL.UKE (Ex.), Philosophic anatomique; Paris, 1818-1823, 2 vols. 8vo., and several papers in the Annal. des sc. nat., Annal. and Mom. du Museum, etc. — CARUS (0. G.), Von den Ur-Theilen des Knochen- und Schalengeriistes ; Leipzig, 1828, fol. — OWEN (R.)> ^n the Archetype and Homologies of the Vertebrate Skeleton ; London, 1848, 8vo.

3 OKEN (LoR.), Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie ; Jena, 1809-11, 3 vols. 8vo. ; Engl. Elements of Physio-philosophy, Ray Society, London, 1847, 8vo. — CUVIER (G.), Sur un nouveau rapprochement a etablir eutre les classes qui composeut le Regue Animal, Annales du Museum, vol. xix, 1812.— SAVIGNY (J. C.), Memoires sur les animaux sans vertebres ; Paris, 1816, 8vo.— BAER (C. E. v.), Ueber Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere, Konigsberg, 1828, 4to.— LEUCKART (R.), Ueber die Morphologic uud dieVerwandtschaftsverhaltnisse der wirbellosen Thiere ; Braunschweig, 1848, 8vo. — AGASSIZ (L.), Twelve Lectures on Comparative Embryology ; Boston, 1849, 8vo. — On Animal Morphology, Proc. Amer. Assoc. for the Adv. of Science ; Boston, 1850, 8vo., p. 411. I would call particular attention to this paper, which has immediate reference to the subject of this chapter. — CARUS (V.), System der thierischen Morphologic; Leipzig, 1853, 1 vol., 8vo. — MULLER (J.), Ueber den Bau der Echinodermen.; Akad. J.Wiss., Berlin, 1854,4to. 3 GO'TIJE (J. W.), Zur Naturwissenschaft iiberhaupt, besonders zur Morphologic; Stuttgarclt, 1817-24, 2 vols. 8vo.; French, (Euvres d'histoire naturelle, comprenant divers memoires d'Anatomie comparee, de Botanique et de Geologic, traduits et annotes par Ch. Fr. Martins; Paris, 1837, 8vo.; atlas in fol.— DE CAN- DOLLE (A. P.), Organographie vegetale; Paris, 1827,2 vols. 8vo. — BRAUN (AL.), Vergleichende Uutersuchung iiber die Ordnung der Schuppen an den Tannenzapfen, als Einleitung zur Uutersuchung der Blattstellung iiberhaupt; Act. Nov. Ac. Nat. Curios., vol. xv, 1829. — Das Individuuin der Pflanze,Akad.d.Wiss,Berlin,1853,4to.

the circumstance that he possesses those noble attributes, without which, in their most exalted excellence and perfection, not one of these general traits of relationship, so characteristic of the great types of the animal and vegetable kingdoms, can be understood or even perceived. How, then, could these relations have been devised, without similar powers I If all these relations are almost beyond the reach of the mental powers of man, and if man himself is part and parcel of the whole system, how could this system have been called into existence, if there does not exist One Supreme Intelligence as the Author of all

During the first decade of this century, naturalists began to study relations among animals, which had escaped almost entirely the attention of earlier observers. Though Aristotle already knew that the scales of fishes

«/

correspond to the feathers of birds,1 it is but recently that anatomists have discovered the close correspondence which exists between all the parts of all animals belonging to the same type, however different they may appear at first sight. Not only is the wing of the bird identical in its structure with the arm of man or the foreleg of a quadruped, but it agrees quite as closely with the fin of the whale or the pectoral fin of the fish ; and all these together correspond in the same manner with their

1 ARISTOTELES, Historia Animali- in Sect. 4, notes 1 and 2, and the

um, Lib. i, Chap. 1, Sect. 4. & yap many other works, pamphlets, and

(v opviGi Trrepbf, TOVTO ev l^Ovl tarl \eiris. papers quoted by them, which are too

Consult also the authors referred to numerous to be mentioned here.

26 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

hind extremities. Quite as striking a coincidence is observed between the solid skull-box, the immoveable bones of the face, and the lower jaw of man and the other mammalia, and the structure of the bony frame of the head of birds, turtles, lizards, snakes, frogs and fishes. But this correspondence is not limited to the skeleton ; every other system of organs exhibits in these animals the same relations, the same identity in plan and structure, whatever be the differences in the form of the parts, in their number, and even in their functions. Such an agreement in the structure of animals is called their honiology, and is more or less close in proportion as the animals in which it is traced are more or less nearly related.

The same agreement exists between the different systems and their parts in Articulata, in Mollusks, and in Radiata, only that their structure is built upon respectively different plans, though in these three types the homologies have not yet been traced to the same extent as among Vertebrata. There is, therefore, still a wide field open for investigations in this most attractive branch of Zoology. So much, however, is already plain, from what has been done in this department of our science, that the identity of structure, among animals, does not extend to all the four branches of the animal kingdom ; that, on the contrary, every great type is constructed upon a distinct plan, — so peculiar, indeed, that homologies cannot be extended from one type to the other, but are strictly limited within each of them. The more remote resemblance which may be traced between representatives of different types is founded upon analogy,1

1 See SWAINSON (W.), On the Geo- London, 1835, 12mo., p. 129, where graphy and Classification of Animals; this point is ably discussed.

and not upon affinity. While, for instance, the head of fishes exhibits the most striking homology with that of reptiles, birds, and mammalia, as a whole, as well as in all its parts, that of Articulata is only analogous to it and to its part. What is commonly called the head in Insects is not a head like that of the Vertebrata : it has not a distinct cavity for the brain, separated from that which communicates below the neck with the chest and abdomen ; its solid envelope does not consist of parts of an internal skeleton surrounded by flesh, but is formed of external rings, like those of the body, soldered together ; it contains but one cavity, which includes the cephalic ganglion, as well as the organs of the mouth and all the muscles of the head. The same may be said of the chest, the legs and wings, the abdomen, and all the parts they contain. The cephalic ganglion is not homologous to the brain, nor are the organs of the senses homologous to those of Vertebrata, even though they perform the same functions. The alimentary canal is formed in a very different way in the embryos of the two types, as are also their respiratory organs ; and it is as unnatural to identify them, as it would be still to consider gills and lungs as homologous among Vertebrata, now that Embryology has taught us, that in different stages of growth, these two kinds of respiratory organs exist in all Vertebrata in very different organic connections one from the other.

What is true of the branch of Articulata when compared to that of Vertebrata is equally true of the Mollusks and Eadiata when compared with one another or with the two other types, as might easily be shown by a fuller illustration of the correspondence of their structure within these limits. Tin's inequality in the fundamental character of the structure of the four branches of the

28 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

animal kingdom points to the necessity of a radical reform in the nomenclature of Comparative Anatomy.1 Some naturalists, however, have already extended such comparisons respecting the structure of animals beyond the limits within which they lead to correct results, when they have attempted to show that all structures may be reduced to one norm, and when they have maintained, for instance, that every bone existing in any Vertebrate must have its counterpart in every other species of that type. To assume such a uniformity among animals would amount to denying to the Creator even as much freedom in expressing his thoughts as man enjoys.

If it be true, as pointed out above, that all animals are constructed upon four different plans of structure, in such a manner that all the different kinds of animals are only different expressions of these fundamental formulae, we may well compare the whole animal kingdom to a work illustrating four great ideas, between which there is no other connecting link than the unity exhibited in the eggs in which their most diversified manifestations are first embodied in an embryonic form, to undergo a series of transformations, and appear in the end in that wonderful variety of independent living beings which inhabit our globe, or have inhabited it from the earliest period of the existence of life upon its surface.

The most surprising feature of the animal kingdom seems to me, however, to rest neither in its diversity, nor in the various degrees of complication of its structure, nor in the close affinity of some of its representatives while others are so different, nor in the manifold relations of all

1 See AGASSIZ (L.), On the Struc- Proc. of the Amer. Assoc. for the

ture and Homologies of Radiated Ani- Adv. of Science for 1849; Boston,

rnals, with Reference to the System- 1850, 1 vol. 8vo., p. 389. atic Position of the Hydroid Polypi,

of them to one another and the surrounding world ; but in the circumstance, that beings, endowed with such different and such unequal gifts, should nevertheless constitute an harmonious whole, intelligibly connected in all its parts.

The degrees of relationship existing between different animals are most diversified. They are not only akin as representatives of the same species, bearing as such the closest resemblance to one another, but different species may also be related as members of the same genus ; the representatives of different genera may belong to the same family ; and the same order may contain different families, the same class different orders, and the same type several classes. The existence of different degrees of affinity, between animals and plants which have not the remotest genealogical connection, which live in the most distant parts of the world, which have existed in periods long gone by in the history of our earth, is a fact beyond dispute ; at least, within certain limits, no longer controverted by well informed observers. Upon what can this be founded 1 Is it that the retentive capacity of the memory of the physical forces at work upon this globe is such, that, after bringing forth a type according to one pattern, in the infancy of this earth, that pattern was adhered to under conditions, no matter how diversified, to reproduce, at another period, something similar, and so on, through all ages, until, at the period of the establishment of the present state of things, all the infinitude of new animals and new plants which now crowd its surface

30 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

were cast in these four moulds, in such a manner as to exhibit, notwithstanding their complicated relations to the surrounding world, all those more deeply seated general relations that establish among them the different degrees of affinity which we may trace so readily in all the representatives of the same type 1 Does all this really look more like the working of blind forces than like the creation of a reflective mind, establishing deliberately all the categories of existence which we recognize in nature, and combining them into that wonderful harmony, which unites all things into such a perfect system, that even to read it as it is established, or even with all the imperfections of a translation, must be considered as the highest achievement of the maturest genius \

Nothing seems to me to prove more directly and more fully the action of a reflective mind, to indicate more plainly a deliberate consideration of the subject, than the different categories upon which species, genera, families, orders, classes, and branches are founded in nature, and manifested in material reality in a succession of individuals, the life of which is limited in its duration to comparatively very short periods. The great wonder in these relations consists in the fugitive character of the bearers of this complicated harmony. For, while species persist during long periods, the individuals which represent them are ever changing, one set dying after the other in quick succession. Genera, it is true, may extend over longer periods ; families, orders and classes may even have existed throughout all periods during which animals have existed at all ; but, whatever may have been the duration of their existence, at all times these different divisions have stood in the same relation to one another and to their respective branches, and have always been represented upon

our globe in the same manner, by a succession of ever renewed and short-lived individuals.

As, however, the second chapter of this work is entirely devoted to the consideration of the different kinds and the different degrees of affinity existing among animals, I will not enter here into any details upon this subject, but simply recall the fact, that, in the course of time, investigators have agreed more and more with one another in their estimates of these relations, and built up systems more and more conformable to one another. Tin's result, which is fully exemplified by the history of our science,1 is in itself sufficient to show that there is a system in nature, to which the different systems of authors are successive approximations, more and more closely agreeing with it, in proportion as the human mind has understood nature better. This growing coincidence between our systems and that of nature shows, further, the identity of the operations of the human and the Divine intellect ; especially when it is remembered to what an extraordinary degree many d priori conceptions, relating to nature, have in the end been proved to agree with the reality, in spite of every objection at first offered to them by empiric observers.

It was formerly believed by geologists and palaeontologists that the lowest animals first made their appearance

1 SPIX (J.), Geschichte und Beur- — DB BLAINVILLE (H.), Histoire des

theilung aller Systeme in der Zoolo- sciences de 1'organisation et de leurs

gie ; Niirnberg, 1811, 1 vol. Svo. — progres; Paris, 1847, 3 vols. 8vo. —

CUVIER (G.), Histoire des progres des POTJCHET (F. A.), Histoire des scisciences naturelles; Paris, 1826, 4 ences naturelles au moyen age ; Pavols. Svo. — Histoire des sciences na- ris, 1853, 1 vol. Svo. Compare, also,

turelles, etc.; Paris, 1841,5 vols. Svo. Chap. II below.

32 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

upon this globe, and that they were followed by higher and higher types, until man crowned the series. Every geological museum, representing at all the present state of our knowledge, may now furnish the evidence that this is not the case. On the contrary, representatives of numerous families, belonging to all the four great branches of the animal kingdom, are well known to have existed simultaneously in the oldest geological formations.1 Nevertheless, I well remember when I used to hear the great geologists of the time assert that the Corals were the first inhabitants of our globe, that Mollusks and Articulata followed in order, and that Vertebrates did not appear until long after these. What an extraordinary change the last thirty years have brought about in our knowledge, and in the doctrines generally adopted respecting the existence of animals and plants in past ages ! However much naturalists may still differ in their views regarding the origin, the gradation, and the affinities of animals, they now all know, that neither Radiata nor Mollusks nor Articulata have any priority one over the other, as to the time of their first appearance upon earth ; and that, though some still maintain that Vertebrata originated somewhat later, it is universally conceded that they were already in existence towards the end of the first great epoch in the history of our globe. I think it would not be difficult to show, upon physiological grounds, that their presence upon earth dates from as early a period as any of the

1 MURCHISON (R. I. ), The Silurian Mountains; London, 1845, 2 vols.

System ; London, 1839, 1 vol. 4to. — 4to. — HALL (JAMES), Palaeontology

MURCHISON (SiR R. I.), Siluria. The of New York; Albany, 1847-52, 2

History of the Oldest Known Rocks vols., 4to. — BARRANDE (J.), Systeine

containing Fossils; London, 1854, 1 silurien du centre de la Boherue;

vol. 8vo. — MURCHISON (R. I.), DE Prague and Paris, 1852, 2 vols. 4to. —

VERNEUIL (Eo.), and KAISERLING SEDGWICK (A.), and McCoY (FR.),

(COUNT ALEX. VON), The Geology of British Palaeozoic Rocks and Fossils;

Russia in Europe, and the Ural London, 1851-55, 4to., 3 fasc.

three other great types of the animal kingdom, since fishes exist wherever Eadiata, Mollusks and Articulata are found together, and the plan of structure of these four great types constitutes a system intimately connected in its very essence. Moreover, for the last twenty years every extensive investigation among the oldest fossiliferous rocks has carried the origin of Vertebrata step by step further back ; so that, whatever may be the final solution of this vexed question, so much is already established by innumerable facts, that the idea of a gradual succession of Eacliata, Mollusks, Articulata and Vertebrata is for ever out of the question. It is proved beyond doubt, that Eadiata, Mollusca and Articulata are everywhere found together in the oldest geological formations, and that very early Vertebrata are associated with them and have continued to be so through all geological ages to the present time. This shows that even in those early days of the existence of our globe, when its surface did not yet present those diversified features which it has exhibited in later periods, and which it exhibits in still greater variety now, animals belonging to all the great types now represented upon earth were simultaneously called into existence. It shows further, that, unless the physical elements then at work themselves devised such plans, and impressed them upon the material world as the pattern upon which Nature was to build for ever afterwards, no such general relations as exist among all animals of all geological periods as well as among those now living, could ever have existed.

This is not all : every class among Eadiata, Mollusks and Articulata is known to have been represented in those earliest days, with the exception of the Acalephs1 and

1 Acalephs have been found in the Their absence in other formations Jurassic Limestone of Solenhofen. may be owing simply to the extraor-

D

34 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Insects only. It is, therefore, not only the plan of the four great types which must have been adopted then, but also the manner in which these plans were to be executed; the systems of form under which these structures were to be clothed, and even the ultimate details of structure which in different genera bear definite relations to those of other genera; the mode of differentiation of species, and the nature of their relations to the surrounding media, must likewise have been determined; for the character of the classes is as well defined as that of the four great branches of the animal kingdom, or that of the families, the genera and the species. Again, the first representatives of each class stand in definite relations to their successors in later periods, and, as their order of appearance corresponds to the various degrees of complication of their structure, and forms a natural series closely linked together, this natural gradation must have been contemplated from the very beginning. There can be the less doubt upon this point, as man, who comes last, closes in his own cycle a series, the gradation of which points from the very beginning to him as its last term. I think it can be shown by anatomical evidence, that man is not only the last and highest among the living beings of the present period, but that he is the last term of a series, beyond which there is no material progress possible in accordance with the plan upon which the whole animal kingdom is constructed ; and that the only improvement

dinary softness of their body. Insects the oldest geological periods, since

are known as early as the Carbonife- representatives of the family of

rous Formation, and may have ex- Nilleporina occur in the Silurian

isted before. — Since the publication rocks.

of these remarks I have ascertained It remains only to be ascertained

that Millepora is not a Polyp, but now whether all the Zoantharia tabubelongs to the Hydroids. It is thus lata are as truly Hydroids as the

shown that Acalephs have existed iu genuine Milleporina or not.

we can look for upon earth, for the future, must consist in the development of man's intellectual and moral faculties.1

The question has been raised of late, how far the oldest fossils known may truly be the remains of the first inhabitants of our globe, No doubt extensive tracts of fossiliferous rocks have been greatly altered by plutonic agencies, and their organic contents so entirely destroyed and the rocks themselves so deeply metamorphosed, that they now resemble eruptive rocks more closely than stratified deposits. Such changes have taken place again and again up to comparatively recent periods, and upon a very large scale, Yet there are entire continents — North America, for instance — in which the palseozoic rocks have undergone little, if any alteration, and where the remains of the earliest representatives of the animal and vegetable kingdoms are as well preserved as in later formations. In such deposits, the evidence is satisfactory that a variety of animals belonging to different classes of the great branches of the animal kingdom has existed simultaneously from the beginning ; so that the assumption of a successive introduction of these types upon earth is flatly contradicted by well established and well known facts.2 Moreover, the remains found in the oldest deposits are everywhere closely allied to one another. In Eussia, in Sweden, in Bohemia, and in various other parts of the world, where these oldest formations have been altered upon a more or less extensive scale, as well as in North America, where they have undergone little or no change, they present the same general character, and that close

1 AGASSIZ (L.), An Introduction to versity and Number of Animals in the Study of Natural History; New Geological Times; Amer. Journ. of York, 1847, 8vo., p. 57. Science and Arts, 2nd ser., vol. 17,

2 AGASSIZ (L.), The Primitive Di- 1854, p. 309.

D 2

36 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

correspondence, in their structure and in the combination of their families, which shows them to have belonged to contemporaneous faunce. It would, therefore, seem that, even where metamorphic rocks prevail, the traces of the earliest inhabitants of tin's globe have not been entirely obliterated.

There is not only variety among animals and plants, but they differ also as to their standing, their rank, their superiority or inferiority, when compared one to another. But this rank is difficult to determine ; for, while in some respects all animals are equally perfect, since they perform completely the part assigned to them in the general economy of nature,1 there are in other respects such striking differences between them, that their very agreement in certain features points at their superiority or inferiority in regard to others.

This being the case, the question first arises, Do all animals form one unbroken series, from the lowest to the highest 1 Before the animal kingdom had been studied so closely as it has been of late, many able writers really believed that all animals formed but one simple, continuous series, the gradation of which Bonnet was particularly industrious in trying to ascertain.2 At a later period, Lamarck3 endeavoured to show further, that, in the com-

1 EHRENBERG (C. G.), Das Natur- 2 vols. 8vo. — Contemplations de la reich des Menschen, oder das Reich Nature; Amsterdam, 1764-65, 2 vols. der willensfreien beseelten Naturkor- 8vo. — Palingenesie philosophique ; per, in 29 Classen iibersichtlich ge- Geneve, 1769, 2 vols. 8vo.

ordnet; Berlin, 1835 (folio), 1 sheet. 3 LAMARCK (J. B. DE), Philoso-

2 BONNET (Cn.), Considerations sur phie zoologique; Paris, 1809, 2 vols. les corps organises ; Amsterdam, 1762, Svo.

plication of their structure, all the classes of the animal kingdom represent only successive degrees; and he was so thoroughly convinced that classes constitute one graduated series, that in his systematic arrangement he actually calls the classes " degrees of organization." De Blainville,1 in the main, followed in the steps of Lamarck, though he does not admit quite so simple a series ; for he considers the Mollusks and Articulates as two diverging branches, ascending from the Eadiata, to converge again and unite in the Vertebrata. But now, since it is known how the great branches of the animal kingdom may be circumscribed,2 notwithstanding a few doubtful points ; since it

fig. 2d edit.; Grundsatze der vergieichenden Anatomic, Dresden, 1828, 8vo. ; Engl. by R. J. GORE, Bath, 1827, 2 vols. 8vo., Atlas.— CABUS (C. G.) and OTTO (A. W.), Erlauterungstafeln zur vergleichenden Anatomic; Leipzic, 1826-40, fol.— WAGNER (R.), Lehrbuch der vergleichenden Anatomic ; Leipzic, 1834-35, 2 vols. 8vo.; Engl. by A. TULK, London, 1844, 1 vol. 8vo.; 2nd edit., Lehrbuch der Zootomie, Leipzic, 1843-44,1 vol. 8vo., 2nd vol. by FREY and LETICKART ; Icoues anatomicee, Leipzig, 1841, fol. — GRANT (R. E.), Outlines of Comparative Anatomy; London, 1835, 1 vol. fol. — JONES (RYMER), A General Outline of the Animal Kingdom ; London, 1838-39, 1 vol. 8vo. fig.; 2nd edit., 1854.— TODD (R. B.), Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology; London, 1835-52, 4 vols. 8vo. fig. — AGASsiz (L.) and GOULD (A. A.), Principles of Zoology; Boston, 1 vol. 8vo., 2nd edit. 1851. — OWEN (R.), Lectures on the Invertebrate Animals; London, 1843, 1 vol. fig.; 2nd edit. 1855. — Lectures on the Comparative Anatomy of the Vertebrate Animals, Fishes; London, 1846, 1 vol. 8vo. fig. — SIEBOLD (C. TH. v.) und STANNIUS (HERM.), Lehrbuch der vergleichenden Anatomic; Berlin, 1845-46, 2 vols. 8vo.; 2nd edit., 1855; Engl. Trans.

1 BLAINVILLE (H. D. DE), De 1'Organization des Animaux; Paris, 1822, 1 vol. 8vo.

2 Besides the works reviewed in Chapter III, consult: BLUMENBACH (J. FR.), Handbuch der vergleichenden Anatomic ; Gottingeu, 1824, 1 vol. 8vo. ; Engl., by W. LAWRENCE, London, 1827, 1 vol. 8vo. — CUVIER, (G.), Legons d' Anatomic comparee, rec. et publ. par MM. Dumeril et Duvernoy ; Paris, 1800-1805, 5 vols. 8vo.; 2de edit., rev. par MM. F. G. CUVIER et LAURILLARD, Paris, 1836- 39, 10 vols. 8vo.— CUVIER (G.), Le Regne animal distribue d'apres son organisation; Paris, 1817,4 vols. 8vo.; 2nd 6dit., 1829-30, 5 vols. 8vo. ; 3e edit, illustree 1836 et suiv. ; Engl. Trans, by GRIFFITH, London, 1824, 9 vols. 8vo. — MECKEL ( J. F.), System der vergleichenden Anatomic ; Halle, 1821-31, 6 vols. 8vo.; French Transl., Paris, 1829-38, 10 vols. 8vo— TREVI- KANUS (G. R.), Biologic, oder Philosophic der lebenden Natur; Gottingen, 1802 16, 6 vols. 8vo.— Die Erscheinungen und Gesetze des organischen Lebens ; Bremen, 1831-37, 5 vols. 8vo. — DELLE CHIAJE, Istituzioni d'Anatomia e Fisiologia comparata; Napoli, 1832, 8vo. — CARUS (C. G.), Lehrbuch der vergleichenden Anatomic; Leipzic, 1834, 2 vols. 4to.,

38 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

is still more accurately known how most classes should be characterized, and what is their respective standing ; since every day brings dissenting views, respecting the details of Classification, nearer together, — the supposition that all animals constitute one continuous, graduated series can be shown to be contrary to nature. Yet, the greatest difficulty in this inquiry is to weigh rightly the respective standing of the four great branches of the whole animal kingdom ; for, although the inferiority of the Eadiata may seem plain when they are compared with the bulk of the Mollusks or Articulata, or still more evident when they are contrasted with theVertebrata,it must not be forgotten that the structure of most Echinoderms is far more complicated than that of any Bryozoon or Ascidian, of the type of Mollusks, or that of any Helminth, of the type of Articulata, and perhaps even superior to that of the Ampliioxus among the Vertebrata. These facts are so well ascertained, that an absolute superiority or inferiority of one type to the others must be unconditionally denied. As to a relative superiority or inferiority, however, determined by the bulk of evidence, though it must be conceded that the Vertebrata rank above the three other types, the question of the relative standing of Mollusks and Articulata seems to rest rather upon a difference in the tendency of their whole organization than upon a real gradation in their structure; concentration being the prominent trait of the structure of Mollusks, while the expression ' outward display' would more naturally indicate that of Articulata;

by W. J. BURNETT, Boston, 1854. — Cambridge, 1856, 2 vols. 8vo. — CA-

BERGMANN (C.) und LEUCKART (R.), RUS (J. V.), Icones Zootomicae, mit

Vergleichende Anatomie und Physi- Original-beitragen von G. J. Allman,

ologie; Stuttgardt, 1852, 1 vol. 8vo. C. Gegeubauer, Th. II. Hayley, Alb.

fig.— VAN DER HOEVEN (F.), Hand- Kolliker, H. Miiller, M. S. Schultze,

book of Zoology, translated from the C. Th. E. von Siebold und F. Stein,

Dutch by the REV. WILLIAM CLARK; Leipzig, 1857, fol.

and so it might seem as if Mollusks and Articulata were standing on nearly a level with one another, and as much above Kadiata as both stand below Vertebrata, but constructed upon plans expressing different tendencies. To appreciate more precisely these most general relations among the great types of the animal kingdom will require deeper investigations into the character of their plan of structure than have been made thus far.1 Let, however, the respective standing of these great divisions be what it may ; let them differ only in tendency, or in plan of structure, or in the height to which they rise, admitting their base to be on one level or nearly so ; so much is certain, thus far, that in each type there are representatives exhibiting a highly complicated structure, and others which appear very simple. Now the very fact that such extremes may be traced within the natural boundaries of each type shows, that, in whatever manner these great types are supposed to follow one another in a single series, the highest representative of the preceding type must join on to the lowest representative of the following, thus necessarily bringing together the most heterogeneous forms.2 It must be further evident, that, in proportion as the internal arrangement of each great type becomes more perfected, the greater is likely to appear the difference at the two ends of the series, which are ultimately to be brought into connection with one another in any attempt to establish a single series for all animals.

I doubt whether there is a naturalist now living who would object to an arrangement in which, to determine

1 I regret to be unable to refer here gressive, Embryonic, and Prophetic

to the contents of a course of lectures Types; Proc. Am. Assoc. for 1849,

which I delivered upon this subject, p. 432.

in the Smithsonian Institution, in 3 AGASSIZ (L.), Animal Morpho-

1852. Compare, meanwhile, my pa- logy; Proc. Am. Assoc. for 1849, p.

per, On the Differences between Pro- 415.

40 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the respective standing of Radiata, Polyps would be placed lowest, Acalephs next, and Echinoderms highest. A similar arrangement of Mollusks would bring Acephala lowest, Gasteropoda next and Cephalopoda highest. Articulata would appear in the following order : Worms, Crustacea and Insects. Vertebrata with the Fishes lowest, Reptiles and Birds next, and Mammalia highest. I have here purposely avoided every allusion to controverted points. Now if Mollusks were to follow Radiata in a simple series, Acephala should join on to the Echinoderms : if Articulata, Worms would be the connecting link. We should then have either Cephalopoda or Insects as the highest term of a series beginning with Radiata, followed by Mollusks or by Articulates. In the first case, Cephalopoda would be followed by Worms : in the second, Insects by Acephala, Again, the connection with Vertebrata would be made either by Cephalopods, if Articulata were considered as lower than Mollusks, or by Insects, if Mollusks were placed below Articulata. Who does not see, therefore, that in proportion as our knowledge of the true affinities of animals is improving, we accumulate more and more convincing evidence against the idea that the animal kingdom constitutes one simple series ?

The next question would then be: Does the animal kingdom constitute several, or any number of graduated series 1 In attempting to ascertain the value of the less comprehensive groups when compared to one another, the difficulties seem to be gradually less and less. It is already possible to mark out with tolerable precision the relative standing between the classes, though even here we do not yet perceive in all the types the same relations. Among Vertebrata there can be no doubt that the Fishes are lower than the Reptiles, these lower than Birds, and that

Mammalia stand highest; and it seems equally evident, that in the main Insects and Crustacea are superior to Worms, Cephalopoda to Gasteropoda and Acephala, and Echinoderms to Acalephs and Polypi. But there are genuine Insects, the superiority of which over many Crustacea would be difficult to prove : there are worms which appear in every respect superior to certain Crustacea : the structure of the highest Acephala seems more perfect than that of some Gasteropoda, and that of the Halcyonoid Polyps more perfect than that of many Hydroids. Classes do not therefore seem to be so limited hi the range of their characters, as to justify in every type a complete serial arrangement among them. But, when we come to the orders, it can hardly be doubted that the gradation of these natural divisions among themselves in each class constitutes the very essence of this kind of groups. As a special paragraph is devoted to the consideration of the character of orders in my next chapter, I need not dwell longer upon this point here.1 It will be sufficient for me to remark now, that the difficulties, with which geologists have met in their attempts to compare the rank of the different types of animals and plants with the order of their succession in different geological periods, have chiefly arisen from the circumstance, that they have expected to find a serial gradation, not only among the classes of the same type, where it is only incomplete, but even among the types themselves, between which such a gradation cannot be traced. Had they limited their comparisons to the orders which are really founded upon gradation, the result would have been quite different; but, to do this, requires more familiarity with Comparative Anatomy, with Embryology and with Zoology proper, than can naturally

3 See Chap. II, Sect. 3.

42 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

be expected of those, whose studies are chiefly devoted to the investigation of the structure of our globe.

To appreciate fully the importance of this question of the gradation of animals, and to comprehend the whole extent of the difficulties involved in it, a superficial acquaintance with the perplexing question of the order of succession of animals in past geological ages is by no means sufficient. On the other hand, a complete familiarity with the many attempts which have been made to establish a correspondence between the two, and with all the crudities which have been published upon this subject, might dispel every hope to arrive at any satisfactory result upon this subject, did it not now appear that the inquiry, to be conducted upon its true ground, must be circumscribed within different limits. The results at which I have already arrived, since I have perceived the mistake under which investigators have been labouring thus far in this respect, satisfy me that the point of view, under which I have presented the subject here, is the true one; and that, in the end, the characteristic gradation exhibited by the orders of each class will present the most striking correspondence with the character of the succession of the same groups in past ages, and afford another startling proof of the admirable order and gradation in the degrees of complication of the structure of animals, which have been established from the very beginning and maintained throughout all time.

The surface of the earth being formed partly by water and partly by land, and the organization of all living

beings standing in close relation to the one or the other of these mediums, it is in the nature of things that no single species, either of animals or plants, should be uniformly distributed over the whole globe. Yet there are some types of the animal, as well as of the vegetable kingdom, which are equably distributed over the whole surface of the land, and others which are as widely scattered in the sea; while others are limited to some continent or some ocean, to some particular province, to some lake, nay, to some very limited spot of the earth's surface.1

As for as the primary divisions of animals are concerned, and the nature of the medium to which they are adapted does not interfere, representatives of the four great branches of the animal kingdom are everywhere found together. Eadiata, Mollusks, Articulata and Vertebrata occur together in every part of the ocean, in the Arctics as well as under the equator and near the southern pole, as far as man has penetrated : every bay, every inlet, every shoal is peopled by them. So universal is this association, not only at present but in all past geological ages, that I consider it as a sufficient reason to believe that fishes will be found in those few fossiliferous beds of the Silurian System in which thus far they have not been found.2 Upon land we find equally everywhere Vertebrata, Articulata and Mollusks, but no Eadiata, this whole branch being limited to the waters ; but, as far as terrestrial animals extend, we find repre-

1 The human race affords an ex- be circumscribed in the sea, and that

ample of the wide distribution of a of the Goniodonts of South America

terrestrial type : the Herring and the in the fresh waters. The Chaca of

Mackerel families have an equally Lake Baikal is found nowhere else.

wide distribution in the sea. The This is equally true of the Blindfish

Mammalia of New Holland show how (Amblyopsis) of the Mammoth Cave,

some families may be limited to one and of the Proteus of the caverns of

continent, the family of Labyrinth id Carinthia. of the Indian Ocean how fishes may 2 See above, Sect. 7.

sentatives of the other three branches associated, as we find them all four in the sea. Classes have already a more limited range of distribution. Among Radiata, the Polypi, Acalephs and Echinoderms1 are not only all aquatic, but they are all marine, with a single exception,2 — • the genus Hydra, which inhabits fresh waters. Among Mollusks,3 the Acephala are all aquatic, but partly marine and partly fluviatile ; the Gasteropoda partly marine,

1 For the geographical distribution of Radiata, consult : DANA (J. D.), Zoophytes. United States Exploring Expedition, under the command of Ch. Wilkes, U.S.N., Philadelphia, 1846, 1 vol. 4to.; Atlas, fol. — MILNE-EDWARDS et HAIME (JuL.), Recherches sur les Polypiers, Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser., vol. 9-18, Paris, 1848- 52,8vo. — ESCHSCHOLTZ (Fn.), System der Acalephen ; Berlin, 1829, 4to., fig. — LESSON (R. PR.), Histoire naturelle des Zoophytes, Acalephes; Paris, 1 843, 1 vol. 8vo., fig. — KOLLIKER (A.), Die Schwimmpolypen und Siphonophoren von Messina; Leipzic, 1853, 1 vol. fol., fig. — LEUCKART (R.), Zoo logische Untersuchungen ; Giessen, 1853, 4to.; Zur nahern Kenntniss der Siphonophoren von Nissa, Arch. f. Naturg., 1854; Beitriige zur Kenntniss der Meduseufaune von Nissa, Arch. f. Naturg., 1856. — GEGENBAUER (C.), Beitriige zur nahern Kenntniss der Schwimmpolypen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1853; Versuch eiues Systems derMedusen,mit Beschreibung neuer oder wenigbekannterformen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1856.— VOGT (C.), Recherches sur les animaux inferieurs de la Mediterranee; Genfeve, 1854. — MULLER (J.) und TROSCHEL (F. H.), System der Asterideu, Braunschweig, 1842, 8vo., fig. — AGASSIZ (L.), Catalogue raisonne des families, des genres et des especes de la Classe des Echinodermes, Ann. des Sc. Nat., 3e ser., vol. 6-8; Paris, 1847, 8vo.

2 I need hardly say in this connection that the so-called freshwater Polyps, Alcyonella. Plumatella, etc., are Bryozoa, and not true Polyps.

3 For the geographical distribution of Mollusks consult : LAMARCK ( J. B. DE), Histoire naturelle des Animaux sans vertebres, Paris, 1815-22, 7 vols. 8vo.; 2de edit, augmentee de notes par MM. DES!IAYES et MILNE- EDWARDS, Paris, 1835-43, 10 vols. 8vo. — FERUSSAC (J. B. L. DE), Histoire naturelle des Mollusques terrestres et fluviatiles; Paris, 1819, et stiiv, 4to., fig., fol., continuee par DES- HAYES. — FRUSSAC (J. B. L. DE) et SAN DER- RANG (A.), Histoire naturelle des Aplysiens; Paris, 1828, 4to., fig., fol. — FERUSSAC (J. B. L. DE) et D'OR- BIGNY (A.), Monographie des Cephalopodes cry ptodibranches ; Paris, 1 834- 43, fol.— MARTINI (F. H. W.) und CIIEMNITZ (J. H.), Neues systematisches Conchylien-Kabinet ; Niirnberg, 1769-95, 11 vols. 4to., fig.; new edit, and continuation by SCHUBERT and A. WAGNER, completed by H. C. KUSTER, Niiruberg, ] 1 vols. 4to., fig. — KIENER (L. C.), Species general et Icouographie des Coquilles vivantes ; Paris, 1834, et suiv, 8vo., fig. — REEVE (LOVELL), Conchologia Iconica ; a complete Repertory of Species of Shells,Pictorial and Descriptive ; London, 1843, and foil., 4to., fig. — PFEIF- FER (L ), Monographia Heliceorum viventium; Leipzig, 1847-48, 8vo. — PFEIFFER (L.), Monographia Pneumonopomorum viventium ; Cassel, 1852, 8vo., and all the special works on Conchology.

partly fluviatile, and partly terrestrial ; while all Cephalopoda are marine. Among Articulata,1 the worms are partly marine, partly fluviatile and partly terrestrial, while many are internal parasites, living in the cavities or in the organs of other animals ; the Crustacea are partly marine and partly fluviatile, a few are terrestrial ; the Insects are mostly terrestrial or rather aerial, yet some are marine, others fluviatile, and a large number of those which, in their perfect state, live in the air, are terrestrial or even aquatic during their earlier stages of growth. Among Vertebrata2 the Fishes are all aquatic, but partly

1 The mode of distribution of free and parasitic Worms, in different parts of the world and in different animals, may be ascertained from : GRUBE (A. ED.), Die Familien der Anneliden, Wiegman's Archiv, 1850. I mention this paper in preference to any other work, as it is the only complete list of Annulata ; and though the localities are not given, the references may supply the deficiency. — RUDOL- PHI (K. A.) Entozoorurn sive Vernii- •um intestinalium Historia naturalis; Arnstelodami, 1808-10, 3 vols. 8vo., fig. — Entozoorum Synopsis; Berolini, 1819, 8vo., fig.— GCRLT (E. F.), Verzeichniss der Thiere, bei Welchen Entozoen gefunden worden sind, Wiegman's Archiv, 1845, contin. by Creplin in the following No. — DUJAR- DIN (FEL.), Histoire naturelle des Helminthes ou Vers intestinaux ; Paris, 1844, 1 vol. 8vo.— DIESING (0. M.), Historia Vermium,Vinclob. 1850, 2 vols. 8vo. That of Crustacea from MILNE-EDWARDS, Histoire naturelle des Crustaces; Paris, 1834, 3 vols. 8vo. fig. — DANA ( J. D.), Crustacea. United States Exploring Expedition, under the command of Ch. Wilkes, U.S.N., vol. xiv, Philadelphia, 1852, 2 vols. 4to., atlas, fol. For the geographical distribution of Insects I must refer to the general works on Entomology,as it would require pages to enumerate even the standard works

relating to the different orders of this class; but they are mentioned in: PERCHERON (Acn. R.), Bibliographic entomologique, Paris, 1837, 2 vols. 8vo. — AGASSIZ (L.), Bibliographia Zoologiae et Geologise; a general catalogue of all books, tracts, and memoirs on Zoology and Geology, corrected, enlarged, and edited by II. E. STRICKLAND; London, 1848-54, 4 vols. 8vo. (Ray Society.)

2 For the geographical distribution of Fishes, consult : CUVIER (G.) and VALENCIENNES (A.), Histoire naturelle des Poissons; Paris, 1828-1849, 22 vols. 8vo., fig. — MULLER (J.) und HENLE (J.), Systematische Beschreibung der Plagiostomen; Berlin, 1841, fol., fig. — RICHARDSON (SiR JOHN), Article 'Ichthyology,' in Encyclopaedia Britannica; Edinburgh, 1856,4to. — DUMERIL (A. M. C.), Ichthyologie analytique ou essai d'une classification naturelle des Poissons ; Paris, 1856, 4to. For that of Reptiles : DUMERIL (A. M. C.) et BIBRON (G.), Erpetologie generate, ou Histoire naturelle complete des Reptiles ; Paris, 1834-1855,9vols. 8vo.,fig.— TSCHUDI, (J. J.), Classification der Batrachier, Neuchatel, 1838, 4to. Mem. Soc. Neuch., 2nd vol. — FITZINGER (L. J.), Systema Rep tilium,Viiidobona3, 1843, 8vo. For that of Birds : GRAY (G. R.), The Genera of Birds, illustrated with about 350 plates by D. W.

4G ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

marine and partly fluviatile ; the Eeptiles are either aquatic or amphibious or terrestrial, and some of the latter are aquatic during the early part of their life ; the Birds are all aerial, but some more terrestrial and others more aquatic ; finally, the Mammalia, though all aerial, live partly in the sea, partly in fresh water, but mostly on land. A more special review might show that this localization, in connection with the elements in which animals live, has a direct reference to peculiarities of structure of such importance that a close consideration of the habitat of animals, within the limits of the classes, might, in most cases, lead to a very natural classification.1 But this is true only within the limits of the classes, and even here not absolutely, as in some the orders only, or the families only, are thus closely related to the elements ; and there are even natural groups, in which this connection is not manifested beyond the limits of the genera, and a few cases in which it is actually confined to the species. Yet, in every degree of these connexions we find that upon every spot of the globe it extends simultaneously to the representatives of different classes, and even of different branches, of the animal and vegetable kingdoms ; a circumstance which shows, that, when called into existence in such an association, these various animals and plants were respectively adapted, with ah1 the peculiarities

Mitchell; London, 1844-1849, 3 vols. 4to. — See also the works quoted

imp. 4to. — BONAPARTE (C. L.), Con- above, Sect. 2, and the annual reports

spectus generum Avium, Lugduni- in Wiegman's Archiv, now edited by

Batavorum, 1850, and seq., 8vo. For Troschel ; the Catalogues of the Brithat of Mammalia: WAGNER (A.), tish Museum, of the Jardin des

Die geographische Verbreitung der Plantes, etc., furnish equally irnpor-

Siiugthiere, Verhandl. der Akad. der tant information. Wissensch. in Miinchen, vol. iv. — 1 AGASSIZ (L.), The Natural Rela-

POMPPER (HERM.), Die Saugthiere, tions between Animals and the Ele-

Vo'gel und Aniphibien, nach ihrer ments in which they live. Amer.

geographischen Verbreitung tabella- Jour, of Sc. and Arts, 2d ser., vol. 9,

rish zusammengestellt; Leipzig,1841, 1850, 8vo., p. 369.

of their kingdom, those of their class, those of their order, those of their genus, and those of their species, to the home assigned to them, and therefore were not produced by the nature of the place, or of the element, or by any other physical condition.1 To maintain the contrary, would really amount to asserting, that, wherever a variety of organized beings live together, 110 matter how great their diversity, the physical agents prevailing there must have in their combined action the power of producing such a diversity of structures as exists in animals, notwithstandino- the close connection in which these animals

o

stand to them, or of working out an intimate relation to themselves in beings, whose essential characteristics have no reference to their nature. In other words, in all these animals and plants there is one side of their organization which has an immediate reference to the elements in which they live, and another which has no such connection ; and yet it is precisely that part of the structure of animals and plants, which has no direct bearing upon the conditions in which they are placed in nature, which constitutes their essential, their typical character. This proves, beyond the possibility of an objection, that the elements in which animals and plants live (and under this expression I mean to include all that is commonly included under the expressions of physical agents, physical causes, etc.) cannot in any way be considered as the cause of their existence.

1 In the study of the geographical rous and most heterogeneous types,

distribution of animals and plants under all possible variations of climaand their relations to the conditions tic influences, severally circumscribed

under which they live, too little im- within the narrowest limits, seems to

portance is attached to the circum- me to present the most insuperable

stance that representations of the objection to the supposition that the

most diversified types are everywhere organized beings, so combined, could

found associated, within limited areas, in anyway have originated spontaunder identical conditions of exist- neously by the working of any natuence. These combinations of nume- ral law.

48 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

If the naturalists of past centuries have failed to improve their systems of Zoology by introducing considerations derived from the habitat of animals, it is chiefly because they have taken this habitat as the foundation of their primary divisions. But, reduced to its proper limits, the study of the connexion between the structure and the natural home of animals cannot fail to lead to interesting results, among which the growing conviction that these relations are not produced by physical agents, but determined in the plan ordained from the beginning, will not be the least important.

The unequal limitation of groups of a different value upon the surface of the earth produces the most diversified combinations possible, when we consider the mode of association of different families of animals and plants in different parts of the world. These combinations are so regulated that every natural province has a character of its own, as far as its animals and plants are concerned; and such natural associations of organized beings, extending over a wider or narrower area, are called Faunae, when the animals alone are considered, and Florae, when the plants alone are regarded. Their natural limits are far from being yet ascertained satisfactorily everywhere. As the works of Schow and Schmarda may suffice to give an approximate idea of their extent,1 I would refer to them for further details, and allude here only to the unequal extent of these different faunae, and to the necessity of limiting them in different ways, according to the point of view under which they are considered ; or rather show, that, as different groups have a wider or more limited

1 I would also refer to a sketch I (Philadelphia, 1854, 4to.), accomhave published of theFaunfe inNoTT's panied with a map and illustraand GLIDDON'S Types of Mankind tions.

range, in investigating their associations, or the faunae, we must distinguish between zoological realms, zoological provinces, zoological counties, zoological fields, as it were; that is, between zoological areas of unequal value, over the widest of which range the most extensive types, while in their smaller and smaller divisions we find more and more limited types, sometimes overlapping one another, sometimes placed side by side, sometimes concentric to one another, but always and everywhere impressing a special character upon some part of a wider area, which is thus made to differ from any other part within its natural limits.

These various combinations of smaller or wider areas, equally well defined in different types, have given rise to the conflicting views prevailing among naturalists respecting the natural limits of faunae ; but, with the progress of our knowledge, these discrepancies cannot fail to disappear. In some respect, every island of the Pacific upon which distinct animals are found may be considered as exhibiting a distinct fauna; yet several groups of these islands have a common character, which unites them into more comprehensive fauna? ; the Sandwich Islands for instance, compared with the Fejees or with New Zealand. What is true of disconnected islands or of isolated lakes is equally true of connected parts of the mainland and of the ocean.

Since it is well known that many animals are limited to a very narrow range in their geographical distribution, it would be a highly interesting subject of inquiry to ascertain what are the narrowest limits within which animals of different types are circumscribed, as this would furnish the first basis for a scientific consideration of the conditions under winch animals have been created. The

E

50 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

time is passed, when the mere indication of the continent whence an animal had been obtained could satisfy

i/

our curiosity; and those naturalists who have an opportunity of ascertaining closely the particular circumstances under which the animals they describe are placed in their natural homes, are guilty of a gross disregard of the interests of science when they neglect to relate them. Our knowledge of the geographical distribution of animals would be far more extensive and precise than it is now, but for this neglect. Every new fact relating to the geographical distribution of well-known species is as important to science as the discovery of a new species. Could we only know the range of a single animal as accurately as Alphonse de Candolle has lately determined that of many species of plants, we might begin a new era in Zoology. It is greatly to be regretted, that, in most works containing the scientific results of explorations of distant countries, only new species are described, when the mere enumeration of those already known might have added invaluable information respecting their geographical distribution. The carelessness with which some naturalists distinguish species merely because they are found in distant regions, without even attempting to secure specimens for comparison, is a perpetual source of erroneous conclusions in the study of the geographical distribution of organized beings, not less detrimental to the progress of science than the readiness of others to consider as identical animals and plants which may resemble each other closely, without paying the least regard to their distinct origin, and without even pointing out the differences they perceive between specimens from different parts of the world. The perfect identity of animals and plants living in very remote parts of the globe has so often been ascer-

tained, and it is also so well known how closely species may be allied and yet differ in all the essential relations which characterize species, that such loose investigations are no longer justifiable.

This close resemblance of animals and plants in distant parts of the world is the most interesting subject of investigation with reference to the question of the unity of the origin of animals; and to that of the influence of physical agents upon organized beings in general. It appears to me, that, as facts now point distinctly to an independent origin of individuals of the same species in remote regions, or of closely allied species representing one another in distant parts of the world, one of the strongest arguments in favour of the supposition, that physical agents may have had a controlling influence in changing the character of the organic world, is gone for ever.

The narrowest limits within which certain Vertebrata are circumscribed, are exemplified, among Mammalia, by some large and remarkable species : the Orang-Outangs upon the Simcla Islands; the Chimpanzee and the Gorilla along the western coast of Africa ; several distinct species of Ehinoceros about the Cape of Good Hope, and in Java and Sumatra; the Pinchaque and the common Tapir in South America, and the eastern Tapir in Sumatra; the East Indian and the African Elephant, the Bactrian Camel and the Dromedary, the Llamas, and the different kinds of wild Bulls, wild Goats, and wild. Sheep, etc. ; among Birds by the African Ostrich, the two American Rheas, the Emeu (Dromceus) of New Holland, and the Casuary (Casuarius galeatits) of the Indian Archipelago, and still more by the different species of doves confined to particular islands in the Pacific Ocean ; among Reptiles, by the Proteus of the cave of Adelsberg in Carinthia, and the

E 2

52 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Gopher (Testudo Polyphemus, Auct.) of our Southern States; and among Fishes, by the Blind Fish (Amblyopsis spelceus) of the Mammoth Cave. Examples of closely limited Articulata may not be so striking; yet the Blind Crawfish of the Mammoth Cave, and the many parasites found only upon or within certain species of animals, are very remarkable in this respect. Among Mollusks I would remark the many species of land shells, ascertained by Professor Adams to occur only in Jamaica,1 among the West India Islands; and the species discovered by the United States Exploring Expedition upon isolated islands of the Pacific, and described by Dr. Gould.2 Even among Radiata many species might be quoted, among Echinoderms as well as among Medusae and Polypi, which are only known from a few localities; but, so long as these animals are not collected with the special view of ascertaining their geographical range, the indications of travellers must be received with great caution, and any generalization respecting the extent of their natural areas would be premature, as long as the countries they inhabit have not been more extensively explored.3 It is nevertheless true, as established by ample evidence, that, within definite limits, all the animals occurring in different natural zoological provinces are specifically distinct. What remains to be ascertained more minutely is the precise range of each species, as well as the most natural limits of the different faunae.

1 ADAMS (C. B.), Contributions to 3 With reference to the Echino- Conchology; New York, 1849-50, 8vo. derms and Acalephs, I am able to A series of pamphlets, full of original state, that the species of the Atlantic information. shores of North America, found along

2 GOULD (A. A.), Mollusks, United the northern states, differ entirely States Exploring Expedition, under from those of the southern states, and the command of Cu. WiLKES,U.S.N.; these differ again from those of the 1 vol. 4to., Philadelphia, 1854. Gulf of Mexico.

It is not only when considering the diversification of the animal kingdom within limited geographical areas, that we are called upon in our investigations to admire the unity of plan which its most diversified types exhibit ; the identity of structure of these types is far more surprising, when we trace it over a wide range of country and within entirely disconnected areas. Why the animals and plants of North America should present such a strong resemblance to those of Europe and Northern Asia, while those of Australia are so entirely different from those of Africa and South America under the same latitudes, is certainly a problem of great interest, in connection with the study of the influence of physical agents upon the character of animals and plants in different parts of the world. North America certainly does not resemble Europe and Northern Asia, more than parts of Australia resemble certain parts of Africa or of South America ; and, even if a greater difference should be conceded between the latter than between the former, these disparities are in no way commensurate with the difference or similarity of their organized beings, nor in any way rationally dependent one upon the other. Why should the identity of species prevailing in the Arctic not extend to the Temperate zone, when it is as difficult to distinguish many species of this zone, though different, as it is to prove the identity of certain arctic species where the continents converge towards the north ; and when, besides, the species of the two zones mingle to a great extent at their boundaries "? Why are the antarctic species

54 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

not identical with those of the arctic regions 1 And why should a further increase of the average temperature introduce such completely new types, when even in the Arctics there are, where the different continents converge towards the North Pole, such strikingly peculiar types (Rhytina, for instance,) combined with those which are identical over the whole arctic area ri l

It may, at first sight, seem very natural that the arctic species should extend over the three northern continents converging towards the north pole, as there can be no insuperable barrier to the widest dissemination over this whole area of the animals that live in the glacial ocean, or upon parts of three continents which are almost bound together by ice. Yet, the more we trace this identity in detail, the more surprising does it appear, as we find in the Arctics as well as everywhere else, representatives of different types living together. The arctic Mammalia, belonging chiefly to the families of Whales, Seals, Bears, Weasels, Foxes, Ruminants and Kodents, have, as Mammalia, the same general structure as the Mammalia of any other part of the globe, and so have the arctic Birds, the arctic Fishes, the arctic Articulata, the arctic Mollusks, the arctic Eadiata, when compared with the representatives of the same types all over our globe. This identity extends to every degree of affinity among these animals, and the plants which accompany them : their orders,

1 I beg not to be misunderstood, under consideration. Too little atten-

I do not impute to all naturalists the tiou has thus far been paid to the

idea of ascribing all the differences facts bearing upon the peculiarities

or all the similarities of the organic of structure of animals in connexion

world to climatic influences ; and I with the range of their distribution,

wish only to remind them that even Such investigations are only beginthe truest picture of the correlations ning to be made, as native investiof climate and geographical distri- gators are studying comparatively

butiou does not yet touch the ques- the anatomy of animals of different

tion of origin, which is the point continents.

their families, and their genera, as far as they have representatives elsewhere, bear everywhere the same identical ordinal, family, or generic characters. The arctic foxes have the same dental formula, the same toes and claws, in fact, every generic peculiarity which characterizes foxes, whether they live in the Arctics or in the temperate or tropical zone, in America, in Europe, in Africa, or in Asia. This is equally true of the seals and the whales ; the same details of structure which characterize their genera in the Arctics reappear in the Antarctics and the intervening space, as far as then1 natural distribution goes. This is equally true of the birds, the fishes, etc., etc. And let it not be supposed that it is only a general resemblance. By no means. The structural identity extends to the most minute details in the most intimate structure of the teeth, of the hair, of the scales, in the furrows of the brain, in the ramification of the vessels, in the folds of the internal surface of the intestine, in the complication of the glands, etc., etc. ; to peculiarities, indeed, which nobody but a professional naturalist conversant with microscopic anatomy would ever believe could present such precise and permanent characters. So complete, indeed, is this identity, that, were any of these beings submitted to the investigation of a skilful anatomist after having been mutilated to such an extent that none of its specific characters could be recognized, yet not only its class, or its order, or its family, but even its genus, could be identified as precisely as if it were perfectly well preserved in all its parts. Were the genera, which have a wide range upon the earth and in the ocean, few, this might be considered as an extraordinary case ; but there is no class of animals and plants which does not contain many genera, more or less cosmopolitan in their geographical distribution.

56 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

The number of animals wliicli have a wide distribution is so great, as far at least as genera are concerned, that, it may even fairly be said that the maj ority of them have an extensive geographical range, This amounts to the most complete evidence, that, as far as these genera extend in their geographical distribution, animals, the structure of which is identical within this range of distribution, are entirely beyond the influence of physical agents, unless these agents have the power, notwithstanding their extreme diversity, within these very same geographical limits, to produce absolutely identical structures of the most diversified types.1

It must be remembered here that there are genera of Vertebrata, of Articulata, of Mollusks, and of Eadiata which occupy the same identical and wide geographical distribution ; and that, while the structure of their respective representatives is identical over the whole area, as Vertebrata, as Articulata, as Mollusks, as Radiata, they are at the same time built upon the most different plans. I hold this fact to be in itself a complete demonstration of the entire independence of the structure of animals of

1 An example may serve to bring circumscribed within the narrowest

this argument nearer to those not limits; although a large number of

familiar with Natural History. From them have representatives in other

the Arctic Ocean to Cape Horn, Ame- parts of the world. It is plain, thererica embraces such a variety of phy- fore, that physical agents cannot be

sical features, that we may well sup- the cause of the existence of any of

pose all the natural causes to which them, unless these agents act with

the origin of organized beings could discrimination, producing mammalia

be ascribed, to be or to have been of the same genus over the whole

active within this range. Now there continent, and by the side of them

is a peculiar kind of fox in Arctic other animals belonging to the most

America ; others occur in the tern- diversified types, and agreeing with

perate zone of that continent, and the extra-American representatives

others again in more southern lati- of these types in every essential featudes. With them the most diversified tare. This is tantamount to assuming

animals of every class are associated, that such an action is the work of a

among which there are many types, rational being, the geographical range of which is

physical agents ; and I may add that the vegetable kingdom presents a series of facts identical with these. This proves that all the higher relations among animals and plants are determined by other causes than by mere physical influences.

While all the representatives of the same genus are identical in structure,1 the different species of one genus differ only in their size, in the proportions of their parts, in their ornamentation, in their relations to the surrounding elements, etc. The geographical range of these species varies so greatly that it cannot afford in itself a criterion for the distinction of species. It appears further, that while some species which are scattered over very extensive areas, occupy disconnected parts of that area, other species, closely allied to one another, and which are generally designated under the name of representative species, occupy respectively such disconnected sections of these areas. The question then arises, how these natural boundaries assigned to every species are established. It is now generally believed that each species had, in the beginning, some starting point, from which it has spread over the whole range of the area it now occupies ; and, that this starting point is still indicated by the prevalence or concentration of such species in some particular part of its natural area, which, on that account, is called its centre of distribution or centre of creation, while at the external limits of the area its representatives thin out, as it were, occurring more sparsely, and sometimes in a reduced condition.

It was a great progress in our science, when the more extensive and precise knowledge of the geographical distribution of organized beings forced upon its cultivators

1 See hereafter, Chap. II, Sect. 5.

58 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the conviction, that neither animals nor plants could have originated upon one and the same spot upon the surface of the earth, and thence have spread more and more widely until the whole globe became inhabited. It was indeed an immense progress which freed science from the fetters of an old prejudice. For now that we have the facts of the case before us, it is difficult to conceive how, by assuming such a gradual dissemination from one spot, the diversity which exists in every part of the globe could ever have seemed to be explained. But, even to grant distinct centres of distribution for each species, within, their natural boundaries, is only to meet the facts half way, as there are innumerable relations between the animals and plants found everywhere associated together, which must be considered as primitive, and cannot be the result of successive adaptation. And if this be so, it would follow that all animals and plants have occupied, from the beginning, those natural boundaries within which they stand one to another in such harmonious relations.1 Pines have originated in forests, heaths in heaths, grasses in prairies, bees in hives, herrings in shoals, buffaloes in herds, men in nations.2 I see a striking proof that this must have been the case in the circumstance, that representative species, which, as distinct species, must have had from the beginning a different and distinct geographical range, frequently occupy sections of an area simultaneously inhabited by the representatives of other species, which are perfectly identical over the whole area. By way of an example, I would mention the European and the American Widgeon,

1 AGASSIZ (L.), Geographical Dis- 3 AGASSIZ (L.), The Diversity of tribution of Animals, Christian Ex- Origin of the Human Races, Chrisainmer; Boston, 1850, 8vo. (March.) tiaii Examiner; Boston, 1850, 8vo.

(Anas Penelope and A. americana,) or the American and the European Ked- headed Ducks, (A. ferina and A, eryihrocephala,) which inhabit respectively the northern parts of the Old and New World in summer, and migrate further south in these same continents during winter; while the Mallard (A. Boschas) and the Scaup Duck (A. mar Ha) are as common in North America as in Europe. What do these facts tell 1 That all these birds originated together somewhere where they no longer occur, and established themselves in the end within the limits which they now occupy ? or, that they originated either in Europe or America, where, it is true, they do not live all together, but only a part of them ? or, that they really originated within the natural boundaries which they now occupy? I suppose with sensible readers I need only follow out the conclusions flowing from the last supposition. If so, the American Widgeon and the American Red-headed Duck

o

originated in America, and the European Widgeon and the European Red-headed Duck in Europe. But what of the Mallard and the Scaup, which are equally common upon the two continents 1 Did they first appear in Europe, or in America, or simultaneously upon the two continents ? Without entering into further details, — as I have only desired to lay clearly a distinct case before my readers, from which the character of the argument, which applies to the whole animal kingdom, may be fully understood, — I say that facts lead, step by step, to the inference, that such birds as the Mallard and the Scaup originated simultaneously and separately in Europe and in America ; and that all animals originated in vast numbers, indeed, in the average number characteristic of their species, over the whole of their geographical area, whether its surface be continuous, or disconnected by sea, lakes, or

rivers, or by differences of level above the sea, etc. Tlie details of the geographical distribution of animals exhibit, indeed, too much discrimination to admit for a moment that it could be the result of accident ; that is, the result of the accidental migrations of the animals, or of the accidental dispersion of the seeds of plants. The greater the uniformity of structure of these widely distributed organized beings, the less probable does their accidental distribution appear. I confess that nothing has ever surprised me so much as to see the perfect identity of the most delicate microscopic structures of animals and plants from the remotest parts of the world. It was this striking identity of structure in the same types, this total independence of the essential characteristics of animals and plants of their distribution under the most extreme climatic differences known upon our globe, which led me to distrust the belief, then almost universal, that organized beings are influenced by physical causes to a degree which essentially modifies their character.

The most interesting result of the earliest investigations of the fauna of Australia was the discovery of a type of animals, the Marsupialia, prevailing upon this continental island, which are unknown in almost every other part of the world. Every student of Natural History now knows that there are no Quadrumana in New Holland, neither Monkis nor Makis: no Insectivora, neither Shrews nor Moles, nor Hedgehogs ; no true Carnivora,1 neither Bears, nor Weasels, nor Foxes, nor Viverras, nor Hyoenas, nor

1 Doubts are entertained respecting the origin of the Dingo, the only beast of prey of New Holland.

Wild Cats; no Edentata, neither Sloths, nor Tatous, nor Ant-Eaters, nor Pangolins ; no Pachyderms, neither Elephants, nor Hippopotamuses, nor Hogs, nor Rhinoceroses, nor Tapirs, nor Wild Horses; no Ruminantia, neither Camels, nor Llamas, nor Deer, nor Goats, nor Sheep, nor Bulls, etc.; and yet the Mammalia of Australia are almost as diversified as those of any other continent. In the words of Waterhouse,1 who has studied them with particular care, " the Marsupialia present a remarkable diversity of structure, containing herbivorous, carnivorous and insectivorous species ; indeed, we find amongst the Marsupial animals analogous representations of most of the other orders of Mammalia. The Quadrumana are represented by the Phalaugers, the Carnivora by the Dasyuri, the Insectivora by the small Phascogales, the Ruminantia by the Kangaroos, and the Edentata by the Monotremes. The Cheiroptera are not represented by any known Marsupial animals, and the Rodents are represented by a single species only. The hiatus is filled up, however, in both cases, by placenta! species ; for Bats and Rodents are tolerably numerous in Australia ; and, if we except the Dog, which, it is probable, has been introduced by man, these are the only placenta! Mammalia found in that continent." Nevertheless, all these animals have in common some most striking anatomical characters, which distinguish them from all other Mammalia, and stamp them as one of the most natural groups of that class. Their mode of reproduction, and the connection of the young with the mother, are different; so also is the structure of their

brain, etc.2

Now, the suggestion that such peculiarities could be

1 WATERHOUSE (G. A.), Natural pialia' in Todd's Cyclopaedia of Anat. History of the Mammalia; London, and Physiol.; London, 1841, 8vo.; 1848, 2 vols. Svo., vol. i, p. 4. and several elaborate papers by him-

2 See OWEN (R.), article ' Marsu- self and others, quoted there.

62 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

produced by physical agents is for ever set aside by the fact that neither the birds nor the reptiles, nor, indeed, any other animals of New Holland, depart in such a manner from the ordinary character of their representatives in other parts of the world ; unless it can be shown that such agents have the power of discrimination, and may produce, under the same conditions, beings which agree, and others which do not agree, with those of different continents ; not to speak again of the simultaneous occurrence, in that same continent, of other heterogeneous types of Mammalia, Bats and Kodents, which occur there as well as everywhere else in other continents. Nor is New Holland the only part of the world which nourishes animals highly diversified among themselves, and yet presenting common characters strikingly different from those of the other members of their type, circumscribed within definite geographical areas. Almost every part of the globe exhibits some such group, either of animals or of plants, and every class of organized beings contains some native natural group, more or less extensive, more or less prominent, which is circumscribed within peculiar geographical limits.

Among Mammalia we might quote the Quadrumana, the representatives of which, though greatly diversified in the Old as well as in the New World, differ and agree respectively in many important points of their structure; also the Edentata of South America. Among Birds, the Humming Birds, which constitute a very natural, beautiful, and numerous family, all of which are nevertheless confined to America only, as the Pheasants are to the Old World.1 Among Eeptiles, the Crocodiles of the Old World

1 What are called Pheasants in The American Pheasants, so called, America do not even belong to the are genuine Grouse, same family as the eastern Pheasants.

compared with those of America. Among Fishes, the family of Lcibyrinthici, which is confined to the Indian and Pacific Oceans; and that of Goniodonts, which is limited to the fresh waters of South America, as that of Cestracionts is to the Pacific. The comparative anatomy of Insects is not sufficiently far advanced to furnish striking examples of this kind. Among Insects, however, remarkable for their form, which are limited to particular regions, may be quoted the genus Mormolyce of Java, Pneumora of the Cape of Good Hope, Belostoma of North America, Fulcjora of China, etc. The geographical distribution of Crustacea has been treated in such a masterly manner by Dana, in his great work upon the Crustacea of the United States Exploring Expedition, vol. xiii, p. 1451, that I need only refer to it for numerous examples of localized types of this class, and also as a model how to deal with such subjects. Among Worms, the genus Peripates of Guiana deserves to be mentioned. Among Cephalopods, Nautilus of Amboyna. Among Gasteropods, the genus lo of the western waters of the United States. Among Acephala, the genus Trigonia of New Holland, certain Naiades of the United States, the genus Aetlieria of the Nile. Among Echinoderms, Pentacrinus of the West Indies, Culcita of Zanzibar, Amblypneustes of the Pacific, Temnopleurus of the Indian Ocean, Dendraster of the western coast of North America. Among Acalephs, Berenice of New Holland. Among Polypi, the true Fungidce of the Indian and Pacific Oceans, the genus Renitta of the Atlantic, etc.

Many more examples might be quoted, were our knowledge of the geographical distribution of the lower animals more precise. But these will suffice to show, that, whether high or low, aquatic or terrestrial, there are types of ani-

64 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

mals remarkable for their peculiar structure which are circumscribed within definite limits, and this localization of special structures is a striking confirmation of the views expressed already in another connection, that the organization of animals, whatever it is, is adapted to various and identical conditions of existence, and can in no way be considered as originating from these conditions.

Ever since I have become acquainted with the reptiles inhabiting different parts of the world, I have been struck with a remarkable fact, not yet noticed by naturalists, as fur as I know, and of which no other class exhibits such striking examples. This fact is, that among Saurians, as well as among Batrachians, there are families, the representatives of which, though scattered all over the globe, form the most natural connected series, in which every link represents one particular degree of development. The Scincoids,1 among Saurians, are one of these families. It contains about one hundred species, referred by Dumeril and Bibron to thirty-one genera, which, in the development of their organs of locomotion, exhibit most remarkable combinations, as illustrated in a diagram on opposite page.

Fully to appreciate the meaning of this diagram, it ought to be remembered that the animals belonging to this family are considered here in two different points of

1 For the characters of the family, COCTEAU, Etudes sur les Scincoides; see DUMERIL et BIBRON, Erpetologie Paris, 1836, 4to. fig. general e, vol. 5, p. 511. See also

view. In the first place, their zoological relations to one another are expressed by the various combinations of the structures of their legs ; some having four legs, and these are the most numerous, others only two legs, which are always the hind legs, and others no legs at all. Again, these legs may have only one toe, or two, three, four, or five toes, and the number of toes may vary between the fore and hind legs. The classification adopted here is based upon these characters. In the second place, the geographical distribution is noticed. But it is at once apparent that the home of these animals stands in no relation whatsoever to their zoological affinities. On the contrary, the most remote genera may occur in the same country, while the most closely related may live far apart.

With/ve toes to the fore feet as well as to the hind feet : Trojndophorus, 1 species, Cochin-China. — Scincus, I sp., Syria, North and West Africa. — Sphenops, 1 sp.. Egypt. — Diploglossus, 6 sp., West Indies and Brazils. — Ampltiglossus, 1 sp., Madagascar. — Gongylus, with 7 subgenera: Gongylus, 2 sp., Southern Europe, Egypt, TenerifFe, Isle de France; Eumeces, 11 sp., East and West Indies, South America, Vanikoro, New Ireland, New Guinea, Pacific Islands ; Euprepes, 13 sp., West Coast of Africa, Cape of Good Hope, Egypt, Abyssinia, Seychelles, Madagascar, New Guinea, East Indies, Sunda Islands, Manilla ; Plestiodon, 5 sp., Egypt, Algiers, China, Japan, United States ; Lygosoma, 19 sp., New Holland, New Zealand, Java, New Guinea, Timor, East Indies, Pacific Islands, United States ; Liolopisma, 1 sp., Mauritius and Manilla; Tropidolopisma, 1 sp., New Holland. — Cydodus, 3 sp., New Holland and Java. — Trachysaurus, 1 sp., New Holland. — Ablepharus, 4 sp., South-eastern Europe, New Holland, Pacific Islands.

With five toes to the fore feet and four toes to the hind feet: Campsodactylus, 1 sp., Bengal.

With four toes to the fore feet and five toes to the hind feet : Heteropus, 3 sp., Africa, New Holland, Isle de France. — Gymnophthalmus, 1 sp., W. Indies and Brazil.

66 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

With four toes to the fore feet and four toes to the hind feet : Tetradactylus, 1 sp., New Holland. The genus Chalcides, of the allied family

Chalcidioids, exhibits another example of this combination. With/<rar toes to the fore feet and three toes to the hind feet : No examples

known of this combination.

With three toes to the fore feet and four toes to the hind feet : Not known. With three toes to the fore feet and three toes to the hind feet: Hemiergis,

1 sp., New Holland. — Seps, 1 sp., S. Europe and N. Africa. — Nessia,

1 sp., Origin unknown.

With three toes to the fore feet and two toes to the hind feet : Not known. With two toes to the fore feet and three toes to the hind feet: Ileteromeles,

I sp., Algiers. — Lerista, 1 sp., New Holland. With two toes to the fore feet and two toes to the hind feet: Chelomeles, \

sp., New Holland. With two toes to the fore feet and one toe to the hind feet: Brachymeles, 1

sp., Philippine Islands. With one toe to the fore feet and two toes to the hind feet : Brachystopus,

1 sp., South Africa. With one toe to the fore feet and one toe to the hind feet: Evesia, 1 sp.,

Origin unknown.

No representatives are known with fore legs only ; but this structural combination occurs in the allied family of the Chalcidioids. The representatives with hind legs only present the following combinations:

With two toes: Scelotes, 1 sp., Cape Good Hope.

With one toe: Propeditus, 1 sp., Cape Good Hope and New Holland.

Op/tiodes, 1 sp., South America.

Ilysteropus, 1 sp., New Holland.

Lialis, 1 sp., New Holland.

Dibamus, 1 sp., New Guinea.

Anguis, 1 sp., Europe, Western Asia, Northern Africa. Ophiomorus, 1 sp., Morea, Southern Russia, and Algiers. Acontias, 1 sp., Southern Africa, Cape Good Hope. Typhlina, 1 sp., Southern Africa, Cape Good Hope.

Who can look at this diagram and not recognize, in its arrangement, the combinations of thought ? This is so obvious, that while considering it one might almost overlook the fact, that, while it was drawn up to classify ani-

mals preserved in the Museum of the Jardin des Plantes in Paris, it is in reality inscribed in nature by these animals themselves, and is only read off when they are brought together, and compared side by side, But it contains an important element for our discussion. The series is not built up of equivalent representatives in its different terms, some combinations being richly endowed, others numbering a few, or even a single genus, and others again being altogether disregarded. Such freedom indicates selection, and not the working of the law of

necessitv. j

And if, from a contemplation of this remarkable series, we turn our attention to the indications relating to the geographical distribution of these so closely linked genera inscribed after their names, we at once perceive that they are scattered all over the globe, but not so that there can be any connection between the combinations of their structural characters and their homes. The types without legs are found in Europe, in Western Asia, in Northern Africa, and at the Cape of Good Hope ; the types with hind legs only, and with one single toe, at the Cape of Good Hope, in South America, New Holland, and New Guinea ; those with two toes at the Cape of Good Hope only. Among the types with four legs, the origin of those with but one toe to each foot is unknown ; those with one toe in the fore foot and two in the hind foot are from South Africa ; those with two toes in the fore foot and one in the hind foot occur in the Philippine Islands ; those with two toes to all four feet in New Holland ; those with three toes to the hind feet and two to the fore feet, in Algiers and New Holland. None are known with three toes to the fore feet and two to the hind feet. Those with three toes to the fore feet inhabit Europe, Northern Africa,

F 2

G8 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

and New Holland. There are none with three and four toes, either in the fore feet or in the hind feet. Those with four toes to the fore feet live in New Holland ; those with five toes to the fore feet and four to the hind feet, in Bengal ; and with four toes to the fore feet and five to the hind feet, in Africa, the West Indies, the Brazils, and New Holland. Those with five toes to all four feet have the widest distribution ; and yet they are so scattered that no single zoological province presents any thing like a complete series. On the contrary, the mixture of some of the representatives with perfect feet with others which have them rudimentary in almost every fauna, excludes still more decidedly the idea of any influence of physical agents upon this development.

Another similar series, not less striking, may be traced among the tailed Batrachians ; for the characters of which I may refer to the works of Holbrook, Tsclmdi, and Baird,1 even though they have not presented these animals in this connection ; as the characteristics of the genera will of themselves suggest their order, and further details upon this subject would be superfluous for my purpose, the more so as I have already discussed the gradation of these animals elsewhere.2

Similar series, though less conspicuous and more limited, may be traced in every class of the animal kingdom, not only among living types, but also among the representatives of past geological ages ; which adds to the interest of such series, as showing that such combinations include not only the element of space, indicating omni-

1 HOLBROOK (J. E.), North Ameri- trachia ; Journal Acad. Nat. Science,

can II erpetology; Philadelphia, 1842, of Philadelphia, 2nd series, vol. i,

4to., 5th vol. — TSCHUDI (J. J.), Clas- 1849, 4to.

sification cler Batrachier; Neuchatel,- 2 AGASSIZ (L.), Twelve Lectures

1838, 4to. — BAIRD (Sp. F.), Revision on Comparative Embryology; Boston,

of the North American Tailed Ba- 1849, 8vo., p. 8.

presence, but also that of time, which involves prescience. The series of Crinoids, that of Brachiopods through all geological ages, that of the Nautiloids, that of Ammoni-

O <D o

toids from the Triassic to the Cretaceous formations inclusive, that of Trilobites from the lowest beds up to the Carboniferous period, that of Ganoids through all the formations ; then, again, among living animals in the class of Mammalia, the series of Monkeys of the Old World especially, that of Carnivora, from the Seals through the Plantigrades to the Digitigrades ; in the class of Birds, that of the Wading Birds, and that of the Gallinaceous Birds ; in the class of Fishes, that of Pleuronectids and Gadoids, that of Skates and Sharks ; in the class of Insects, that of Lepidoptera from the Tineina to the Papilioiiina ; in the class of Crustacea, that of the Decapods in particular ; in the class of Worms, that of the Nudibranchiata and that of the Dorsibranchiata especially ; in the class of Cephalopoda, that of the Sepioids ; in the class of Gasteropoda, that of the Nudibranchiata in particular ; in the class of Acephala that of the Ascidians and that of the Oysters in the widest sense ; in the class of Echinoderms, those of the Holothurians and Asterioids ; in the class of Acalephs, that of the Hydroids ; in the class of Polyps, that of the Halcyonoids, of the Atroeoids, etc., etc., deserve particular attention, and may be studied with great advantage in reference to the points under consideration. For everywhere do we observe in them, with reference to space and to time, the thoughtful combinations of an active mind.

o

But it ought not to be overlooked, that, while some types represent strikingly connected series, there are others in which nothing of the kind seems to exist, and the diversity of which involves other considerations.

70 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

The relation between the size and the structure of animals has been very little investigated, though even the most superficial survey of the animal kingdom may satisfy any one, that there is a decided relation between size and structure among them. Not that I mean to assert that size and structure form parallel series, or that all animals of one branch, or even those of the same class or the same order, agree very closely with one another in reference to size. This element of their organization is not denned within those limits, though the Vertebrata, as a whole, are larger than Articulata, Mollusks, or Radiata; though Mammalia are larger than Birds, Crustacea larger than Insects ; though Cetacea are larger than Herbivora, these larger than Carnivora, etc. The true limit in the organization of animals, within which size acquires a real importance, is that of families, that is, groups which are essentially distinguished by their form ; as if form and size were correlative as far as the structure of animals is concerned. The representatives of natural families are, indeed, closely similar in that respect. The greatest differences within these limits are hardly anywhere as much as ten to one, and frequently not more than as two to one. A few examples, selected from among the most natural families, will show this. Omitting mankind, on account of the objections which might be made against the idea that it embraces any original diversity, let us consider the different families of Monkeys, of Bats, of Insectivores, of Carnivores, of Rodents, of Pachyderms, of Ruminants, etc, ; among Birds, the Vul-

tures, the Eagles, the Falcons, the Owls, the Swallows, the Finches, the Warblers, the Humming Birds, the Doves, the Wrens, the Ostriches, the Herons, the Plovers, the Gulls, the Ducks, the Pelicans ; among Reptiles, the Crocodiles, the different families of Cheloniaus, of Lizards, of Snakes, the Frogs proper, the Toads, etc. ; among Fishes, the Sharks and Skates, the Herrings, the Codfishes, the Cyprinnodonts, the Chsetodonts, the Lophobranches, the Ostracionts, etc. ; among Insects, the Sphingoidse or the Tineiua, the Longicorns or the Coccinellina, the Bomboidse or the Brachonidse ; among Crustacea, the Cancroidea or the Pinnitheroidse, the Limuloidre or the Cypridoidse, and the Rotifera ;l among Worms, the Dorsibranchiata or the Naioidse ; among Mollusks, the Stroniboidse or the Buccinoidse, the Helicinoidae or the Limnseoidse, the Chamacea or the Cycladoidce ; among Radiata, the Asterioidse and the Ophiuroidse, the Hydroids and the Discophorse, the Astrseoidse and the Actiiiioidae.

Having thus recalled some facts which go to show what are the limits within which size and structure are more directly connected,2 it is natural to infer, that, since size is such an important character of species, and extends distinctly its cycle of relationship to the families or even further, it can as little be supposed to be determined by

1 See DANA'S Crustacea, p. 1409 the least bearing upon the question

and 1411. of origin, or even the maintenance of

- These remarks about the average any species, but only upon the consize of animals in relation to their dition of individuals, respecting which structure, cannot fail to meet with more will be found in Sect. 16. Moresome objections, as it is well known over, it should not be overlooked that that, under certain circumstances, there are limits to these variations, man may modify the normal size of and that, though animals and plants a variety of plants and of domesti- may be placed under influences concated animals, and that, even in their ducive to a more or less voluminous natural state, occasional instances of growth, yet it is chiefly under the extraordinary sizes occur. But this agency of man that such changes neither modifies the characteristic reach their extremes. (See also Sect. average, nor is it a case which has 15.)

72 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

physical agents as the structure itself, with which it is so closely connected, both bearing similar relations to these

agents.

Life is regulated by a quantitative element in the structure of all organized beings, which is as fixed and as precisely determined as every other feature depending more upon the quality of the organs or their parts. This shows the more distinctly the presence of a specific, immaterial principle in every kind of animals and plants. All begin their existence in the condition of ovules of a microscopic size, which exhibit a wonderful similarity of structure. And yet these primitive ovules, so identical at first in their physical constitution, never produce any thing different from the parents ; and all reach respectively, through a succession of unvarying changes, the same final result, the reproduction of a new being identical with the parents. How does it happen then, that, if physical agents have such a powerful influence in shaping the character of organized beings, we see no trace of it in the innumerable instances in which these ovules are discharged into the elements in which they undergo their further development, at a period when the germ they contain has not yet assumed any of those more determined characteristics which distinguish the full-grown animal or the perfect plant 1 Do physicists know any law of the material world which presents such analogy to these phenomena, that it could be considered as accounting for them ?

In this connection, it should be further remembered that these cycles of size characteristic of different families are entirely different for animals of different types, though living together under identical circumstances.

It lias just been remarked, that animals of different types, even when living together, are framed in structures of different size. Yet, life is so closely combined with the elements of nature, that each type shows decided relations, within its own limits, to these elements, as far as size is concerned.1 The aquatic Mammalia, as a whole, are larger than the terrestrial ones ; so are the aquatic Birds and the aquatic Eeptiles. In families which are essentially terrestrial, the species which take to the water are generally larger than those which remain permanently terrestrial, as, for instance, the Polar Bear, the Beaver, the Coypu, and the Capybara. Among the different families of aquatic Birds, those of their representatives which are more terrestrial in their habits are generally smaller than those which live more permanently in the water. The same relation is observed in the different families of Insects which number aquatic and terrestrial species. It is further remarkable, that, among aquatic animals, the fresh- water types are inferior in size to the marine ones ; the marine Turtles are all larger than the largest inhabitants of our rivers and ponds ; the more aquatic Trionyx larger than the Emyds ; and, among these, the more aquatic Chelydra larger than the true Emys, and these generally larger than the more terrestrial Clemmys or the Cistudo.

1 GEOFPROY ST. HILAIRE (IsiD.), etc., quoted above, p. 46; and BE-

Recherches zoologiques et physiolo- FOLD (A. TON), Untersuchungen liber

giques sur les variations de la taille die Vertheilung von Wasser, orgauchez les Aniniaux et dans les races ischer Materie und anorganischen

humaines; Paris, 1831, 4to. — See also VerbindungenirnThierreiche,Zeitsch.

my paper upon the Natural Relations f. wiss. Zool., 1857, vol. 8, p. 487. between Animals and the Elements,

74 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

The class of Fishes has its largest representatives in the sea ; fresh water fishes are on the whole dwarfs in comparison to their marine relatives, and the largest of them, our Sturgeons and Salmons, go to the sea, The same relations obtain among Crustacea ; and to be satisfied of the fact, we need only compare our freshwater Crawfishes with the Lobsters, our Apus with Limulus, etc. Among Worms, the Earthworms and Leeches furnish a still wider range of comparison, when contrasted with the marine types. Among Gasteropods and Acephala, this obtains to the same extent ; the most gigantic Ampullarise and Anodontee are small in comparison to certain species of Fusus, Voluta, Tritonmrn, Cassis, Strombus, or to the Tridacna. Among Eadiata even, which are all marine with the exception of the single genus Hydra, this rule holds good, as the fresh water Hydroids are among the smallest Acalephs known.

This coincidence, upon such an extensive scale, seems to be most favourable to the view that animals are modified by the immediate influence of the elements ; yet I consider it as affording one of the most striking proofs that there is no causal connexion between them. Were it otherwise, the terrestrial and the aquatic representatives of the same family could not be so similar as they are in all their essential characteristics, which actually stand in no relation whatsoever to these elements. That which constitutes the Bear in the Polar Bear is not its adaptation to an aquatic mode of existence. That which makes the Whales Mammalia bears no relation to the sea. That which constitutes Earthworms, Leeches, and Eunice members of one class has no more connexion with their habitat, than the peculiarities of structure which unite Man, Monkeys, Bats, Lions, Seals, Beavers, Mice, and Whales into one class.

Moreover, animals of different types, living in the same element, have no sort of similarity as to size. The aquatic Insects, the aquatic Mollusks, fall in with the average size of their class, as well as the aquatic Reptiles and the aquatic Birds, or the aquatic Mammalia ; but there is no common average for either terrestrial or aquatic animals of different classes taken together. And in this lies the evidence that organized beings are independent of the mediums in which they live, as for as their origin is concerned, though it is plain that, when created, they were made to suit the element in which they were placed.

To me these facts show that the phenomena of life are manifested in the physical world, and not through or by it ; that organized beings are made to conquer and assimilate to themselves the materials of the inorganic world ; that they maintain their original characteristics, notwithstanding the unceasing action of physical agents upon them. And I confess I cannot comprehend how beings so entirely independent of these influences could be produced by them.

It was a great step in the progress of science when it was ascertained that species have fixed characters, and that they do not change in the course of time. But this fact, for which we are indebted to Cuvier,1 has acquired a still greater importance since it has also been established, that even the most extraordinary changes in the mode of existence, and in the conditions under which animals

1 CUVIER (G.), Rechcrches sur les Paris, 1821, 5 vols., 4to., fig. vol. i, ossements fossiles, etc., Nouv. edit.; sur 1'Ibis, p. cxli.

7(5 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

are placed, have no more influence upon their essential characters than the lapse of time.

The facts bearing upon these two subjects are too well known to require special illustration. I will, therefore, allude only to a few points, to avoid even the possibility of a misapprehension of my statements. That animals of different geological periods differ specially, en masse, from those of preceding or following formations, is a fact satisfactorily ascertained. Between two successive geological periods, then, changes have taken place among animals and plants. But none of those primordial forms of life which naturalists call species are known to have changed during any of these periods. It cannot be denied, that the species of different successive periods are supposed by some naturalists to derive their distinguishing features from changes which have taken place in those of preceding ages ; but this is a mere supposition, supported neither by physiological nor by geological evidence ; and the assumption, that animals and plants change in a similar manner during one and the same period, is equally gratuitous. On the contrary, it is known, by the evidence furnished by the Egyptian monuments, and by the most careful comparison between animals found in the tombs of Egypt with living specimens of the same species obtained in the same country, that there is not the shadow of a difference between them for a period of about five thousand years. These comparisons, first instituted by Cuvier, have proved, that, as far as it has been possible to carry back the investigation, it does not afford the beginning of an evidence that species change in the course of time, if the comparisons be limited to the same great cosmic epoch. Geology only shows that at different periods1

1 I trust no reader will be so igno- to infer from the use of the word rant of the facts here alluded to as " period" for different eras and epochs

there have existed different species ; but no transition from those of a preceding into those of the following

of great length, — each of which is characterized by different animals, — that the differences these animals exhibit is in itself evidence of a change in the species. The question is, whether any changes take place during one or any of these periods. It is almost incredible how loosely some people will argue upon this point from a want of knowledge of the facts, even though they seem to reason logically. A distinguished physicist has recently taken up this subject of the immutability of species, and called in question the logic of those who uphold it. I will put his argument into as few words as possible, and show, I hope, that it does not touch the case. " Changes are observed from one geological period to another ; species which do not exist at an earlier period are observed at a later period, while the former have disappeared ; and, though each species may have possessed its peculiarities unchanged for a lapse of time, the fact that, when long periods are considered, all those of an earlier period are replaced by new ones at a later period, proves that species change in the end, provided a sufficiently long period of time is granted." I have nothing to object to the statement of facts, as far as it goes, but I maintain that the conclusion is not logical. It is true that species are limited to particular geological epochs; and it is equally true, that, in all geological formations, those of successive periods are different one from the other. But because they so differ, does it follow that they have themselves changed, and not been exchanged for, or replaced by, others 1 The length of time taken for the operation has nothing to do with the argument. Granting myriads of years for each period, no matter how many or how few, the question remains simply this : When the change takes place,does it take place spontaneously,

under the action of physical agents, according to their law, or is it produced by the intervention of an agency not at work in that way before or afterwards 1 A comparison may explain my view more fully. Let a lover of the fine arts visit a museum arranged systematically, and in which the works of the different schools are placed in chronological order. As he passes from one room to another, he beholds changes as great as those which the palaeontologist observes in passing from one system of rocks to another. But, because these works bear a closer resemblance as they belong to one or the other school or to periods following one another closely, would the critic be in any way justified in assuming that the earlier works have changed into those of a later period, or in denying that they are the works of artists living and active at the time of their production 'I The question about the immutability of species is identical with this supposed case. It is not because species have lasted for a longer or shorter time in past ages that naturalists consider them as immutable, but because, in the whole series of geological ages, taking the entire lapse of time which has passed since the first introduction of animals or plants upon earth, not the slightest evidence has yet been produced that species are actually transformed one into the other. We only know that they are different at different periods, as are works of art of different periods and of different schools ; but, as long as we have no other data to reason upon than those which Geology has furnished to this day, it is as unphilosophical and illogical, because such differences exist, to assume that species do change, and have changed, — that is,are transformed, or have been transformed, — as it would be to maintain that works of art change in the course of time.

78 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

epoch has ever been noticed anywhere ; and the question alluded to here is to be distinguished from that of the origin of the differences in the bulk of species belonging to two different geological eras. The question we are now examining involves only the fixity or mutability of species during one epoch, one era, one period, in the history of our globe. And nothing furnishes the slightest argument in favour of their mutability. On the contrary, every modern investigation1 has gone only to confirm the results first obtained by Cuvier, and his views, that species are fixed.

It is something to be able to show by monumental evidence and by direct comparison, that animals and plants have undergone no change for a period of about five thousand years.2 This result has had the greatest influence upon the progress of science, especially with reference to the consequences to be drawn from the occurrence in the series of geological formations of organized beings as highly diversified in each epoch as those of the present day;3 and it has laid the foundation for the conviction, now universal among weU informed naturalists, that this globe has been in existence for innumerable ages, and that the length of time elapsed since it first became inhabited cannot be counted in years. Even the length of the period

We do not know how organized l KUNTH, Recherches snr les

beings have originated, it is true ; plantes trouvees dans les tombeaux

and no naturalist can be prepared to egyptiens ; Ann. des scien. nat., vol.

account for their appearance in the viii, 1826, p. 411. beginning, or for their difference in 2 It is not for me to discuss the

different periods; butenoughisknown degree of reliability of the Egyptian

to repudiate the assumption of their chronology; but, as far as it goes, it

transmutation, as it does not explain shows that, from the oldest periods

the facts, and shuts out further at- ascertained, animals have been what

tempts at proper investigations. See they are now.

BADEN POWELL'S Essays, quoted 3 See my paper upon The Primiabove, p. 412 et seq., and Essay 3rd, tive Diversity, etc., quoted above,

generally. p. 35.

to which we belong is still a problem, notwithstanding the precision with which certain systems of chronology would fix the creation of man.1 There are, however, many circumstances which show that the animals now living have been for a much longer period inhabitants of our globe than is generally supposed. It has been possible to trace the formation and growth of our coral reefs, especially in Florida,2 with sufficient precision to ascertain that it must take about eight thousand years for one of those coral walls to rise from its foundation to the level of the surface of the ocean. There are, around the southernmost extremity of Florida alone, four such reefs, concentric with one another, which can be shown to have grown up one after the other. This gives, for the beginning of the first of these reefs, an age of over thirty thousand years (nay, probably, over one hundred thousand years) ; and yet the the corals by which they were all built up are the same identical species in all of them. These facts, then, furnish evidence as direct as we can obtain in any branch of physical inquiry, that some, at least, of the species of animals now existing, have been in existence over thirty thousand years,3 and have not undergone the slightest change during the whole of that period.4 And yet these

1 NOTT and GLIDDON, Types of at one hundred thousand years; so

Mankind, p. 653. slow are the operations of nature.

3 See my paper upon the Reefs of 4 Those who feel inclined to ascribe

Florida, soon to be published in the the differences which exist between

Reports of the United States Coast species of different geological periods

Survey, extracts of which are already to the modifying influence of physiprinted in the Report for 1851, p. 145. cal agents, and who look to the

A renewed examination of the reefs changes now going on among the livof Florida has satisfied me that this ing for the support of such an opiestimate falls short of the reality by nion, and not being satisfied that the

a great deal. The rate of growth of facts just mentioned are sufficient

the corals, ascertained by direct ob- to prove the immutability of speservation, is not half so rapid as I cies, still believe that a longer

had been led to assume at first. period of time would yet do what

3 I am now satisfied that the age of thirty thousand years have not done,

this reef is not overstated, if estimated I beg leave to refer, for further con-

80 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

four concentric reefs are only the most distinct of that region; others, thus far less extensively investigated, lie to the northward: indeed, the whole peninsula of Florida consists altogether of coral reefs annexed to one another in the course of time, and containing only fragments of corals and shells, etc., identical with those now living upon that coast. Now, if a width of five miles is a failaverage for one coral reef, growing under the circumstances under which the concentric reefs of Florida are seen now to follow one another, and this regular succession extends only as far north as Lake Ogeechobee, for two degrees of latitude, this would give about two hundred thousand years for the period of time which was necessary for that part of the peninsula of Florida which lies south of Lake Ogeechobee to rise to its present southern extent above the level of the sea, and during which no changes have taken place in the character of the animals of the Gulf of Mexico.1

It is very prejudicial to the best interests of science to confound questions that are entirely different, merely for the sake of supporting a theory ; and yet this is constantly done, whenever the question of the fixity of species is alluded to. A few more words upon this point, therefore, will not be out of place here.

I will not enter into a discussion upon the question, whether any species are found identically the same in two successive formations, as I have already examined it at full length elsewhere,2 and it may be settled finally, one

sicleration, to the charming song of 3 AGASSIZ (L.), Coquilles tertiaires

Chamisso, entitled Tragische Qes- reputees identiques avec les especes

chichte, and beginning as follows : vivantes ; Nouv. Mem. de la Soc.

"'s war Einer dem'szu Herzenging." Helv. des sc. nat., JSTeuchatel, 1845,

1 According to facts recently ob- vol.7,4to., fig. — AOASSIZ (L.), Etudes

served, and alluded to above, double critiques sur les Mollusques fossiles ;

that time, at least, has elapsed since Neuchatel, 1831-45, 4to., fig. — AGAStheir first appearance in these waters, siz (L.), Monographies d'Echino-

way or the other, without affecting the proposition now under consideration ; for it is plain, that, if such identity could be proved, it would only show more satisfactorily how tenacious species are in their character, to continue to live through all the physical changes which have taken place between two successive geological periods. Again, such identity, once proved, would leave it still doubtful, whether their representatives in two successive epochs are descendants one of the other, as we have already strong evidence in favour of the separate origin of the representatives of the same species in separate geographical areas.1 The case of closely allied but different species occurring in successive periods, yet limited respectively to their epochs, affords, in the course of time, a parallel to the case of closely allied, so-called, representative species occupying different areas in space, which no sound naturalist would now suppose to be derived one from the other. There is no more reason to suppose species equally allied, following one another in time, to be derived one from the other ; and all that has been said in preceding paragraphs respecting the differences observed between species occurring in different geographical areas applies with the same force to species succeeding each other in the course of time.

When domesticated animals and cultivated plants are mentioned as furnishing evidence of the mutability of species, the circumstance is constantly overlooked, or passed over in silence, that the first point to be established respecting them, in order to justify any inference from them against the fixity of species, would be

dermes vivans et fossiles; Neuchatel, 4to., atlas, fol.

1838-42, 4 nos., 4to., fig. — AGASSIZ l See Sect. 10, where the case of

(L.), Recherches sur les Poissons fos- representative species is considersiles; Neuchatel, 1833-44, 5 vols., ed.

G

82 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

to show that each of them has originated from one common stock, which, far from being the case, is flatly contradicted by the positive knowledge we have that the varieties of several of them at least are owing to the entire amalgamation of different species.1 The Egyptian monuments further show that many of these so-called varieties, which are supposed to be the product of time, are as old as any other animals which have been known to man. At all events, we have 110 tradition, no monumental evidence of the existence of any wild animal older than those which represent domesticated animals, already as different among themselves as they are now.2 It is, therefore, quite possible that the different races of domesticated animals were originally distinct species, more or less mixed now, as the different races of men are. Moreover, neither domesticated animals, nor cultivated plants, nor the races of men, are the proper subjects for an investigation respecting the fixity or mutability of species, as all involve already the question at issue in the premises which are assumed in introducing them as evidence in the case. With reference to the different breeds of our domesticated animals, which are known to be produced by the management of man, as well as certain varieties of our cultivated plants, they must be well distinguished from permanent races, which, for aught we know, may be primordial ; for breeds are the result of the fostering care of man : they are the product of the limited influence and control the human mind has over organized beings, and not the free product of mere physical agents. They show, therefore, that even the least important changes winch may take place during one and the same cosmic period, among animals and plants, are controlled by an intellec-

1 Our fowls, for instance. 2 NOTT and GLIDDON., Types of Mankind, p. 386.

tual power, and do not result from the immediate action of physical causes.

So far, then, from disclosing the effects of physical agents, whatever changes are known to take place in the course of time among organized beings appear as the result of an intellectual power, and go therefore to substantiate the view, that all the differences observed among finite beings are ordained by the action of the Supreme Intellect, and not determined by physical causes. This position is still more strengthened, when Ave consider that the differences which exist between different races of domesticated animals and the varieties of our cultivated plants, as well as among the races of men, are permanent under the most diversified climatic influence ; a fact which is daily proved more conclusively by the extensive migrations of the civilized nations, and which stands in direct contradiction to the supposition that such or similar influences could have produced them.

When considering the subject of domestication, in particular, it ought further to lie remembered, that every race of man has its own peculiar kinds of domesticated animals and of cultivated plants, and that these exhibit much fewer varieties among themselves in the case of those races which have had little or no intercourse with other races, than in the case of those nations which have been formed by the mixture of several tribes.

It is often stated, that the ancient philosophers have solved satisfactorily all the great questions interesting to man ; and that modern investigations, though they have grasped with new vigour, and illuminated with new light, all the phenomena of the material world, have added little or nothing in the field of intellectual progress. Is this true ? There is no question so deeply interesting to man

G 2

84 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

as that of his own origin, and the origin of all things, And yet, antiquity had no knowledge concerning it : things were formerly believed, either to be from eternity, or to have been created at one time. Modern science, however, can show in the most satisfactory manner that all finite beings have made their appearance successively and at long intervals, and that each kind of organized beings has existed for a definite period of time in past ages, and that those now living are of comparatively recent origin. At the same time, the order of their succession, and their immutability during such cosmic periods, show no casual connexion with physical agents and the known sphere of action of these agents in nature, but argue in favour of repeated interventions on the part of the Creator. It seems really surprising, that, while such an intervention is admitted by all, except the strict materialists, for the establishment of the laws regulating the inorganic world, it is yet denied by so many physicists with reference to the introduction of organized beings at different successive periods. Does this not show the imperfect acquaintance of these investigators with the conditions under which life is manifested, and with the essential difference between the phenomena of the organic and those of the physical world, rather than furnish any evidence that the organic world is the product of physical causes 1

Every animal and plant stands in certain definite relations to the surrounding world ; some, however, like the

domestic animals and the cultivated plants, are capable of adapting themselves to various conditions more readily than others ; but even this pliability is a characteristic feature, These relations are highly important in a systematic point of view, and deserve the most careful attention on the part of naturalists. Yet, the direction which zoological studies have taken since Comparative Anatomy and Embryology began to absorb almost entirely the attention of naturalists has been very unfavourable to the investigation of the habits of animals, in which their relations to one another and to the conditions under which they live are more especially exhibited. We have to go back to the authors of the preceding century1 for the most interesting accounts of the habits of animals, as among modern writers there are few who have devoted their chief attention to this subject.2 So little, indeed, is its importance now appreciated, that the students of this branch of natural history are hardly acknowledged as peers by their fellow investigators, the anatomists and physiologists, or the systematic zoologists. And yet, without a thorough knowledge of the habits of animals, it will never be possible to ascertain with any degree of precision the true limits of all those species which descriptive zoologists have of late admitted with so much confidence into their

1 REAUMUR (R. ANT. DE), Memoires London, 1818-26, 4 vols. 8vo., fig. — pour servir a 1'histoire des Insecfces; LENZ (H. 0.), Gemeinniitzige Natur- Paris, 1834-42, 6 vols. 4to. fig.— Ro- geschichte; Gotha, 1835, 4 vols. 8vo. SEL (A. J.), Insectenbelustigungen ; — RATZENBURG (J. TH. CH.), Die Niirnberg, 1746-61, 4 vols. 4to., fig.— Forst-Insekten ; Berlin, 1837-44, 3 BUFFON (G. L. LECLERC DE),Histoire vols. 4to. fig., and supplement. — HARuaturelle ge"nerale et particuliere ; RIS (T. W.), Report on the Insects Paris, 1749, 44 vols. 4to., fig. injurious to Vegetation; Cambridge,

2 AUDUBON (J. J.), Ornithological 1841, 1 vol. 8vo.; 2nd edit., A Trea- Biography, or an Account of the Ha- tise on some of the Insects of New bits of the Birds of the United States England which are injurious to Vegeof America; Edinburgh, 1831-49,5 tation ; Boston, 1852, 8vo. The most vols. 8vo. — KIRBY (W.) and SPENCE important work on American In- (W.), An Introduction to Entomology; sects.

86 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

works. And after all, what docs it matter to science, that thousands of species, more or less, should be described and entered in our systems, if we know nothing about them ? A very common defect of the works relating to the habits of animals has no doubt contributed to detract from their value, and to turn the attention in other directions : their purely anecdotic character, or the circumstance that they are too frequently made the occasion for narrating personal adventures. Nevertheless, the importance of this kind of investigation can hardly be overrated ; and it would be highly desk-able that naturalists should turn their attention that way again, now that Comparative Anatomy and Physiology, as well as Embryology, suggest so many new topics of inquiry, and the progress of Physical Geography has laid such a broad foundation for researches of this kind. Then we may learn with more precision, how far the species described from isolated specimens are founded in nature, or how far they are only a particular stage of growth of other species : then we shall know, what is yet too little noticed, how extensive the range of variation is among animals observed in their wild state, or rather, how much individuality there is in each and all living beings. So marked, indeed, is this individuality in many families,— and that of the Turtles affords a striking example of this kind, — that correct descriptions of species can hardly be drawn from isolated specimens, as is constantly attempted to be done. I have seen hundreds of specimens of some of our Chelonians, among which there were not two identical. And truly, the limits of this variability constitute one of the most important characters of many species ; and, without precise information upon this point for every genus, it will never be possible to have a solid basis for

the distinction of species. Some of the most perplexing questions in Zoology and Palaeontology might long ago have been settled, had we had more precise information upon this point, and were it better known, how unequal in this respect different groups of the animal kingdom are, when compared with one another. While the individuals of some species seem all different, and might be described as different species, if seen isolated, or obtained from different regions, those of other species appear as if all cast in one and the same mould. It must be, therefore, at once obvious, how different the results of the comparison of one fauna with another may be, if the species of one have been studied accurately, for a long period, by resident naturalists, and the other is known only from specimens collected by chance travellers ; or, if the fossil representatives of one period are compared with living animals, without both faunas having first been revised according to the same standard.1

Another deficiency, in most works relating to the habits of animals, consists in the absence of general views and of comparisons. We do not learn from them, how far animals related by their structure are similar in their habits, and how far these habits are the expression of their structure. Every species is described as if it stood alone in the world ; and its peculiarities are mostly exaggerated, as if to contrast more forcibly with all others. Yet, how

1 In this respect I would remark should be altogether rejected in the

that most of the cases in which spe- investigation of general questions incific identity has been affirmed be- volviug fundamental principles, as

tween living and fossil species, or untrustworthy observations always

between the fossils of different geolo- are in other departments of science,

gical periods, belong to families which Compare further my paper upon The

present either great similarity or ex- Primitive Diversity and number of

traordiuary variability, and in which animals, quoted above, page 35,

the limits of species are therefore in which this point is specially consivery difficult to establish. Such cases dered.

88 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

interesting would be a comparative study of the mode of life of closely allied species ! how instructive a picture might be drawn of the resemblance there is in this respect between species of the same genus and of the same family ! The more I learn upon this subject, the more am I struck with the similarity in the very movements, the general habits, and even in the intonation of the voices of animals belonging to the same family ; that is to say, between animals agreeing in the main in form, size, structure, and mode of development. A minute study of these habits, of these movements, and of the voice of animals, cannot fail, therefore, to throw additional light upon their natural affinities.

AYhile I thus acknowledge the great importance of such investigations with reference to the systematic arrangement of animals, I cannot help regretting deeply that they are not more highly valued with reference to the information they might secure respecting the animals themselves, independently of any system. How much is there not left to study with respect to every species after it is named and classified ! No one can read Nauman's Natural History of German Birds without feeling that natural history would be much further advanced, if the habits of all other animals had been as accurately investigated and as minutely recorded ; and yet that work contains hardly anything of importance with reference to the systematic arrangement of birds. We scarcely possess the most elementary information necessary to discuss upon a scientific basis the question of the instincts, and in general the faculties of animals, and to compare them together and with those of man,1 not only because so few animals have

1 SCHEITLIN (P.), Versuch einer Stuttgart und Tubingen, 1 840, 2 vols. vollstandigen Thierseelenkuude ; 8vo. — CuviER(FRED.)Resume analyt-

been thoroughly investigated, but because so much fewer still have been watched during their earlier periods of life, when their faculties are first developing ; and yet how attractive and instructive tin's growing age is in every living being ! Who, for instance, could believe for a moment longer that the habits of animals are in any degree determined by the circumstances under which they live, after having seen a little turtle of the genus Chelydra, still enclosed in its egg-shell, which it hardly fills half-way, with a yolk bag as large as itself hanging from its lower surface and enveloped in its amnios and in its allantois, with the eyes shut, snapping as fiercely as if it could bite without killing itself?1 Who can watch the Sunfish (Pomotis vulgaris) hovering over its eggs and protecting them for weeks, or the Catfish (Piinelodus Catus) moving about with its young, like a hen with her brood, without remaining satisfied that the feeling which prompts them in these acts is of the same kind as that which attaches the Cow to her suckling, or the child to its mother ? Is there an investigator, who having once recognized such a similarity between certain faculties of Man and those of the higher animals, can feel prepared, in the present stage of our knowledge, to trace the limit where this community of nature ceases 1 And yet, to ascertain the character of all these faculties there is but one road ; the study of the habits of animals, and a comparison between them and the earlier stages of the development of Man. I confess I could not say in what the mental faculties of a child differ from those of a young Chimpanzee.

Now that we have physical maps of almost every part

ique des observations sur I'instinct et J See Contributions to the Natural

1'intelligence des animaux, par R. History of the United States., Part

Flourens; Ann. Sc. Nat., 2de ser., Ill, which is devoted to the Enibryvol. 12. ology of the Turtles.

00 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

of the globe,1 exhibiting the average temperature of the whole year and of every season upon land and sea ; now that the average elevation of the continents above the sea, and that of the most characteristic parts of their surface,— their valleys, their plains, their table-lands, their mountain systems, — are satisfactorily known ; now that the distribution of moisture in the atmosphere, the limits of the river systems, the prevailing direction of the winds, the course of the currents of the ocean, are not only investigated but mapped down, even in school atlases ; now that the geological structure of nearly all parts of the globe has been determined with tolerable precision,— zoologists have the widest field and the most accurate basis to ascertain all the relations which exist between animals and the world in which they live.

Having thus considered the physical agents with reference to the share which they may have had in calling organized beings into existence, and satisfied ourselves that they are not the cause of their origin, it now remains for us to examine more particularly these relations, as an established fact, as conditions in which animals and plants are placed at the time of their creation, within definite limits of action and reaction between them ; for, though not produced by the influence of the physical world, organized beings live in it, they are born in it, they grow up in it, they multiply in it, they assimilate it to themselves or feed upon it, they have even a modifying influence upon it, within the same limits as the physical world is subservient to every manifestation of their life. It cannot fail, therefore, to be highly interesting and instructive to trace these connexions, even without any

1 BERGHAUS, Physikalischer Atlas; (A. K.), Physical Atlas of Natural Gotha, 1838 et seq., fol. — JOHNSTON, Phenomena; Edinb., 1848, 1 vol. fol.

reference to the manner in which they were established ; and this is the proper sphere of investigation in the study of the habits of animals. The behaviour of each kind towards its fellow-beings, and with reference to the conditions of existence in which it is placed, constitutes a field of inquiry of the deepest interest, as extensive as it is complicated. When properly investigated, especially within the sphere which constitutes more particularly the essential characteristics of each species of animals and plants, it is likely to afford the most direct evidence of the unexpected independence of organized beings of physical influences, if I mistake not the evidence which I have myself been able to collect. What can be more characteristic of different species of animals, than their motions, their plays, their affections, their sexual relations, their care of their young, the dependence of these upon their parents, their instincts, etc., etc. ; and yet there is nothing in all this which depends in the slightest degree upon the nature or the influence of the physical conditions in which they live. Even their organic functions are independent of these conditions to a degree unsuspected, though this is the sphere of their existence which exhibits the closest connexions with the world around.

Functions have so long been considered as the test of the character of organs, that it has almost become an axiom in Comparative Anatomy and Physiology, that identical functions presuppose identical organs. Most of our general works upon comparative anatomy are divided into chapters according to this view. And yet there never was a more incorrect principle, leading to more injurious consequences, more generally adopted. That naturalists should not have repudiated it long ago is the more surprising, as every one must have felt again and

92 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

again how unsound it is. The organs of respiration and circulation of fishes afford a striking example. How long have not their gills been considered as the equivalent of the lungs of the higher Vertebrata, merely because they are breathing organs ; and yet these gills are formed in a very different way from the luogs : they bear very different relations to the vascular system ; and it is now known that they may exist simultaneously with lungs, as in some full-grown Batrachians, and, in the earlier embryonic stages of development, in ah1 Vertebrata. There can now no longer be any doubt that they are essentially different organs, and that their functions afford no test of their nature, and cannot constitute an argument in favour of their organic identity. The same may be said of the vascular system of the fishes. Cuvier1 described their heart as representing the right auricle and the right ventricle, because it propels the blood it contains to the gills, in the same manner as the right ventricle propels the blood to the lungs of the warm blooded animals ; yet embryology has taught us that such a comparison, based upon the special relations of the heart of fishes, is unjustifiable. The air-sacs of certain spiders have also been considered as lungs, because they perform similar respiratory functions ; and yet they are only modified tracheae,2 which are constructed upon such a peculiar plan, and stand in such different relations to the peculiar kind of blood of the Articulata,3 that no homology can be traced between them and the lungs of Vertebrata, any more than between

1 CUVIER (G.), Regn. Anim., 2de 3 BLANCHARD (EM.),De la circula- 6'lit., vol. ii, p. 122. tioii dans les lusectes. Compt. Rend.,

2 LEUCKART (R.), Ueber den Bau 1847, vol. 24, p. 870. — AGASSIZ (L.), und die Bedeutung der sogenannten On the Circulation of the Fluids in Lungen bei den Arachniden, in SIE- Insects, Proceedings of the Arne- BOLD und KOLLIKER'S Zeitschrift, f. rican Association for 1849, page wiss. Zool., 1849, I, p. 246. 140.

these and the so-called lungs of the air breathing Mollusks, whose aerial respiratory cavity is only a modification of the peculiar kind of gills observed in other Mollusks. Examples might easily be multiplied. I will, however, only allude further to the alimentary canal of Insects and Crustacea with its glandular appendages, formed in such a different way from that of Vertebrata, or Mollusks, or Eadiata, to their legs and wings, etc., etc. I might allude also to what has been called the foot in Mollusks, did it not appear like pretending to suppose that any one still entertains an idea that such a name implies any similarity between their locomotive apparatus and that of Vertebrata or Articulata ; and yet the very use of such a name misleads the student; and even some of the coryphees of our science have not freed themselves from such and similar extravagant comparisons, especially with reference to the solid parts of the frame of the lower animals. 1

Tins identification of functions and organs was a natural consequence of the prevailing ideas respecting the influence physical agents were supposed to have upon organized beings. But as soon as it is understood how different the organs may be which perform the same function in animals, organization is at once brought into such a position towards physical agents as to make it utterly impossible to maintain the idea that there is any genetic connexion between them. A fish, a crab, a mussel, living in the same waters, breathing at the same source, should have the same respiratory organs, if the elements in which 'these animals live had anything to do with shaping their organization. I suppose no one can be so short-sighted as to assume that the same physical agents acting upon

1 CARUS (C. G.), Von den Ur-Thei- tes; Leipzig, 1828, 1 vol. fol., p. 61len des Knochen- und Schalengems- 89.

94 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

animals of different types must produce in each peculiar organs, and not to perceive that such an assumption implies the very existence of these animals independently of the physical agents. But this mistake recurs so constantly in discussions upon this and similar topics, that, trivial as it is, it requires to be rebuked.1 On the contrary, when acknowledging an intellectual conception, as the preliminary step in the existence not only of all organized beings, but of everything in nature, how natural it is to find, that, while diversity is introduced into the plan, the complication, and the details of structure of animals, their relations to the surrounding media are equally diversified, and consequently that the same functions may be performed by the most different apparatus !

The relations in which individuals of the same species of animals stand to one another are no less determined and fixed than the relations of species to the surrounding elements, which we have thus far considered. The relations which individual animals bear to one another are of such a character, they they ought long ago to have been considered as sufficient proof that no organized being could ever have been called into existence by other agency than by the direct intervention of a reflective mind.

1 I hope the day is not far distant having spent so much labour in urg->

when zoologists and botanists will ing my fellow labourers in a right

equally disclaim having shared in direction ; but, at the same time, I

the physical doctrines more or less must protest now and for ever against

now prevalent, respecting the origin the bigotry spreading in some quarand existence of organized beings, ters, which would press upon science

Should the time come when my pre- doctrines not immediately flowing

sent efforts may appear like fighting from scientific premises, and check

against windmills, I shall not regret its free progress.

It is in a measure conceivable that physical agents might produce something like the body of the lowest kinds of animals or plants, and that, under identical circumstances, the same thing may have been produced again and again, by the repetition of the same process ; but that, upon closer analysis of the possibilities of the case, it should not have at once appeared how incongruous the further supposition is, that such agencies could delegate the power of reproducing what they had just called into existence to those very beings, with such limitations that they could never reproduce anything but themselves, I am at a loss to understand. It will no more do to suppose, that, from simpler structures, such a process may end in the production of the most perfect, as every step implies an addition of possibilities not even included in the original case. Such a delegation of power can only be an act of intelligence ; while between the production of an indefinite number of organized beings as the result of a physical law, and the reproduction of these same organized beings by themselves, there is no necessary connexion. The successive generations of any animal or plant cannot stand, as far as their origin is concerned, in any causal relation to physical agents, if these agents have not the power of delegating their own action to the full extent to which they have already been productive in the first appearance of these beings ; for it is a physical law, that the resultant is equal to the forces applied. If any new being has ever been produced by such agencies, how could the successive generations enter, at the time of their birth, into the same relations to these agents, as their ancestors, if these beings had not in themselves the faculty of sustaining their character, in spite of these agents 1 Why, again, should animals and plants at once begin to decom-

96 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

pose under the very influence of all those agents which have been subservient to the maintenance of their life, as soon as life ceases, if life is limited or determined by them 1

There exist between individuals of the same species relations far more complicated than those already alluded to, which go still further to disprove any possibility of causal dependence of organized beings upon physical agents. The relations upon which the maintenance of species is based, throughout the animal kingdom, in the universal antagonism of sex, and the infinite diversity of these connexions in different types, have really nothing to do with external conditions of existence ; they indicate only relations of individuals to individuals, beyond their connexions with the material world in which they live. How, then, could these relations be the result of physical causes, when physical agents are known to have a specific sphere of action, in no way bearing upon this sphere of phenomena ?

For the most part, the relations of individuals to individuals are unquestionably of an organic nature, and, as such, have to be viewed in the same light as any other structural feature ; but there is much also in these connexions that partakes of a psychological character, taking this expression in the widest sense of the word.

When animals fight with one another, when they associate for a common purpose, when they warn one another in danger, when they come to the rescue of one another, when they display pain or joy, they manifest impulses of the same kind as are considered among the moral attributes of man. The range of their passions is even as extensive as that of the human mind, and I am at a loss to perceive a difference of kind between them, however

much they may differ in degree, and in the manner in which they are expressed. The gradations of the moral faculties among the higher animals and man are more-

O O

over so imperceptible, that, to deny to the first a certain sense of responsibility and consciousness, would certainly be an exaggeration of the differences which distinguish animals and man. There exists, besides, as much individuality, within their respective capabilities, among animals, as among men, as every sportsman, every keeper of menageries, and every farmer or shepherd can testify, or any one who has had large experience with wild, tamed or domesticated animals.1

This argues strongly in favour of the existence in every animal of an immaterial principle similar to that which, by its excellence and superior endowments, places man so much above animals.2 Yet the principle unquestionably

1 See J. E. RIDIXGER'S various works illustrative of Game Animals, which have appeared under different titles iu Augsburg, from 1729 to 1778. — GEOFFROY ST. HILAIRE et CUVIER (FR.), Histoire naturelle des Manimiferes ; Paris, 1820-35, 3 vols. fol. — LENZ (H. 0.), Gemeinnutzige Naturgeschichte ; Gotha, 1835, 4 vols. 8vo. — BINGLEY (W.), Animal Biography; London, 1803, 3 vols. 8vo.

2 It might easily be shown that the exaggerated views generally entertained of the difference existing between man and monkeys are traceable to the ignorance of the ancients, and especially the Greeks (to whom we owe chiefly our intellectual culture) of the existence of the Orang- Outang and the Chimpanzee. The animals most closely allied to man, known to them, were the Red Monkey, /nj/3os, the Baboon, Kuvoi«=(pa.\os, and the Barbary Ape, Trie-nitos. A modern translation of Aristotle, it is true, makes him say that monkeys

form the transition between man and quadrupeds (ARISTOTELES, Naturgeschichte der Thiere, von DR. F. STRACK, Frankfurt-am-Main, 1816, p. 65); but the original says no such thing. In the History of Animals, Book 2, Chap. V, we read only, evia.

be TWV £(a(av eira/j.<poreplfei T^v tpvfftv ry re avBpwirw KO.I rols TtTpdiTOtni'. There is a wide difference between " partaking of the nature of both man and quadrupeds," and " forming a transition between man and quadrupeds." The whole chapter goes on enumerating the structural similarity of the three monkeys above named with man ; but the idea of a close affinity is not even expressed, and still less that of a transition between man and quadrupeds. The writer, on the contrary, dwells very fully upon the marked differences they exhibit, and knows, as well as any modern anatomist has ever known, that monkeys have four hands.

i'5/ovs 5e rovs

fieri yap olov

exists, and whether it be called soul, reason, or instinct, it presents, in the whole range of organized beings, a series

fj.tyd\at. Kcu ot 5<xKTu\oi wcrirep of t<av Xfipevv, o jU67as juaKpoVaTOS ' Kal TO Karia roO TroSos Xetpl SjUOioj', irX^v eirl TO /UTJJCOJ

irep devap. ToDro 5e fir' axpov <jK\"npArepov, KaKus KO.I a/j.v$pcas /j.ifj.ovfjLfvuv irTfpvr]i>. It is strange that these clear and precise distinctions should have been so entirely forgotten in the days of Linnteus that the great reformer in Natural History had to confess, in the year 1746, that he knew no character by which to distinguish man from the monkeys. Fauna Suecica (Prefat., p. 2), — " Nullum characterem adhuc eruere potui, uncle homo a simia internoscatur." But, it is not upon structural similarity or difference alone that the relations between man and animals have to be considered. The psychological history of animals shows that, as man is related to animals by the plan of his structure, so are these related to him by the character of those very faculties, which are so transcendent in man as to point at first to the necessity of disclaiming for him completely any relationship with the animal kingdom. Yet the natural history of animals is by no means completed after the somatic side of their nature has been thoroughly investigated ; for they too have a psychological individuality, which, though less fully studied, is nevertheless the connecting link between them and man. I cannot, therefore, agree with those authors who would disconnect mankind from the animal kingdom, and establish a distinct kingdom for man alone, as Ehrenberg (Das Naturreich des Menschen; Berlin, 1835, fol.), and lately, I. Geoffroy St. Hilaire (Hist. nat. generale, Paris, 1856, tome i, Part 2, p. 167), has done. Compare also Chap. II, where it is shown for every kind of group of the animal kingdom that the amount of their difference one

from the other never affords a sufficient ground for removing any of them into another category. A close study of the dog might satisfy every one of the similarity of his impulses with those of man ; and these impulses are regulated in a manner which discloses psychical faculties in every respect of the same kind as those of man : moreover he expresses by his voice his emotions and his feelings with a precision which may be as intelligible to man as the articulated speech of his fellow men. His memory is so retentive that it frequently baffles that of man. And though all these faculties do not make a philosopher of him, they certainly place him, in that respect, upon a level with a considerable proportion of poor humanity. The intelligibility of the voice of animals to one another, and all their actions connected with such calls, are also a strong argument of their perceptive power, and of their ability to act spontaneously and with logical sequence in accordance with these perceptions. There is a vast field open for investigation in the relations between the voice and the actions of animals, and a still more interesting subject of inquiry in the relationship between the cycle of intonations which different species of animals of the same family are capable of uttering, which, as far as I have as yet been able to trace them, stand to one another in the same relations as the different, so-called, families of languages.— SCHLEGEL (FR.), Ueber die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier; Heidelberg, 1808, 1 vol. 8vo.— HUM- BOLDT (W. v.), Ueber die Kawi- Sprache, auf der Insel Java ; Berlin, 1836-39, 3 vols. 4to., Ahh. Ak. d. Wissensch. — STEINTHAL (H.), Gramrnatik, Logik und Psychologic ; Berlin, 1855, 1 vol. 8vo., — in the human family. All the Canina bark ; the

of phenomena closely linked together ; and upon it are based not only the higher manifestations of the mind, but the very permanence of the specific differences which characterize every organism. Most of the arguments of philosophy in favour of the immortality of man apply equally to the permanency of this principle in other living beings. May I not add, that a future life, in which man would be deprived of that great source of enjoyment and intellectual and moral improvement which result from the contemplation of the harmonies of an organic world, would involve a lamentable loss. And may we not look to a spiritual concert of the combined worlds and all their inhabitants in presence of their Creator, as the highest conception of paradise ?

The study of Embryology is of very recent date ; the naturalists of the past century, instead of investigating the phenomena accompanying the first formation and growth of animals, were satisfied with vague theories upon reproduction.1 It is true, the metamorphoses of Insects

howling of the wolves, the barking kind, but only in the mode of utterof the dogs and foxes, are only differ- ance. Among birds, this is, perhaps,

ent modes of barking, comparable to still more striking. Who does not

one another in the same relation as distinguish the note of any and every

the monosyllabic, the agglutinating, thrush, or of the warblers, the ducks,

and the inflecting languages. The the fowls, etc., however numerous

Felidce mew : the roaring of the lion their species may be, and who can

is only another form of the mewing fail to perceive the affinity of their

of our cats and the other species of voices ? And does this not indicate

the family. The Equina neigh or a similarity also in their mental

bray : the horse, the donkey, the ze- faculties ?

bra, the dow, do not differ much in * BUFFON (G. L. LECLERC DE),

the scale of their sounds. Our cattle, Discours sur la nature des Animaux;

and the different kinds of wild bulls, Geneve, 1754, 12mo. ; also in his

have a similar affinity in their into- (Euvres completes, Paris, 1774-1804,

nations : their lowing differs not in 36 vols. 4to.

H 2

100 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

became very early the subject of most remarkable observations ; 1 but so little was it then known that all animals undergo great changes, from the first to the last stages of their growth, that metamorphosis was considered a distinguishing character of Insects. The differences between Insects in that respect are, however, already found to be so great, that a distinction has been introduced between those which undergo a complete metamorphosis, — that is to say, which appear in three different successive forms, as larvae, pupae, and perfect insects, — and those with an incomplete metamorphosis, or whose larvae differ little from the perfect insect. Yet the range of these changes is so limited in some insects, that it is not only not greater, but is even much smaller than in many representatives of other classes. We may, therefore, Avell apply the term metamorphosis to designate all the changes which animals undergo, in direct and immediate succession,2 during their growth, whether these changes are great or small, provided they are correctly determined for each type.

The study of Embryology, at first limited to the investigation of the changes which the chick undergoes in the egg, has gradually extended to every type of the animal kingdom ; and, so diligent and thorough has been the study, that the first author who ventured upon an extensive illustration of the whole field, C. E. von Baer, has already presented the subject in such a clear manner, and drawn general conclusions so accurate and so com-

1 SWAMMERDAM (J.), Biblia Natu- 2 I say purposely, "in direct and

rae, sive Historia Insectorum, etc. ; immediate succession," as the pheno-

Lugduni-Batavorum, 1737-38, 3 vols. mena of alternate generation are not

fol., fig. — REAUMUR (R. ANT. DE), included in metamorphosis. They con-

Memoires pour servir a 1'Histoire des sist chiefly in the production of new

Insectes; Paris, 1734-42, 6 vols. 4to., germs, which have their own ruetafig. — ROESEL VON ROSENHOF (A. J.), morphosis; while metamorphosis pro-

Insectenbelustigungen ; Niirnberg, per relates only to the successive

1746-01, 4 vols. 4to.; fig. changes of one and the same germ.

prchensive, that all subsequent researches in this department of our science may be considered as only a further development of the facts first noticed by him, and of the results he has already deduced from them.1 It was he who laid the foundation for the most extensive generalizations respecting the mode of formation of animals ; for he first discovered, in 1827, the ovarian egg of Mammalia, and thus showed, for the first time, that there is no essential difference in the mode of reproduction of the so-called viviparous and oviparous animals, and that man himself is developed in the same manner as animals. The universal presence of eggs in all animals, and the unity of their structure, which was soon afterwards fully ascertained, constitute, in my opinion, the greatest discovery in the natural sciences of modern times.2

1 Without referring to the works of older writers, such as De Graaf, Malpighi,Ilaller,Wolf,Meckel,Tiedemann, etc., which are all enumerated with many others in BISCHOFF'S article, " Eutwickelungsgeschichte," in WAGNER'S Handworterbuch der Physiologic, vol. i, p. 860, I shall mention hereafter, chiefly those published since, under the influence of Dollinger, this branch of science has assumed a new character : — BAER (C. E.v.),TJeberEntwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere; Konigsberg, 1828-37, 2 vols. 4to., fig. The most important work yet published. The preface is a model of candour and truthfulness, and sets the merits of Dollinger in a true and beautiful light. As textbooks, I would quote, BURDACH (C. F.), Die Physiologic als Erfahrungswissenschaft ; Leipzig, 1829-40, 6 vols. 8vo.; French, Paris, 1837-41, 9 vols. Svo. — MULLER (J.), Handbuch der Physiologic des Menschen ; Coblenz, 1843, 2 vols. Svo., 4th edit.; Engl., by W. BAYLY, London, 1837, 8vo. — WAGNER (R.), Lehrbuch der Physiologic ; Leipzig, 1839-42, 2 vols.

Svo. — VALENTIN (G.), Handbuch der Entwickelungsgeschichte, etc. ; Berlin, 1835, 1 vol. Svo. — Lehrbuch der Physiologic des Menschen ; Braunschweig, 1843, 2 vols. 8vo. — LONGET (F. A.),Traite de Physiologic; Paris, 1850, 2 vols. Svo. — KOLLIKER (ALB.), Microscopische Anatomic des Menschen ; Leipzig, 1840-54, 2 vols. Svo. fig. — See also OWEN'S Lectures, etc., SIEBOLD und STANNIUS'S Lehrbuch, and CARUS'S Morphologic, q. a., p. 37 and p. 24. I might further quote almost every modern text-book on physiology ; but most of them are so evidently mere compilations, exhibiting no acquaintance with the subject, that I purposely omit to mention any other elementary works.

3 BAER (C. E. a.), De Ovi Marnmalium et Hominis Genesi ; Konigsberg, 1827, 4to., fig.— PURKINJE (J. E.), Symbols ad Ovi aviura historian! ante incubationem ; Lipsise, 1830, 4to., fig. — WAGNER (R.), Prodromus Historic generationis Hominis atque Animalium, etc.; Lipsiso, 1836, 1 vol. fol., fig. — Icones physiologicse ; Lipsis3, 1839, 4to., fig. Compare also

102 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

It was indeed a gigantic step to demonstrate such an identity in the material basis of the development of all animals, when their anatomical structure was already known to exhibit such radically different plans in their full-grown state. From that time a more and more extensive investigation of the manner in which the first germ is formed in these eggs, and the embryo developes itself ; how its organs grow gradually out of a homogeneous mass ; what changes, what complications, what connections, what functions, they exhibit at every stage ; how, in the end, the young animal assumes its final form and structure, and becomes a new, independent being, could not fail to be a most interesting subject of inquiry. To ascertain all this, in as many animals as possible, belonging to the most different types of the animal kingdom, soon became the principal aim of all embryological investigations ; and it can truly be said, that few sciences have advanced with such astonishing rapidity, or led to more satisfactory results.

For the actual phases of the mode of development of the different types of the animal kingdom, I must refer to special works upon this subject,1 no general treatise, eni-

VALENCIENNES (A.) and FREMY, Re- Batrachians, the Lepidosteus, the cherches sur la composition des oeufs Arnia, etc.; not to speak of the opdans la serie des animaux, Compt.- portuuitics which thousands of miles Rend., 1854, vol. 39, p. 469, 525 and of sea-coast, everywhere easily acces- 570. sible, aftbrd for embryological inves- 1 The limited attention thus far tigations, from the borders of the paid in this country to the study of Arctics to the Tropics. In connexion Embryology, has induced me to enu- with Embryology, the question of merate the works relating to this Individuality comes up naturally, branch of science more fully than any See upon this subject: LEUCKART others, in the hope of stimulating in- (RuD.), Ueber den Polymorphismus vestigations in this direction. There der Individuen oder die Erscheinung exist, upon this continent, a number der Arbeitstheilung in der Natur; of types of animals, the embryologi- Giessen, 1851, 4to. — REICHERT (C. cal illustration of which would add B.), Die monogene Fortpflanzung; immensely to the stock of our science: Dorpat, 1852. — HUXLEY (Tn. II.), such are the Opossum, the Ichthyoid Upon Animal Individuality ; Ann.

bracing the most recent investigations, having as yet been published ; and I must take it for granted, that, before forming a definite opinion upon the comparisons instituted hereafter between the growth of animals and the structural gradation among full-grown animals, or the order of succession of the fossils characteristic of different geological periods, the necessary information respecting these changes will have been gathered and mastered by my readers sufficiently to enable them to deal with it freely.

The embryology of Polypi has been very little studied thus far ; and what we know of the embryonic growth of these animals relates chiefly to the family of Actinoids. 1 When the young is hatched, it has the form of a little club-shaped or pear-shaped body, which soon assumes the appearance of the adult, from which it differs only by having; few tentacles. The mode of ramification and the

o

multiplication by buds have, however, been carefully and minutely studied in all the families of this class.2 Acalephs present phenomena so peculiar, that they are discussed hereafter in a special section. Their young3 are either

and Mag. Nat. Hist., 2nd ser., 1852, (L.), Twelve Lectures, etc. p. 40 et

vol. 9, p. 507. — FORBES (ED.), On the seq. — HAIME (J.), Me"moire sur le

supposed Analogy between the Life Lerianthe, Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e ser., 1854,

of an Individual and the Duration of vol.i. — Note sur le developpement cles

a Species ; Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., Actinies, Compt.-Rend., 1854, vol. 39,

2nd ser., 1 852, vol. 10, p. 59.— BRAUN p. 437 et 595.

(AL.), Das Individuuni der Pflanze, 2 SeeDANA'sZoophytes,andMiLNEq. a. — Betrachtungen iiber die Er- EDWARDS et HAIME, Recherches, etc.,

scheinung der Verjungung in der Na- q. a., p. 44, n. 1.

tur; Freiburg, 1849, 4to., fig. 3 SIEBOLD (C. Tn. E. v.), Beitriige

1 SARS (M.), Beskrivelser og Jagt- zur Naturgeschichte der wirbellosen

tagelser over nogle maerkelige eller Thiere, Neueste Schriften der Naturnye i Havet ved den Bergeuske Kyst forsch. Gesellschaft in Danzig ; Danlevende Dyr, etc.; Bergen, 1835, 4to. zig, 1839, 4to., p. 1-35.— LOVEN (S.

— Fauna littoralis Norvegise ; Chris- L.),Beitrag zur Kentniss der Gattuntiania, 1846, fol., fig. — RATHKE (H.), gen Campanularia und Syncoryne,

in Burdach's Physiologic, vol. ii, 2nd Wiegm., Arch., 1837, pp.249 and 321 ;

edit., p. 215. — Zur Morphologic, Rei- French Ann. Sc. n. 2de ser., vol. xv,

sebemerkungen aus Taurien ; Riga p. 157. — SARS (M.), Beskrivelser, q.

und Leipzig,! 837, 4to., fig. — A«ASSIZ a. — Fauna littoralis, q. a. — Einige

polyp-like or resemble more immediately the type of their class. Few multiply in a direct, progressive development.

Worte iiber die Entwickelung der Medusen ; Arch. f. Naturg., 1857, i, p. 117. — NOEDMANN (AL. v.), Sur les changements que 1'age apporte dans la maniere d'etre des Campanulaires, Comptes-Rendus, 1834, p. 709. — STEENSTRUP (J.), Ueber den Generations-Wechsel oder die Fortpflanzung und Entwickelung durch abwechselnde Generationen, Uebers. von Lo- RENZEN; Kopenh., 1842, 8vo., fig.; Engl. by G. BUSK (Ray Society), London, 1845, 8vo. — VAN BEXEDEN (P. J.), Memoire sur les Campanulaires de la cote d'Ostende, etc., Mem. Ac. Brux., 1843, vol. xvii, 4to., fig. — Recherches sur 1'Embryogeuie des Tubulaires, etc., Mem. Ac. Brux., 1844, 4to., fig. — DUJARDIN (PEL.), Observations sur un nouveau genre de Medusaires (Cladonema), provenant de la metamorphose des Syncorynes ; Ann. Sc. n. 2de ser., 1843, vol. 20, p. 370. — Memoire sur le developpement des Medusaires et des Polypes Hydraires ; Ann. Sc. n. 3e ser., 1845, vol. 4, p. 257.— WILL (J. G. Fa.), Horse Tergestinse ; Leipzig, 1844, 4to., fig. — FREY (II.) und LEUCKART (R.), Beitrage zur Kenntniss wirbelloser Thiere ; Braunschweig, 1847, 4to., fig. — DALYELL (SiR J. G.), Rare and Remarkable Animals of Scotland, etc.; London, 1847, 2 vols. 4to. fig. — FORBES (Ei>.), Monograph of the British Naked-eyed Medusa; ; London, 1847, 1 vol. fol., fig. (Ray Society).— On the Morphology of the Reproductive System of Sertularian Zoophytes, etc.; Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 1844, vol. 14, p. 385.— LEYDIG (F.), Einige Bernerkungen liber den Bau der Hydren, Miiller, Arch., 1854, p. 270. — ECKER (A.), Zur Lehre vom Bau und Lebeu der Koutraktilen Substanz der niedersten Thiere; Basel, 1848, 4to.; also in Zeitsch. f. w. Zool., 1849, vol. i, p. 218.— ROUGET'S papers on Hydra I have not yet been able to secure. — AGASSIZ (L.), Twelve

Lectures, etc., q. a. — DESOR (Eo.), Lettre sur la generation medusipare des Polypes Hydraires ; Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser., 1849, vol. xii, p. 204. — KROHN (A.), Benierkungen iiber die Geschlechtsverhaltnisse der Sertularinen;Muller'sArch.,1843,p.l74. — Ueber die Brut des Cladonema radiatum, und deren Entwickelung zum Stauridium, Miiller's Arch., 1853, p. 420. — Ueber Podocoryne carnea, Sars und die Fortpflanzungsweise ihrer medusenartigenSprosslinge; Wiegrn. Arch. 1851, i, p. 263. — Ueber eiuige niedere Thiere; Miiller's Arch., 1853, p. 137. — Ueber die friihesten Entwickelungsstufen der Pelaqia noctiluca; Miiller's Archiv., 1855, p. 491.— KOL- LIKER (A.), Die Schwimmpolypen, etc., q. a., p. 44. — BUSCH (W.), Beobachtuugen iiber Anatomic und Entwickelungsgeschichte einiger wirbelloser Seethiere; Berlin, 1851, 4to., fig., pp. 1, 25 and 30. — GEGENBAUER, KOLLIKER und MULLER, Bericht liber einige irn Herbste 1852 in Messina angestellte anatomische Untersuchungen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., vol. 4, p. 299. — GEGENBAUER (C.), Ueber die Entwickelung von Doliolum, der Scheibenquallen und von Sagitta, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1853, p. 13.— Beitriige zu uahern Kenntniss der Schwimmpolypen (Siphonophoren), Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1853, vol. 5, p. 285. — Ueber Diphyes turyida, etc., Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1853, vol. 5, p. 442. — Ueber den Entwickelungscyclus von Doliolum, etc., Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1855, vol. 7, p. 283. — Bemerkungen iiber die Randkorper der Medusen, Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 230. — Studien iiber Organisation und Systematik der Ctenophoren, Arch, f. natz., 1856, i, p. 163. — FRANTZIUS (AL. v.), Ueber die Jungen der Cephea, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., vol. 4, p. 118. — MULLER ( J.), Ueber eine eigentlHimliche Meduse des Mittelrneeres und ihren Jugeudzustand, Miiller's

As to Echinoderms, they have for a long time almost entirely escaped the attention of embryologists ; but lately J. Miiller has published a series of most important investigations upon this class,1 disclosing a wonderful diversity

Arch., 1851, p. 272.— SCHULTZE (M.), Ueber die ruiinnlichen Geschlechtstheile der Campanularia geniculata, Miiller's Arch., 1850, p. 53.— HINCKS (Tn.), Notes on the Reproduction of the Campanulariadte, etc., Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 2nd ser., 1852, vol. 10, p. 81. — Further Notes on British Zoophytes, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 1853, vol. 15, p. 127.— ALLMAN (G. J.), On Hydroids, Rep. Brit. Ass. Adv. Sc., 1852, p. 50.— On the Structure of Hydratiridis, Proc. Brit. Ass. 1853, p. 64. — DERBES (A.), Note sur les organes reproducteurs et I'embryogeuie du Ci/anea chrysaora, ADU. Sc. Nat., 3e ser., 1850, vol. 13, p. 377. — VOGT (C.), Ueber die Siphonophoren, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1852, vol. 3, p. 522. — Untersuchungen iiber Thierstaaten ; Frankfurt, 1851, 8vo. — Siphonophores de Nice, q. a., p. 44. — HUXLEY (Tn. H.), On the Anatomy and Affinities of the Family of the Medusae, Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc., 1849, ii, p. 413. — An Account of Researches into the Anatomy of the Hydrostatic Acalephee, Proc. Brit. Ass. Adv. Sc., 1851, p. 78. — LEUCK- ART (R ), Zoologische Untersuchungen; Giessen, 1853-54, 4to., fig., 1st Fasc. — Zur nahern Kenntniss der Siphonophoren von Nizza, Wiegui. Arch., 1854, p. 249. — Medusen von Nizza, q. a., p. 44. — STIIUPSON (W.), Synopsis of the Marine Invertebrata of Grand Manan, Smithson. Contrib., 1853, 4to., fig. — LEIDY (Jos.), Contributions towards a Knowledge of the Marine Invertebrate Fauna, etc., Journ. Acad. Nat. Sc., Philad., 2nd ser., 1855, vol. 3, 4to., fig. — See also below, Sect. 20.— GOSSE (Tn. H.), Naturalist's Rambles on the Devonshire Coast; London, 1853, 8vo. — QUATKEFAGES (A. DE), Memoire sur 1' organisation des Physales, Ann. Sc.

Nat., 4e ser., 1854, vol. 2. — SCHULTZE (MAX.), Ueber der Bau der Gallertscheibe der Medusen, Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 311.— M'CRADY(J.), Description of Oceania Nutricula and the embryological history of a singular Medusan larva found in the cavity of its bell ; Proceed. Elliott Society, Charleston, S.C., 1857.— WRIGHT (T. S.),0n liydr actinia £c/iinata^dm\). New Phil. Journ., new series, 1857. — Observations on British Zoophytes, Edinb. New Phil. Journ., new series, 1857. — Observations on British Zoophytes: Laomedea acuminata, Trichydra pudica, and Tubularia indivisa; Edinb. New Phil. Journ., new series, 1858. — On the Reproduction of Cydippe pomiformis, Edinb. New Philos. Journ., new series, 1856, vol. 4, p. 85.— PEACH (C. W.), Notice of a Curious Metamorphosis in a Zoophyte-like Animal, Edinb. New Philos. Journ., new series, 1856, vol. 4, p. 162.

1 Beskrivelser, etc., p. 37. — Ueber die Entwickelung der Seesterne, Wiegm. Arch., 1844, I., p. 169, fig.— Fauna littoralis, etc., p. 47. — MiiL- LER, (J.,) Ueber die Larven u. die Metamorphose der Ophiuren u. Seeigel, Akad. d. Wiss. ; Berlin, 1848. — Ueber die Larven u. die Metamorphose der Echinodermen, 2te Abh., Ak. d. Wiss.; Berlin, 1849.— Ueber die Larven u. die Metamorphose der Holothurien u. Asterien, Ak. d. Wiss. ; Berlin, 1850. — Ueber die Larven u. die Metamorphose der Echinoderineu, 4te Abh., Ak. d. Wiss. ; Berlin, 1 852.— Ueber die Ophiureularven des Adriatischen Meeres; Ak. d. Wiss.; Berlin, 1852. — Ueber den allgemeinen Plan in der Entwickelung der Echinodermen, Ak. d. Wiss. ; Berlin, 1853. — Ueber die Gattungen der Seeigellarven, 7te Abh., Ak. d. Wiss., 1855.—

UJ/.

106 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

in the mode of their development, not only in the different orders of the class, but even in different genera of the same family. The larvae of many have a close resemblance to diminutive Ctenophorse, and may be hornologized with this type of Acalephs.

As I shall frequently refer hereafter to the leading divisions of the animal kingdom, I ought to state here, that I do not adopt some of the changes which have been proposed lately in the limitation of the classes, and which seem to have been pretty generally received with favour. The undivided type of Eadiata appears to me as one of the most natural branches of the animal kingdom, and I consider its subdivision into Coelenterata and Echinodermata as an exaggeration of the anatomical differences observed between them.1 As far as the plan of their structure is concerned, they do not differ at all, and that structure is throughout homological. In this branch I

Ueber den Canal in den Eiern der Ueber die Larve der Comatula, Miil-

Holothurien, Mullet's Arch., 1854, p. ler's Arch., 1849, p. 400. — KROIIN,

60. — Fortsetzung der Beobachtun- (A.,) Ueber die Entwickelung der

gen uber die Metamorphose der Echi- Seesterne und Holothurien, Muller's

nodermen, Muller's Arch., 1855, p. Arch., 1853, p. 317.— Ueber die Ent-

67. — French abstracts of these papers wickelung einer lebendig gebiihrenmay be found in Ann. Sc. Nat., 3e den Ophiure, Muller's Arch., 1851, p.

ser., 1852 and '53, vols. 17, 19, and 338. — Ueber die Larve des Echinus

20, and 4e ser., 1854, vol. 1, by C. brevispinosus, Muller's Arch., 1853,

DARESTE. An English account is p. 361. — Beobachtungen liber Echipublished by HUXLEY, (Tn. H.,) Re- nodermenlarven, Muller's Arch., 1854,

port upon the Researches of Prof, p.208. — Ueber einenneuenEntwickel-

Muller into the Anatomy and Deve- ungsmodus der Ophiuren, Muller's

lopment of the Echinoderrns, Ann. Arch., 1857, p.369. — SCHULTZE,(M.),

and Mag. Nat. Hist. 2d ser., vol. 8, Ueber die Entwickelung von Ophio-

1851, p. 1. — KOREN und DANIELSSEN lepis squamata, Muller's Arch., 1852,

in Nyt Magazin for Naturvid, vol. 5, p. 37. — GOSSE (R. H.), Tenby, a seap. 253, Christiania, 1847 ; Ann. Sc. side holiday ; London, 1856, 8vo.

Nat., p. 347. See also Fauna littoralis l I am surprised to find that J.

Norvegise, 2d. livr. — AGASSIZ, (L.,) Miiller favours the view of a close

Twelve Lectures, etc., p. 13. — DER- affinity between Polyps and Aca-

BES, (A.,) Sur la formation de 1'em- lephs, and still more that he is inbryon chez 1'oursin comestible, Ann. cliued to refer the Bryozoa to the

Sc. Nat., 3e ser., vol. 8, p. 80.— BUSH, type of Radiata, Muller's Arch., 1858,

(W.,) Beobachtuugeu, etc., q. a. — 8vo., p. 105.

recognize only three classes, Polypi, Acalephce, and Ecliinodermata. The chief difference between the two first lies in the radiating partitions of the main cavity of the Polypi, supporting the reproductive organs ; moreover the digestive cavity in this class consists of an inward fold of the upper aperture of the common sac of the body, while in Acalephs there exist radiating tubes, at least in the proles medusina, which extend to the margin of the body where they anastonioze, and the digestive cavity is hollowed out of the gelatinous mass. This is equally true of the Hydroids, the Medusae proper, and the Ctenophorae ; but nothing of the kind is observed among Polypi. Siphonophorae, whether their proles medusina becomes free or not, and Hydroids, agree in having, in the proles medusina, simple radiating tubes, uniting into a single circular tube around the margin of the bell-shaped disk. These two groups constitute together one natural order, in contradistinction to the Covered-eyed Medusae, whose radiating tubes ramify towards the margin and form a complicated net of anastomoses. Morphologically, the proles polypoidea of the Acalephs is as completely an Acaleph as their proles medusina? and, whether they separate or remain connected, their structural relations are everywhere the same. A comparison of Hydractinia, which is the most common and the most polymorphous Hydroid, with our common Portuguese Man-of-War, (Pliysalia,) will at once show the homology of their most polymorphous individuals. 2

The embryology of Mollusks has been very extensively

1 I shall show this fully in the 2 It has already been stated above,

third volume of my contributions to that the Milleporina are not true

the Natural History of the United Polyps, but Hydroids, closely allied

States. Meanwhile, see niy paper on to Hydractinia, by their structure

the structure and horuoloyies of lla- and their polymorphism, diata, q. a., p. 28.

108 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

investigated, and some types of this branch are among the very best known in the animal kingdom. The natural limits of the branch itself appear, however, somewhat doubtful. I hold that it must include theBryozoa,1 which lead gradually through the Brachiopods2 and Tunicata to the ordinary Acephala, and I would add that I have satisfied myself of the propriety of uniting the Vorticellidse with Bryozoa. On the other hand, the Cephalopods can never be separated from the Mollusks proper, as a distinct branch ; and the partial segmentation of their yolk no more affords a ground for their separation, than the total segmentation of the yolk of Mammalia would justify their separation from the other Vertebrata. Moreover, Cephalopods are, in all the details of their structure, homologous with the other Mollusks. The Tunicata are particularly interesting, inasmuch as the simple Ascidians have pedunculated young, which exhibit the most striking resemblance to Boltenia, and form, at the same time, a connecting link with the compound Ascidians. 3 The development of the

1 ALLMAN, (G. J.,) On the Present (F.,) Infusionsthiere auf ihre Ent-

State of our Knowledge of the Fresh wickelungsgeschichte untersucht ;

Water Polyzoa, Proc. Brit. Asso. Adv. Leipzig, 1854, 1 vol. 4to. fig. — •

Sc., 20th Meet. ; Edinburgh, 1850, p. FRANTZIUS, (AL. v.,) Analecta ad

305. — Proc. Irish Ac. 1850, vol. 4, p. Ophrydii versatilis historian! natu-

470. — Ibid., 1853, vol. 5, p. 11. — Mo- ralem, Vratislav, 1849. — LACHMANN,

nograph of the Fresh-water Polyzoa, (C. F. J.,) Ueber die Organization der

Ray Soc. — VAN BENEDEN (P. I.,) Infusorien, besonders der Vorticellen,

Recherches sur 1'Anatoinie, la phy- Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 340. Having

siologie et le developpement des Bry- satisfied myself that the Vorticellidje

ozoaires qui habitent la cote d'Os- are Bryozoa, I would also refer here

tende, Nouv. Mem. Ac. Brux., 1845, to all the works on Infusoria in

vol. 18. — DUMORTIER, (B.C.,) et VAN- which these animals are considered.

BENEDEN, (P. J.) Histoire naturelle 2 I see, from a short remark of

des Polypes composes d'eau douce, Leuckart, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., vol.

Mem. Ac. Brux., 1850, vol. 16, 4to. 7, suppl., p. 115, that he also has perfig. — HINCKS, (Tn.,) Notes on British ceived the close relationship which

Zoophytes, with Descriptions of some exists between Brachiopods and Bry-

New Species, Ann. and Mag. Nat. ozoa. See also HANCOCK (ALB.), On

Hist., 2d ser., 1851, vol. 8, p. 353.— the Organization of the Brachiopoda,

EHRENBERG, (C. G.,) Die Infusions- Proc. Roy. Soc. ; London, 1857, p.

thiere als vollkornrnene Organismeu, 463.

Leipzig, 1838, 2 vols. fol. fig.— STEIN, 3 SAVIGNY, (J. C.,) Memoires sur

Lamellibr'ancHata seems to be very uniform, but they differ greatly as to their breeding, many laying their eggs before the germ is formed, whilst others carry them in their gills until the young are entirely formed.1 This is observed particularly among the Unios, some of which, however, lay their eggs very early, while others carry them, for a longer or a shorter time, in a special pouch of the outer gill, which presents the most diversified forms in

les Anim. sans Vertebres, etc. q. a. — CHAMISSO, (Ao. v.,) De animalibus quibusdam e classe Vermium Linnteana. Fasc. 1, De Salpa, Berol. 1819, 4to.} fig.— MEYEN, (F. J.,) Beitrage zur Zoologie, etc., 1st Abth., iiber Salpen, Nov. Act. Nat. Cur. 1832, vol. 16.— EDWARDS, (H.MiLNE-) Observations sur les Ascidies cornposees des cotes de la Manche ; Paris, 1841, 4to., fig.— SAKS, (M.,) Beskrivelser, q. a. — Fauna litt., q. a, — VAN BENEDEN, (P. J.,) Recherches sur 1'embryogenie, I'anator0ie et la physiologic des Ascidies simples, Mem. Ac. Brux., 1847, vol. 20.— KROHN, (A.,) Ueber die Entwickelung der Ascidien, Miiller's Arch., 1852, p. 312. — KOLLIKER, (A.,) et LOWIG, De la composition et de la structure des enveloppes des Tuniciers, Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser., vol. 5, p. 193. — HUXLEY (Tn. H.), Observations upon the Anatomy and Physiology of Salpa and Pyrosoma, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., 1851, II., p. 567.— ESCHBICHT (D. F.), Anatoinisk-physiologiske Undersogelser over Salperne, Kiob. 1840, fig. — STEENSTRUP, (J.,) Ueber den Generationswechsel, q. a. — VOGT (C.), Bilder aus dem Thierleben, Frankfurt a. M., 1852, 8vo. — MULLER (H.), Ueber Salpen, Zeitsch. f., wiss., Zool., vol. 4, p. 329. — LEUCKART (R.),ZoologischeUntersuchungen, Giessen, 1853-54, 4to., fig., 2d Fasc. — GEGENBAUER (C.), Ueber die Entwickelung von Doliolum, &c., q. a., p. 104.

1 CARUS (C. G.), Entwickelungsgeschichte unserer Flussmuschel,

Leipzig, 1832, 4to., fig. — QUATRE- PAGES (ARM. DE,), Sur 1'embryogenie des Tarets, Ann. Sc. Nat., 3e ser., 1849, vol. 2, p. 202.— Sur la vie interbranchiale des petites Anodontes, Ann. Sc. Nat., 2de ser., vol. 5, p. 321. — LOVEN (S. L.), Om Utvecklingen of Mollusca Acephala, Overs. Vet. Akad. Forhandl. ; Stockholm, 1849. — Germ. Miiller's Arch., 1848, p. 531, and Wiegman's Arch., 1849, p. 312. — PREVOST, (J. L.,) De la generation chez la rnoule des peintres, Mem. Soc. Phys. ; Geneve, 1825, vol. 3, p. 121. — VOGT, (C.,) Bilder aus dern Thierleben ; Frankfurt, 1852, 8vo. — SCHMIDT, (0.,) Ueber die Entwickelung von Cyclas calyculata, Drap. Muller's Arch., 1854, p. 428.— LEYDIG, (F.,) Ueber Cyclas cornea. Muller's Arch., 1855, p. 47. — LACA/E-DUTHIERS, (H.,) Recherches sur les organes geuetaux des Acephales lamellibranches, Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e. ser., 1854, vol. 2. — Meuioire sur 1'organe de Bojanus des Acephales lamellibranches, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e. ser., 1855, vol. 4. — Observations sur 1'hermaphrodisme des Anodontes, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e. ser., 1855, vol. 4. — Memoire sur le developpeinent des branchies des Mollusques Acephales lamellibranches, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e. ser., 1856, vol. 5. — Histoire de 1'organisation et du developpement du Dentale, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e. s6r., 1856, vol. 6. — I have not yet been able to secure DAVAISNE'S paper on the reproduction of the Oyster, published in the Memoires de la Societe de Biologic.

different genera of the family. Nothing is as yet known of the development of Brachiopods. The Gasteropoda1 ex-

1 CARFS, (C. G.,) Von den aussern Lebensbedingungen der weiss- und kaltbliitigen Thiere ; Leipzig, 1824, 4to., fig. — PEEVOST, (J. L.,) De la gen6ration chez le Lymnee, Mem. Soc. Phys., Geneve, vol. 5, p. 119. — SARS, (M.,) Zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Mollusken und Zoophyten ; Wiegm. Arch., 1837, 1., p. 402; 1840, 1, p. 196. — Zusatze zu der von mir gegebenen Dartstellung der Entwickelung der Nudibranchien ; Wiegm. Arch.,

1845, I, p. 4. — QUATREFAGES (ARM.

DE,) Memoire sur 1'Einbryogenie des Planorbes et des Lyrnnees; Ann. Sc. Nat.,2de ser., vol. 2, p. 107. — VAN BE- NEDEN, (P. J.,) Recherches sur le developpernent des Aplysies ; Ann. Sc. Nat., 2de ser., vol. 15, p. 123.— VAN BENEDEN, (P. J.,) et WINDISCHMAN, (On.,) Recherches sur FEmbryogenie des Limaces, Mem. ; Ac. Brux., 1841. — JACQUEMIN, (En.,) Sur le developpement des Planorbes ; Ann. Sc. Nat., vol. 5, p. 117 ; Nov. Act. Nat. Cur., vol. 18. — DUMORTIER, (B. C.,) Memoire sur les evolutions de I'embryon dans les Mollusques Gasteropodes, Mem. ; Ac. Brux., 1836, vol. 10. — LAURENT, (J. L. M.,) Observations sur le developpernent de 1'ccuf des Limaces ; Ann. Sc. Nat., vol. 4, p. 248. — POUCHET, (P. A.,) Sur le developpement de 1'embryon des Lymnees ; Ann. Sc. Nat., 2de ser., vol. 10, p. 63. — VOGT, (C.,) Recherches sur 1'Embryologie de I'Actseon ; Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser., 1846, vol. 6, p. 5.— Beitrag zur Entwickelungsgeschichte eines Cephalophoren ; Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1855, vol. 7, p. 162. — SCHULTZE, (M.,) Ueber die Entwickelung des Tergipes lacinulatus; Wiegm. Arch., 1849, I., p. 268.— WARNECK, (N. A.,) Ueber die Bildung und Entwickelung des Embryo bei Gasteropoden, Bull. Soc. Imp. ; Moscou, 1850, vol. 23, I., p. 90. — SCHMIDT, (0.,) Ueber die Eutwickelung von Limax agrestis, Miiller's Arch., 1851, p. 278. — LEYDIG, (F.,) Ueber Paludina vivipara^ ein

Beitrag zur nahern Kenntniss dieses Thieres in embryologischer,anatomischer und histologischer Beziehung, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1850, vol. 2, p. 125. — KOLLIKER, (A.,) q. a., Zeitsch, f. wiss. Zool., vol. 4, p. 333 and 369. — MULLER, (J.,) Ueber verschiedene Formen von Seethieren, Mviller's Arch., 1854, p. 69. — Ueber Synapta digitata und iiber die Erzeugung von Schnecken in Holothurien ; Berlin,

1852, 4to. fig. — The remarkable case described in this paper admits of an explanation which Muller has not considered. It is known that fishes (Ophidium) penetrate into the cavity of the body of Holothurisa, through its posterior opening. (DE BOSSET, Notice, etc., Mem. Soc. Sc. Nat., Neuch., 1839, vol. 2, 4to. — I have observed the fact myself in Florida.) The similarity of Entoconcha mirabilis with the embryonic shell of various species of Littorinae, such as Lacuna vincta, the development of which I had an opportunity of studying, suggests the possibility, that some species of this family, of which there are many very small ones, select the Synapta as their breeding place, and leave it after depositing their eggs, which may become connected with the Synapta, as our Mistletoe or the Orobanche and many other parasitic plants with the plants upon which they grow. — GEGEN- BAUER, (C.,) Beitriige zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Landgasteropoden, Zeitsch, f. wiss. Zool., 1852, vol. 3, p. 371. — Untersuchungen iiber Pteropoden und Heteropoden ; Leipzig, 1855, 1 vol., 4to. fig. — KOREN, (J.,) und DANIELSSEN, (D. C.,) Bitrag til Pectinibranchiernes Udviklingshistorie, Bergen, 1851, 4to. ; French Sc. Nat., 1852, vol. 18, p. 257, and

1853, vol. 19, p. 89 ; also Germ, in Wiegm. Arch., 1853, p. 173 ; see also Fauna littoralis Norvegias 2de livr. — NORDMANN, (AL. V.,) Versuch einer Monographic von Tergipes Edwardsii;

Ill

hibit a much greater diversity in their development than the Lamellibranchiata. Even among the terrestrial and aquatic Pulmonata there are striking differences. Some of the Pectinibranchiata are remarkable for the curious cases in which their eggs are hatched and the young developed, to an advanced state of growth. The cases of Pyrula and Strombus are among the most extraordinary of these organic nests. The embryology of Cephalopoda1 has been illustrated in a masterly way by Kolliker.

St. Petersburg, 1844, 4to. — LEUC- KART, (R.,) Zoologische Untersuchungen ; Giessen, 1853-54, 4to., fig., 3d Fasc.— HUXLEY, (Tn. H.,) On the Morphology of the Cephalous Mollusca, etc., Phil. Trans. R. Soc., 1853, I., p. 29. — HOGG, (JABEZ,) On the Development and Growth of the Watersnail, Quart. Micr. Jour., 1854, p. 91. — REID, (J.,) On the Development of the Ova of the Nudibranchiate Mollusca, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 1846, vol. 17, p. 377.— CARPEN- TER, (W. B.,) On the Development of the Embryo of Purpura Lapittus, Quart. Micr. Journ., 1845, p. 17. — LOREN, (S.,) Ueber die Entwickelung von Chiton, Arch. Naturz. 1856, I, p. 206. — KROHN, (A.,) Ueber einer neuen mit Wimpersegeln versehenen Gasteropoden, Arch. f. Naturz. 1853, p. 223. — Beobachtungen aus der Entwickelungsgeschichte der Pteropoden, Heteropoden, Echinodermen, Miiller's Arch. 1856, p. 515, and 1857, p. 459. — MACDONALD, (J. D.,) Remarks on the Anatomy of Macgillivrayapelagica and CheletropisIIaselzi, Trans. Roy. Soc. ; London, 1855. II, p. 289 ; — Further observations, etc., p. 295. — CLAPAREDE, (Ed.,) Anatomic und Entwickelungsgeschichte der Neritina fluviatilis, Miiller's Arch. 1857, p. 109. — Beitrag fur Anatomic des Cyclostoma elegans, Miiller's Arch., 1858, p. 1. — SEMPER, (C.,) Beitrage fur Anatomic uud Physiologic der Pulraonaten, Zeit. f. w. Zool. 1856, vol. 8, p. 340. — SCHNEIDER, (A.,)

Ueber die Entwickelung der Phyllirhoe Bucephalum, Miiller's Arch., 1858, p. 35.

1 KOLLIKER, (ALB.,) Entwickelungsgeschichte der Cephalopoden, Zurich, 1844, 4to., fig. — VAN-BENE- DEN, (P. J.,) Recherches sur 1'Embryogenie des Sepioles, N. Mem. Acad. Brux., vol. 14, 1841. — COLDSTREAM, (Z.,) On the Ova of Sepia, Lond. and Ed. Phil. Mag., Oct., 1833.— DUGES, (ANT.,) Sur le developpement de 1'ernbryon chez les Mollusques Cephalopodes, Ann. Sc. Nat., vol. 8, p. 107. — RATHKE, (H.,) Perothis, ein neues genus der Cephalopoden, Mem. Ac. ; St. Petersburgh, 1834, vol. 2, p. 149. (Is the young of some Loligoicl Cephalopod.) — MILNE-EDWARDS, (H.,) Observations sur les spermatophores des Mollusques Cephalopodes, etc., Ann. Sc., n., 2de ser., vol. 3, p. 193. — KOLLTKER, (A.,) Hectocotylus Arffonautce,T>e\le Chiaje und fleet. Tremoctopodis, K., die Miinnchen von Argonauta Argo und Tremoctopus violaceus, Ber. Zool. Anst. ; Wiirzberg, 1849, p. 69.— MULLER, (H.,) Ueber das Miinnchen von Argonauta Argo und die Hectocotylen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., vol. 4, p. 1. — VERANY, (J. B.,) et VOGT, (C.,) Memoire sur les Hectocotyles et les males de quelques Cephalopodes, Ann. Sc. n., 3e ser., 1852, vol. 17, p. 147. — ROULIN, (F. D.,) De la connaissance qu'ont cue les anciens du bras copulateur chez certains Cephalopodes, Ann. Sc. N., 3e ser., 1852, vol. 17, p. 188.—

112 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

There is still much diversity of opinion among naturalists respecting the limits of Articulata ; some being inclined to separate the Arthropods and Worms as distinct branches, while others unite them into one. I confess I cannot see the ground for a distinction. The worm-like nature of the larvre of the majority of Arthropods and the perfect homology of these larvae with the true Worms, seem to me to show beyond the possibility of a doubt, that all these animals are built upon one and the same plan, and belong, therefore, to one branch, which contains only three classes, if the principles laid down in my second chapter are at all correct, namely, the Worms, Crustaceans, and Insects. As to the Protozoa, I have little confidence in the views generally entertained respecting their nature. Having satisfied myself that Colpoda and Paramecium are the brood of Planarise, and Opalina that of Distoma, I see no reason why the other Infusoria, included in Ehrenberg's division Enterodela,1 should not also be the brood of the many lower Worms, the development of which has hitherto escaped our attention. Again, a comparison of the early stages of development of the Entomostraca with Eotifera might be sufficient to show, what Burmeister, Dana, and Leydig have proved in another way, that Eotifera are genuine Crustacea, and not Worms. The vegetable character of most of the Anentera has been satisfactorily illustrated. I have not yet been able to arrive at a definite result respecting the

LEUCKART, (R.,) Zool. Unters. q. a. — von Messina. Arch. Nat., 1857, I, p.

STEENSTRUP, (J.,) Die Hectocotylen- 41. — VAN DER HOEVEN, (J.,) Beitrag

bildung bei Argonauta und Treinoc- zur Anatomic von Nautilus Pomtopus. erklart durch Beobachtung pilius L., besonders des Mannlichen

iihnlicher Bildungen bei den Cepha- Thieres, Arch. f. Nat. 1857, I, page

lopoden im Allgerneinen, Arch. Nat., 77.

1856, I, p. 211.— TROSCHEL, (F. H.,) 1 That the Vorticellidae are Bryo-

Benierkungen uber die Cephalopoden zoa, has already been stated above.

Rhizopods, though they may represent, in the type of Mollusks, the stage of yolk-segmentation of Gasteropoda.1 From these remarks it should be inferred that I do not consider the Protozoa as a distinct branch of the animal kinoxlom, nor the Infusoria as a natural class.2

1 See also below, Chap. III., Sect. 1.

2 ScnuLTZE, (M.,) Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte den Turbellarien, Greifswakl, 1851, 4to., fig. — Zoologische Skizzeu, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1852, vol. 4, p. 178. MULLER, (J.,) Ueber eine eigenthumliche Wurrnlarve, etc., Archiv.r 1850, p. 485. — DESOR (E.,) On the Embryology of Nemertes, with an Appendix on the Embryonic Development of Polynoe, Boston Journ. Nat. Hist. 1850, vol. 6, p. 1 ; Miiller's Archiv, 1848, p. 511. — AGASSIZ, (L.,) Colpoda and Paramecium are larvse of Planariae, Proc. Am. Ass. Adv. Sc. ; Cambridge, 1849, p. 439. — GIRARD, (Cn.,) Embryonic Development of Planocera elliptica, Jour. Ac. Nat. Sc. Phil., 2d ser. 1854, vol. 2, p. 307. — EHRENBERG, (C. G.,) Die Infusionsthierchen, etc., q. a. — Microgeologie ; das Erder und Felsenschaffende Wirken des unsichtbaren kleinen selbststandigen Lebeus auf der Erde; Leipzig, 1854, fol. — Ueber den Griinsand und seine Erliiuterung des organischen Lebens, Ak. d., Wiss., Berlin, 1855, 4to. — KUTZING, (F. T.,) Ueber die Verwandlung der Infusorien in niedere Algenforrnen, Norclhausen, 1844, 4to., fig. — KOLLIKER, (A.,) Das Sonnenthierchen, Actinophrys Sol, Zeitsch. f. w. Zool. 1849, I, p. 198.— CLAPAKIDE, (ED.,) Ueber Actinophrys Eichomii, Miiller's Arch., 1854, p. 398. — SIEBOLD, (C. TH. E. v.,j Ueber einzellige Pflanzen undThiere, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1849, vol. 1, p. 270. — NAEGELL, (C.,) Gattungen einzelliger Algen ; Zurich, 1849, 4to. fig. — BRAUN, (A.,) Algarum unicellularium genera nova et minus coguita ; Leipzig, 1845, 4to. fig. — Ueber Chitridium, eine Gattungein Zellifer Schmarotzergeorachse auf Algen und

Infusiorien. Ak. cl. wiss. ; Berlin, 1855 — COHN, (F.,) Untersuchungen iiber die Entwickelungsgcschichte der Microscopischen Algen, Nov. Act. Acad. N. C. 1854, vol. 24, p. 101 ; Beitrage zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Infusorien, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1851, vol. 3, p. 257. — Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Infusorien, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1854, vol. 5, p. 420. — Ueber Encystirung von Amphileptus fasciola, ibid. p. 434. — Observation sur 1'organisation et la propagation des Volvocinees, Compt.- Rend. 1856, vol. 43, p. 1054.— Ueber Fortpflanzung von Nassula elegans, Zeit. f. wiss. Zool. 1857, vol. 9, p'. 143. — SCHULTZE, (M.,) Ueber den Organismus der Polythalamien ; Leipzig, 1854, 1 vol. fol. fig. — Beobachtungen iiber die Fortpflanzung der Polythalamien, Miiller's Archiv, 1856, p. 165. — ARCHIAC (Vic. D') andHAiNE (J.), Description des anhnaux fossiles du groupe uummulitique de 1'Inde ; Paris, 1853, 4to. — CARTER (H. J.,) Description of some of the Larger Forms of Fossilized Forarninifera in Scinde, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 1853, p. 161. — CARPENTER(\V.B.), Researches on the Foraminifera, Trans. Roy. Soc., London, 1856, i, p. 181; ii, p. 547. — HUXLEY (Tn. H.), Zoological Notes and Observations made on Board H.M.S. Rattlesnake, upon Thalassicola, a new Zoophyte ; Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 2nd ser., 1851, vol. viii, p. 433.— MULLER (J.), Ueber Sphcerozouin und Thalassicola, Ber. Ak. d. Wiss., Berlin, 1855, p. 229.— Ueber die im Hafen von Messina beobachteten Polycystinen ; Ibid., p. 671. — Ueber die Thalassicolen, Polycystinen und Acanthometren des Mittelmeeres, Ber. Ak. d. Wiss.; Berlin, 1856, p. 474. — ArjERBACH (L.), Ueber die Bin-

Taking the class of Worms in the widest sense, it would thus embrace the Helminths, Turbellariee, and Annulata,1 The embryology of these animals still requires careful study, notwithstanding the many extensive investigations to which they have been submitted ; the intestinal Worms especially continue to baffle the zeal of naturalists, even now, when the leading features of their development are ascertained. The Nematoids undergo a very simple development, without alternate generations, and, as some are viviparous, their changes can easily be traced.2 The Cestoids and Cystici, which were long conzelligkeit dcr Amoeben Zeitsch. f. wiss. ZooL, 1855, vol. 7, p. 365. — Ueber Encystirung von Oxytricha Pellionella, Zeitsch. f. wiss. ZooL, 1854, vol. 5, p. 430. — CIENKOWSKY, Ueber Cystenbildung bei Infusorien, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1855, vol. 6, p. 301. — LIEBERKUHN (N.), Ueber Protozoen, Zeit. f. w. ZooL, 1856, vol. 8, p. 30. — Beitrage zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Spongillen, Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 1.— Zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Spongillen, Nachtrag., Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 399.— Zusiitze zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Spongillen, Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 496. — Beitrage zur Anatomic der Spongien, Miiller's Arch., 1857, p. 376. — Beitriige zur Anatomic der Infusorien, Miiller's Arch.. 1856, p. 20. — SCHNEIDER (A.), Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte der Infusorien, Miiller's Arch., 1854, p. 191.— PERTY (MAX.), Zur Kenntniss Kleinster Lebensformen,nachBau,Function, Systematik; Bern, 1852.

1 BLANCHARD (E.), Reeherches sur 1'organisation des Vers ; Paris, 4to. ; part of Voyage en Sicile, by Milne- Edwards, De Quatrefages and Blanchard.

2 STEIN (F.), Beitrage zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Eingeweidewiirrner, Zeitsch. f. wiss. ZooL, 1852, vol. 4, p. 196.— NELSON (H.), On the

Reproduction of the Ascaris Mystax, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., 1852, II, p. 563. — THOMPSON (ALLEN), Ueber die Samenkarperchen, die Eier und die Befruchtung der Ascaris Mystax, Zeitsch. f. wiss. ZooL, 1S56, vol. 8, p. 425. — GRUBE (E.), Ueber einige Anguillulen und die Entwickeluug von Oordius Aquations, Wiegmann's Archiv, 1849, I, p. 358. — SIEBOLD (C. TH. E. v.), Ueber die Wanderung der Gordiaceen, Uebers d. Arb. und Ver. schles. Ges. f. vaterl. Kulture

1850, p. 38. — MEISSNER (G.), Beitriig, zur Anatomie und Physiologic von Mermis albicans, Zeitsch. f. wiss. ZooL, 1853, vol. 5, p. 207.— Beobachtungen iiber das Eindringen der Saanienelemente in den Dotter, Zeitsch. f. wiss. ZooL, 1855, vol. 6, p. 208 und 272. — Beitrage zur Anatomie und Physiologic der Gordiaceen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. ZooL, 1855, vol. 7, p. 1. — KOL- LIKER (A.), Beitrage zur Entwickelungsgeschichte wirbelloser Thiere, Miiller's Archiv, 1843, p. 68. — BAGGE (H.), Dissertatio inaug. de evolutione StrongyliauricularisekAscaridisacuminatce; Erlangen, 1841, 4to., fig. — LEIDY (Jos.), A Flora and Fauna within Living Animals, Smithson. Contrib., 1853, 4to., fig. — LUSCHKA (II.), Zur Naturgeschichte der Trichina spiralis, Zeitsch. f. wiss. ZooL,

1851, vol. 3, p. 69.— BISCHOFF (TH.),

sidered as separate orders of Helminths, are now known to stand in direct genetic connection with one another, the Cystici being only earlier stages of development of the Cestoids.1 The Trematods exhibit the most compli-

UeberEi-und Samenbildung und Bef. wiss. Zool., 1855, vol. 6, p. 377. — Wiederlegung, des von DR. KEBER bei den Najaden und DR. NELSON bei den Ascariden behaupteten Eindringens der Spermatozoiden in das Ei ; Giessen, 1854, 4to., fig. — Bestiitigung des von DR. NEWPORT bei den Batrachiern und DR. BARRY bei den Kaninchen behaupteten Eindringens der Spermatozoiden in das Ei ; Giessen, 1854, 4to.— DAVAINE (C.), Stir la inaladie du ble, counue sous le nora de nielle et sur les Helminthes qui occasionnent cette rnaladie, Compt.- Rend., 1855, vol. 41, p. 435.— CLAPA- REDE (ED.), Ueber Eibildung und Befruchtung bei den Nematoden, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1857, vol. 9, p. 106. — WALTER (G.), Beitrage zur Anatomic und Physiologic von Organis ornata, Zeitsch. f. w. Zool., 1856, vol. 8, p. 163.— WAGNER (G. R.), Ueber Dicyema, K61L, Miiller's Arch., 1857, p. 354. — LIEBERKUHN (N.), Beitrage zur Anatomic der Nematoden, Miiller's Arch., 1855, p. 314.

1 VAN BENEDEN (P. J.), Les Helminthes, Cestoides, etc., Bullet. Ac. Belg., vol. 16 et seq.; Mem. Ac. Brux., 1850, vol. 17 et seq. — Sur les Coeuures, Compt.-Rend., 1854, vol. 39, p. 46. — KOLLIKER (A.), Beitrage, etc., q. a., p. 81.— SIEBOLB (C. Tn. E. v.), Ueber den Generationswechsel der Cestoden, etc., Zeitsch. wiss. Zool., 1850, vol. 2, p. 198.— Ueber die Urnwandlung von Blasenwiirrner in Bandwiirmer, Uebers. d. Arb. und Ver. d. schles. Ges. f. vaterl. Kultur, 1852, p. 48. — Ueber die Verwandlung des Cysticercus pisiformis in Tcenia serrata, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1853, vol. 4, p. 400. — Ueber die Verwandlung der Echinococcus-Brut in Ttenien,

Ibid., 1853, p. 409.— Ueber die Bandund Blasenwimncr, nebst einer Einleitung liber die Entstehung der Eingeweidewiirmer ; Leipzig, 1854, 8vo., fig. ; translated in Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e ser., 1855, vol. 4.— HUXLEY (Tn. II.), On the Anatomy and Development of Echinococcus veterinorum, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 2nd ser., vol. xiv, p. 379. — KUCHENMEISTER (FR.), Ueber die Umwandlung der Finnen (Cysticerci) in Bandwiirrner (Tcenice) Prag. Vierteljahrssch. 1852, p. 106. — Extrait d'une lettre sur des experiences relatives a la transmission des Vers Intestinaux chez 1'espece humaiue, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e ser., 1855, vol. 3. — Gas de transformation de Cysticerques cellulaires en Tcenict Solum clans 1'organisme humain, Compt.-Rend., 1854, vol. 39, p. 1180. — WAGENER (R. G.), Die Entwickelung der Cestoden; Bonn, 1855, 1vol. 4to.fig. — HelnrinthologischeBernerkungen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1857, vol. 9, p. 73. — MEISSNER (G.), Zur Entwickeluugsgeschichte und Anatomic der Bandwurrner, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1854, vol. 5, p. 380. — LEUCKART (R.), Erziehung des Cysticercus fasciolar is aus den Eiern der Tcenia crassicollis, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1854, vol. 6, p. 139.— MILNE- EDWARDS, Nouvelles experiences sur la transmission et les metamorphoses de vers intestinaux, et VALENCIENNES (A.),Remarques au sujetde la precedente communication, Compt.-Rend., 1855, vol. 40, p. 997.— Lettre relative a des nouvelles experiences sur le developpement des Vers Intestinaux, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e ser., 1855, vol. 3 — Die Blasenbanduriner und ihre Entwickelung, Zeitsch. im Beitrag. zur Kenntniss der Cysticercus leber, Giessen,185Q,4to. — AUBERT(H.), Ueber Gryporhynchus pusillus, ein$ freie

I 2

cated phenomena of alternate generations ; but, as no single species has thus far been traced through all the successive stages of its transformations, doubts are still entertained respecting the genetic connection of many of the forms which appear to belong to the same organic cycle.1 It is also still questionable, whether the Grregarinse and Psorospermia are embryonic forms or not, though the most recent investigations render it probable that they are.2 The development of the Annulata, as they are now

Cestoden Amme, Zeitsch. f. w. Zool., 1856, vol. 8, p. 274.

1 NORDMANN (AL. v.), Micrographische Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte cler wirbellosen Thiere ; Berlin, 1832, 4to. fig. — Bo JANUS (L.), Zerkarien und ihr Fundort, Isis 1818, vol.4, p. 729. — Enthelininthica Isis 1821, p. 1G2. — CABUS, Beobachtungen iiber einen merkwiirdigen Eingeweidewurin, Leucochloridium paradoxum, Nov. Act. Ac. Nat. Cur., vol. 17, p. 85.— SIEBOLD (C.TH.E.V.), Ilelminthologische Beitrage, Wiegman's Archiv, 1835, vol. 1, p. 45. — Ueber die Conjugation des Diplozoon paradoxurn, etc., Zeitsch. f. wiss., Zool. ,1851, vol. 3, p. 62. — Gyrodactylus, ein amrnendes Wesen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool.,

1849, vol. 1, p. 347. — STEENSTRUP (J.), Generationswechel, etc., q. a. — BILHARZ (Th.), Ein Beitrag zur Helmiuthographia huniana, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1852, vol. 4, p. 59. — AGASSIZ (L.), Zoological Notes, etc., Amer. Journ. Sc. and A. 1852, vol. 13, p. 425.— BAER (K. E. v.), Beitriige zur Kenntniss der niederen Thiere, Act. Nov. Nat. Cur. 1827, vol. 13. — AUBERT (H.), Ueber das Wassergefass-system,dieGeschlechtsverhiiltnisse, die Eibildung und die Entwickelung von Aspidoqaster conchicola, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1855, vol. 6, p. 349.— LEIDY (Jos.), Description of two new Species of Distoma, with the partial History of one of them, Jour. Ac. Nat. Sc. Phil.

1850, vol. 1, p. 301, fig. — LAVALETTE

(A. DE), Syrnboke ad Trematoduui evolutionis historiam, Diss. inaug. ; Berolini, 1855, 4to. — FILIPPI (Tn. DE), Mernoire pour servir a 1'histoire genetique des Trernatodes, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e. ser. 1854, vol. 2. — Quelques nouvelles observations sur les larves des Trematodes, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e ser., 1856, vol. 6. — CLAPAREDE (ED.). Ueber die Kalkkorperchen der Trematoden und die Gattung Tetracotyle, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1857, vol. 9, p. 99.

2 MULLER (J.), Ueber eine eigenthumliche krankhafte parasitische Bildung, etc., Miiller's Archiv, 1841, p. 477. — Ueber parasitische Bildungen, etc., Miiller's Archiv, 1842, p. 193. — DCFOUR (L.), Note sur la Gregarine, etc., Ann. Sc. Nat., 1828, vol. 13, p. 366, fig.— Ibid., 2de ser., 1837, vol. 7, p. 10.— SIEBOLD (C. TH. E. v.), Beitrage, etc., q. a. ; p. 56-71. — HAM- MERSCHMIDT (C. ED.), Helrninthologische Beitrage, Isis 1838, p. 351. — KOLLIKER (A.), Die Lehre von der thierischen Zelle, etc., Zeitsch. wiss. Botanik. 1845, vol. i., p. 46, and p. 97. — Beitrage zur Kenntniss niederer Thiere, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1848, vol. i. p. 1. — HENLE (J.), Ueber die Gattung Gregarina, Miiller's Archiv, 1845, p. 369.— FRANTZIUS (AL. v.), Observationes qusedam de Gregarinis, Berolini, 1846.— STEIN (F.), Ueber die Natur der Gregarinen, Miiller's Archiv, 1848, p. 182, fig.— BRUCII (C.), Einige Bemerkungen iiber die Gregarinen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool.

11'

circumscribed, exhibits great variety :l some resemble more the Nematoids, in their metamorphoses, while others,

1850, vol. 2, p. 110.— LEYDIG (F.) Ueber Psorospermicn und Gregarinen, Miiller's Archiv, 1851, p. 221. — LEIDY (Jos.), On the Organization of the Genus Gregarina, Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. 1851, vol. 10, p. 233.— Some Observations on Nematoidea imperfecta and Descriptions of three parasitic Infusoria, Trans. Anier. Phil. Soc. 1851, vol. 10, p. 241.— LIEBERKUHN (N.), Ueber die Psorospermien, Miiller's Archiv, 1854, p. 1. — SCHMIDT (A. ),Beitriig zur Kenntniss der Gregarinen, Abh. Leuk. Gesell. 1854. — Ueber parasitische Schlauche auf einigen Insektenlarven, Miiller's Archiv, 1856, p. 494.— Comp. also note 2, p. 113.

2 WEBER, (E. EL), Ueber die Entwickelung von Hirudo medicinalis, Meckel' s Archiv, 1828, p. 366, fig.— FILIPPI (FiL DE), Sopra 1'anatornia e lo sviluppo delle Clepsine, Pavia, 1839, 8vo. fig. — LOVEN ( J.), Beobachtungen iiber die Metamorphose einer Annelide, K. Vet. Ac. Handl. 1840, Wiegman's Archiv, 1842, vol. i., p. 302. — OERSTED (A. S.), Ueber die Entwickelung der Jungen bei einer Annelide, etc., Wiegmann's Archiv, 1845, vol. i. p. 20.— SARS (M.), Zur Entwickelung de Annelidcn, Wiegmann's Archiv, 1845, vol., i., p. 11. — MENGE (A.), Zur Roth-Wiiruier Gattung Euaxes, Wiegmann's Archiv, 1845, vol. i., p. 24.— GRUBE (A. E.), Zur Anatomic und Entwickelung der Kiemeuwiiriner, Konigsberg, 1838, 4to. Actinien, Echinoderrnen und Wiirmer, etc., Konigsberg, 1843, 4to. fig. — Untersuchungen iiber die Entwickelung der Clepsine, Dorpat, 1844.— EDWARDS (H. MILNE-), Observations sur le developpement des Annelides, Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser. 1845, vol. 3, p. 145. — KOCH (H.), Einige Worte zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Eunice, mit einem Nachworte von Kolliker, N. Denksch. Schw. Gesell., 3847, vol. 8, 4to. fig. — QUATREFAGES (A. DE), Menioire sur rEiubryogeuic

des Annelides, Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser., 1848, vol. 10, p. 153, fig.— DESOR (E.), On the Embryology, etc., q. a. — LEIDY (Jos.), Descriptions of some American Annelida abranchia, Journ. Ac. Nat. Sc. Phil. 1850, vol. 2, p. 43, fig. (Lunibricillus contained several thousand large Lcucophrys. The case related here by Leidy seems to me to indicate rather the hatching of Opalinas from the eggs Lumbricillus, than the presence of parasitic Leucophrys.) — SCHULTZE (M.) Ueber die Fortpflanzung clurch Theilung bei Nais proboscidea, Wiegmann's Archiv, 1849, I., p. 293 ; id. 1852, I., p. 3. — Zoologische Skizzen (Arenicolapiscat.) Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1852, vol. 4, p. 192.— Abh. Nat. Gesellsch. in Halle, vol. 4. — BUSCH (W.), Beob. iiber Anat. und Entw. q. a. (p. 55.) — MiiLLER (M.), Observationes anatomicas de Vermibus quibusdarn maritimis, Berolini, 1852, 4to. ; Miiller's Archiv, 1852, p. 323. — Ueber die weitere Entwickelung von Mesotrocha sexocidata, Miiller's Archiv, 1855, p. 1.- Ueber Saccpnereis helgolandica, Miiller's Archiv, 1855, p. 13. — KROHN (A.), Ueber die Erscheiuungen bei cler Fortpflanzung von Syllis, Wiegman's Archiv, 1852, I., p. 66. — Ueber die Sprosslinge von Aittolytus prolifer Gr., Miiller's Archiv, 1855, p. 489. — LEUCKART (R.), Ueber die ungeschlechtliche Vermehrung bei Nais proloscidea, Weigman's Archiv, 1851, p. 134.— Ueber die Jugendzustaude einiger Anneliden, Wiegman's Archiv, 1855, I., p. 63. — QTJATREFAGES (A. DE), Mernoire sur la generation alternante des Syllis, Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e ser., 1854, vol. 2. — Note sur le developpement des Spermatozoides chez la Torrea vitrea, Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e ser., 1854, vol. 2. — HERING (Ew.), Zur Anatomic und Physiologic der Gcnerationsorgane des Regenswurms, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1856, vol. 8, p. 400.— GOSSE (PH. H.), Tenby, q. a.—

the Leeches for instance, approximate more to the type of the Trematods. The Sipunculoids are no doubt more closely related to the Anmilata than to the Holothurioids.1 The class of Crustacea, 011 the contrary, may be considered as one of the best known, as far as its zoological characters and embryonic growth are concerned, the only point still questioned being the relationship of the Kotifera.2 In their mode of development the Lernseans, the Entomostraca proper, and the Cirripeds, agree as closely with one another as they differ from the higher Crustacea. This conformity3 is the more interesting, as the low posi-

UDEKEM (J.i>'),Nouvelle classification des Annelides Setigenes abranches, Bull. Ac.; Brux. 1855, IT., p. 533.

1 PETERS (W.), Ueber die Fortpflanzungsorgane des Sipunculus, Miiller's Archiv, 1850, p. 382.— MiiL- LER (M.), Ueber eine den Sipunculiden verwandte Wurnilarve, Muller's Archiv, 1850, p. 439. — KROHN (A.), Ueber die Larve des /Sipunculus nudus, etc., Muller's Archiv, 1851, p. 368. — SCHMARDA (L.), Zur NaturgeschichtederAdria(Z»<me^'«t> iridis) Denksch. Wien. Akad. ] 852, vol. 4, p. 117,%.

! EHHENBERG (C. J.), Die Infusionsthierchen, etc., q. a. — DALRYM- PLE (J.), Description of an Infusory Animalcule allied to the Genus Notorama, Philos. Trans. 1844, II., p. 331. — NAEGELI (H.), Beitriige zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Raderthiere, Diss. iuaug. Zurich, 1852, 8vo. fig. — LEYDIG (Fn.), Ueber den Bau uud die systematische Stellung der Riiderthiere, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1854, vol. 6, p. 1. — Zur Anatomic und Entwickelungsgeschichte derZacinularia socicdis, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1852, vol. 3, p. 452.— Ueber Hydatina Scata, Muller's Arch. 1857, p. 404.— COHN (F.), Ueber die Fortpflanzung der Riiderthiere, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1855, vol. 7, p. 431.— HUXLEY (Til. H.), Lacinularia socialis, Trans. M. Soc., Micr. Jouru.

1852, p. 12.— WILLIAMSON (W. C.), On the Anatomy of Melicerta ringens. Quart. Micr. Journ. 1852, p.'l. — BDRMEISTER (H.), Noch eiuige Worte iiber die systematische Stellung der Riiderthiere, Zeit. f. w. Zool. 1856, vol. 8, p. 152. — GOSSE (Tn. H.), On the Structure, Functions and Homologies of the Manducatory organs in the class Rotifera, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. ; London, 1856, II., p. 419.

3 JURINE (L.), Histoire des Monocles qui se trouvent aux environs de Geneve ; Paris, 1806, 4to. fig.— MILNE-EDWARDS (H.), in Cuvier, Regn.An.edit. illustr. q.a. Crustaces; represents young Limulus. — ZAD- DACH (E. G.), De Apodis cancriformis Anatomia et Historia evolutionis BonnjB, 1841, 4to. fig. — NORDMANN (AL. v.), Microgr. Beitr. q. a. — LEY- DIG (FR.), Ueber Argulus foliaceus, ein Beitrag zur Anatomic, Histologie nnd Eutwickelungsgeschichte dieses Thieres, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1850, vol. 2, p. 323. — Ueber Artemia salina und Drancliipus staqnalis, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1851, voL 3, p. 280.— VAN- BEXEDEN (P. J.), Recherches sur quelques Crustaces inferieurs Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser. 1851, vol. 16, p. 71.— Memoire sur le developpement et 1'organisation des Nicothoes, Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser. 1850, vol. 13, p. 354. GEGEKBAUR (C.), Ueber die Entwickclung der Sagitta, Abh. d. na-

lion which the Eutomostraca hold in the class of Crustacea agrees strikingly with their early appearance in geological times ; while the form of the adult Cirripeds1 and that of the Lernseans would hardly lead one to suspect their near relationship, which has, indeed, been entirely overlooked, until the study of their metamorphoses showed that their true position is among the Crustacea. In the development of the higher Crustacea,2 their superior rank is plainly exturf. Ges. zu Halle, 1856, 4to. vol. 4, p. 1. — KROHN (A.), Auatomischpkysiologische Beobachtungen iiber die Sagitta Copunctata ; Hamburgh, 1844. — Nachtragliche Bemerkungen, etc., Muller's Arch., 1853, p. 266. — WILMS, Observationes de Sagitta mare Gerinauicum circa insulam Helgoland incolente ; Berolini, 1846.— HUXLEY (Tii. H.), Observations on the genus Sagitta. Rep. Brit. Ass. for 1851, p. 77. — DARWIN (Cn.), Observations on the Structure and Propagation of the genus Sagitta. An. Mag. Nat. Hist. 1844, vol. 13, p. 1. — BUSCH (W.), Beobachtungen, q. a. — BARRANDE (J.), Syst. sil. q. a. ; contains the first observations upon the transformations of Trilobites.

1 THOMPSON (W. V.), Zoological Researches and Illustrations, or Natural History of nondescript or imperfectly known Animals, Cork, 1828-34, Svo., fig. — BURMEISTER (H.), Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte der Rankenfiisser ( Cirripedia), Berlin, 1834, 1 vol. 4to. fig. — COLD- STREAM (J.) Article Cirrhopoda, in Todd's Cyclopedia, London, 1836, vol. 1, p. 683.— GOODSIR (H. D. S.), On the Sexes, Organs of Reproduction, and Development of Cirripeds, Ed. N. Phil. J. 1843, No. 35, p. 88, fig.— MARTIN ST. ANGE (G. J.), Memoire sur 1'organisation des Cirripedes et sur leurs rapports naturels avec les animaux articulus, Ann. Sc. Nat. 1831, p. 366, fig. — DARWIN (Cn.), A Monograph of the sub-class

Cirripedia, with Figures of all the Species, London, 1851, 2 vols. Svo. (Ray Society). — BATE (SPENCE), On the Development of the Cirripedia, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist. 2d ser. vol.8, p. 324.— GOSSE (Tn. H.), Tenby, q. a. 2 RATHKE (H.), Untersuchungen iiber die Bildung und Entwickelung des Flusskrebses, Leipzig, 1829, 1 vol. fol. fig. — Beitrage zur Fauna Norvegica, Act., Nov. Ac. Leop. Gses. vol. 20. — Beitrage zur vergieichenden Anatomic and Physiologic, Reisebemerkungen aus Skandinavien, Dautzig, 1842, 4to. — Zur Morphologic, Reisebemerkungen aus Taurien, Riga und Leipzig, 1837. 4to. fig. — Ueber die Entwickelung der Decapoden, Muller's Archiv, 1836, p. 187, Wiegnian's Archiv, 1840, I., p. 241. — Beobachtungen und Betrachtungen iiber die Entwickelung der Mysis vulgaris, Wiegman's Archiv, 1839, p. 195, fig.— ERDL (M. P.), Entwickelung des Hummereies, Munchen, 1843, 4to. fig. — EDWARDS (II. MILNE-), sur la generation des Crustaces, Ann. Sc. Nat. 1829.— Observations sur les changeinents de forme que divers Crustaces eprouvent dans le jeune age, Ann. Sc. Nat. 2de sur. vol. 3, p. 321. — AGASSIZ (L.), Zoological Notes, etc., Am. Jour. Sc. and A., 1852, p. 426. — Recent Researches, etc., Am. Jour. Sc. and A., 1852, vol. 16, p. 136.— BATE (Sp.)? On the British Edriophthalma, Report Brit. Ass., 1855, p. 18. — LEREBOULLET, Resum6, etc., Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e ser. 1854, vol.1.— GOSSE (T.H.),Tenby,q.a,

hibited ; and few types show more directly a resemblance, in their early stages of growth, to the lower members of their class, than the Brachyura.

In the class of Insects, I include Myriapods, Arachnoids, and the true Insects, as, according to the views expressed hereafter, these natural groups constitute only different degrees of complication of the same combination of organic systems, and must therefore be considered as natural orders of one and the same class. This class, though very extensively studied in a zoological and anatomical point of view, and as far as the habits of its representatives are concerned, still, however, requires much patient work, as the early embryonic development of these animals has been much less studied than their later transformations.1 The type of the Arachnoids embraces two groups, the

1 HEKOLD (M.), Entwickelungsgeschichte der Schmetterliuge, etc., Kassel und Marburg, 1815, 4to. fig. — Disquisitiones de animalium vertebris carentiurn in ovo fortnatione, Frankfurt a. M., 1835, fol. fig.— RATHKE (H.), Entwickelungsgeschichte der BUitta germanica, Mcckel's Archiv, 1832.— Zur Etitwickelungsgeschichte der Maul- \vurfsgrille (Gryllotalpa vulgaris), Miiller's Archiv, 1844, p. 27.— KOL- LIKER (A.), Observationes de pritna Insectorum Genesi, Turici, 1842, 4to. fig. — ZADPACH (G.), Die Entwickelung des Phryganiden Eies, Berlin, 1 vol. 4to. 1854. — LEUCKABDT (R.), Ueber die Micropyle und den feinern Bau der Schalenhaut bei den Insekteneiern, Muller's Arch., 1855, p. 90. — NEWPORT (Gso.), On the Organs of Reproduction and the Development of Myriapoda, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 1842, II., p. 99.— On the Anatomy and Development of Meloe, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 1848, vol. 1, p. 377, vol. 2, p. 145. — STEIN (FR.), Vergleichende Anatomic und Physiologic der Insecten, Iste Monogr., Die wciblichen Geschlechtsorgane der Kafer, Berlin, 1847, fol. fig.— SIEBOLD (C. TH. E. v.), Ueber die Fortpflanzung vonPsyche,Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1848, vol. 1, p. 93.— Wahre Parthenogenesis bei Schmetterlingen und Bienen, Ein Beitrag zur Fortpfianzungsgeschichte der Thiere, Leipzig, 1856, 8vo. ; see also Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e s6r. 1856, vol. 6. — LEYDIG (FR.), Einige Bernerkungen iiber die Entwickelung der Blattliiuse, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1850, vol. 2, p. 62.— MEYER (H.), Ueber die Entwickeluug des Fcttkorpers, der Tracheen und der keiinbereitendenGeschlechtstheile bei den Lepiclopteren, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1849, vol. 1.— BURNETT (W. I.), Researches on the Development of viviparous Aphides, Amer. Jour. Sci. and Arts, 1854, vol. 17, p. 62 and 261.— FABRE, Recherches sur 1'anatomie des organes reproducteurs et sur le development des Myriapodes, Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e ser. 1855, vol. 3. — Etude sur 1'instinct et les metamorphoses des Sphegiens, Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e ser. 1856, vol. 6. — SAUSSURE (HENRY DE), Nouvelles considerations sur la uidification des guepes, Ann. Sc. Nat.

Acari and the Arachnoids proper, corresponding respectively in this class to the Entomostraca and the higher Crustacea. The embryo of the Acari resembles somewhat that of the Entomostraca, whilst that of the true Spiders1 recalls the metamorphosis of the higher Crustacea. On the ground of the similarity of their young, some animals, formerly referred to the class of Worms,2 are now considered as Arachnoids ; but the limits between the aquatic Mites and the Pycnogonums are not yet quite denned.

In the branch of Vertebrata, all classes have been extensively studied, and, as far as the principal types are concerned, the leading features of their development are satisfactorily known. Much, however, remains to be done

4e ser. 1855, vol. 3.— SEMPER (C.), Ueber die Bilduag der Fliigel, Schuppen und Haare bei den Lepidopteren, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1856, vol. 8, p. 326. — LEUCKART (R.), Die Fortpfianzuug und Entwickelung der Pupiparen, Abh. d. naturf. Ges. zu Halle, 1858, vol. 4, p. 145.— As far as the metamorphoses of Insects, after the eclysis of the larva, are concerned, I must refer to the works of Reaumur and Roesel, already quoted, and to almost every modern book upon Entomology. The metamorphoses of North American Insects are minutely described in Harris's Report, q. a., p. 85.

1 HEROLD (M.), De generatione Aranearum in ovo, Marburgi, 1824, fol. fig. — RATIIKE (H.), Ueber die Entwickelung des Scorpions ; Zur Morphologic, q. a. — VAN BENEDEN (P. J.), Recherches sur 1'Histoire naturelle et le developpement de VAtax ypsilophora, Mem. Ac. Brux., 1850, vol. 24, p. 444.— WITTICH (W. H. v.), Observations quasdarn de aranearum ex ovo evolutione, Diss. inaug. Halis. Sax., 1845. — Die Entstehung des Arachnideneies im Eierstock, Mi.iller's Arch., 1849, p. 113. — CARUS (J. V.), Ueber die Entwickelung des

Spinneneies, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1850, vol. 2, p. 97.— DUJARDIN (F.), Memoire sur des Acariens sans bouches, dont on a fait le genre Hypopus et qui sont le premier age des Garnaases, Ann. Sc. Nat. 1849, vol. 12, p. 243 et 259. — BLANCHARD (E.), Observations relatives a la generation des Arachnides, Comptes- Rendus, 1857, vol. 44, p. 741. — SCHEXJTER (A.), Einiges iiber Milben, Arch. f. Naturg. 1857, 1., p. 104. 2 KAUFMANN (Jos.), Ueber die Entwickelung und zoologische Stellung der Tardigraden, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1851, vol. 3, p. 220.— VAN BENEDEN (P. J.), Recherches sur 1'orgauisation et le developpement des Linguatules (Pentastoma), Mem. Acad. Brux., vol. 15, I., p. 188.— SCHUBERT (T. D.), Ueber Entwickelung von Pentastomum tcenioides, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1852, vol. 2, p. 117. — WILSON (E.), Researches into the Structure and Development of a newly discovered Parasitic Animalcule of the Human Skin, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 1844, p. 305.— SEMPER (C.), Zur Anatomic und Eutwickclungsgeschichte der Gattung Myzostoma, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1857,vol. 9, p. 48.

in ascertaining the minor modifications characteristic of tlie different families. It may even be, that further investigations will greatly modify the general classification of the whole branch. The class of Fishes1 may require sub-

1 FORCHHAMMER, (G.,) De Bleniiii vipipari formatione et evolutions observationes, Kiel, 1819, 4to. — PRE- VOST, (J. L.,) De la generation chez le Sechot (Cottus Gobio), Mem. Soc. Phys. et Hist. Nat. Geneve, vol. 4, ] 828, 4to.— RATHKE, (H.,) Beitriige zur Geschichte der Thiervvelt, Halle, 1820-27, 4 vols. 4to. fig.— Abhandlungen zur Bildungs- und Entwickelungsgeschichte des Menschen und der Thiere ; Leipzig, 1832-33, 2 vols. 4to. fig. — Ueber das Ei einiger Lacbsarten, Meckel's Archiv, 1832, p. 392, — BAER, (K. E. v.,) Untersuchungen liber dieEutwickelungsgeschichte der Fiscbe ; Leipzig, 1835, 4to. — Also Entw. der Thiere, q. a., vol. 2. — DAVY, (J.,) On tbe Development of the Torpedo, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., 1834. — Some observations on the ova of the Salmon, in relation to the distribution of species, Trans. Roy. Soc. ; London, 1856, I, p. 21. — FILIPPI, (FiL. DE,) Memoria sullo sviluppo del Gobius fluviatilis, Annal. Medic., Milano, 1841, 8vo. fig. — RUSCONI, (M.,) Sopra la fecondatione artificiale nei pesci, Giorn. delle Sc. Med.-chir., Pavia, vol. 9 ; trausl. in Miiller's Archiv, 1840, p. 185. — Lettre sur les chaugements que les ceufs de Poissons eprouvent avant qu'ils aient pris la forme d'embryon, Ann. Sc. Nat., 2dc ser. vol. 5 ; transl. Mag. Zool. and Bot., L, p. 586. — AGASSIZ, (L.,) Histoire naturelle des Poissons d'eau douce de 1'Europe centrale, vol. 1. Embryologie des Salrnones, par C. VOGT, Neuchatel, 1842, 8vo. atlas fol. These investigations were made under my direction and supervision. The reader may compare the preface to this work with a letter published in Zeitsch. f. wisseusch. Zoologie, 1855, vol. 7, p. 328. — MULLER, (J.,) Ueber den glatten Hai des Aristoteles, und

iiber die Verschiedenheiten unter den Haifischen und Rochen in der Entwickelung des Eies ; Berlin, 1842, fol. fig. — LEUCKART, (F. S.,) Untersuchungen iiber die aussern Kiernen der Ernbryonen von Rochen und Haien ; Stuttgardt, 1836, 8vo. fig. — LEYDIG, (PR.,) Beitrage zur rnicroscopischen Anatomic und Entwickelungsgeschichte der Rochen und Haie ; Leipzig, 1852, 1 vol. 8vo. fig. — CARUS, (C. G.,) Erlauterungstafeln, etc., No. 3 ; Leipzig, 1831, fol. fig. — SHAW, ( J.,) Account of some Experiments and Observations on the Parr, etc., Edinb. New Phil. Journ., vol. 21, p. 99.— On the Development and Growth of the Fry of the Salmon, etc., Ibid. vol. 24, p. 165 ; also Ann. Nat. Hist., I. p. 75, and IV. p. 352. — YARRELL, (W.,) Growth of the Salmon in Fresh Water, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., IV. p. 334. — DUVERNOY, (G. L.,) Observations pour servir a, la connaissance du developpement de la Peeilie de Surinam, Ann. Sc. Nat., 1844, 3e ser. I. p. 313, fig. — COSTE, (P.,) Histoire geuerale et particuliere du developpement des corps organises ; Paris, 1847-53, 4to., Atl. fol., 2d Fasc., Epinoche. — QUA- TREFAGES, (ARM. DE,) Menioire sur les Embryons des Syngnathes, Ann. Sc. Nat., 2de ser. vol. 18, p. 193, fig. — Sur le developpement embryonaire des Blennies, etc., Comptes-Rendus, vol. 17, p. 320. — VALENCIENNES, (A.,) Anableps in CUVIER et VALENCI- ENNES, Histoire naturelle des Poissons ; Paris, 1846, vol. 18, p. 245. — WYMAN, (J.,) Observations on the Development of Anableps Gronovii, Journ. Bost. Nat. Hist., 1854, vol. 6, fig. — On some peculiar modes of gestation observed in certain animals of Guiana, Proc. Bost. Nat. Hist., 1857. — AGASSIZ, (L.,) Extraordinary Fishes from California, constituting a new

division, since the development of the Plagiostoms differs greatly from that of the ordinary fishes. As it now stands in our systems, the class of Fishes is certainly the most heterogeneous amonQ- Vertebrata. The disagreement of

O O

authors, as to the limits and respective value of its orders and families, may be partly owing to the unnatural circumscription of the class itself. l As to the Reptiles, it is

family, Amer. Journ. Sc. and A., 1853, vol. 16, p. 380. — Embryology of LophiusAmericanusiPiOG.Aro..A.c.l855.

— LEREBOULLET, (A.,) Recherches sur 1' Anatomic des organes genitaux des animaux Vertebres, N. Act. Ac. Nat. Cur., vol. 23, p. 1. — Resume d'un travail d'embryologie compares sur le developperueut du Brocket, de la Perche et de 1'Ecrevisse, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e ser., 1854, vol. 1. — AUBERT, (H.,) Beitrage zur Entwickeluugsgeschichte der Fische, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1853, vol. 5, p. 94 ; 1855, vol. 7. — VALENTIN, (G-.,) Zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Fische, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1850, vol. 2, p. 267.— LETTCKART, (R.,) Ueber die allmahlige Bildung der Korpergestalt bei den Rochen, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1850, vol. 2, p. 258. — HAECKEL, (E.,) Ueber die Eier der Scomberesoces, Miiller's Arch., 1855, p. 23. — RETZITJS, (A.,) Ueber den grosseu Fetttropfen in den Eiern der Fische, Miiller's Arch., 1855, p. 34. — BHUCH, (C.,) Ueber die Micropyle der Fische, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1855, vol.7, p. 172. — REICHERT, (K.B.,) Ueber die Micropyle der Fischeier, etc., Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 83. — Ueber die Miiller-Wolffschen Korper bei Fischembryonen, etc., Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 125. — DerNahrungsdotter des Hechteies eine contractile Substanz, Muller's Arch., 1857, p. 46. — DOWLER, (B.,) Discovery of a Viviparous Fish in Louisiana, Amer. Jour. Sc. and Arts, 1855, vol. 19, p. 133, with Remarks by L. AGASSIZ, p. 136. — SCHULTZE, (M.,) Note sur le devcloppeincnt des Petromyzous, Comptes-Rendus, 1856, p. 336 ; Ann. and

Mag. Nat. Hist., 2d ser., 1856, vol. 17, p. 443. — MULLER, (A.,) Ueber die Entwickelung der Neunaugen, Miiller's Arch., 1856, p. 303 ; translated in Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e ser., 1856, vol. 5. The unexpected facts mentioned here, render it highly probable, that Amphioxus is the immature state of some marine Cyclostorn. — DUFOSSE, De 1'hermaphrodisme chez certains Vertebres, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e ser., 1856, vol. 5.

1 The peculiarities of the development of the Plagiostoms consist not so much in the few large eggs they produce, and the more intimate connection which the embryo of some of them assumes with the parent, as in the development itself, which, notwithstanding the absence of an amnios and an allantois, closely resembles, in its early stages, that of the Reptiles proper and of the Birds, especially in the formation of the vascular system, the presence of a sinus terminalis, etc. Again, besides the more obvious anatomical differences existing between the Plagiostoms and the bony Fishes, it should be remembered, that, as in the higher Vertebrata, the ovary is separated from the oviducts in the Sharks and Skates, and the eggs are taken up by a wide fallopian tube. That the Plagiostoms can hardly be considered simply as an order in the class of Fishes might even be inferred from the fact, that they do not constitute a natural series with the other Fishes. I would, therefore, propose the name of SELA- CHIANS for a distinct class, embracing

already certain that the Amphibia and Reptiles proper, so long united as one class, constitute two distinct classes. In the main, the development of the true Reptiles1 agrees very closely with that of the Birds, while the Amphibians2

the Sharks, Skates, and Chimreras. Recent investigations upon the Cyclostoms show them also to differ widely from the Fishes proper, and they too ought to be separated as a distinct class, for which the name of MYZONTES may be most appropriate.

1 VOLKMANN (G. W.), De Colulris natricis Generatione, Lipsise, 1834, 4to. — RATHKE (H.), Eutwickclungsgeschichte der Natter (Coluber matrix), Konigsberg, 1839, 4to. fig. — Untersuchungen iiber die Aortenwurfeln, Denksch. Ak. Wiss. Wien, 1857, vol. 13.— WEINIAND (D.), Ueber den Eizahn der Ringelmatter, "Wiirt. Nat. Hist. Jahreshefte, 1855. — TIEDEMANN (F.), Ueber das Ei und den Foetus der Schildkrote, Heidelberg, 1828, 4to. fig.— BAER (K. E. v.), Beitritge zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Schildkroten, Midler's Archiv, 1834, p. 544. — RATHKE (H.), Ueber die Entwickelung der Schildkroten, Braunschweig, 1848, 4to. fig.

2 ROSEL v. ROSENHOF (A. J.), Historia naturalis Ranarum nostratiurn, etc., Norimb., 1758, fol. fig. — FUNK (A. F.), De Sdlamandrce terrestris vita, evolutione, formatione, etc., Berlin, 1826, fol. fig.— RATHKE (H.), Diss. de Salamandrarum corporibus adiposis eorunique evolutione, Berol. 1818. — Ueber die Entstehung und Entwickelung der Geschlechtstheile bei den Urodelen, N. Schr. Dantz. Naturf. Ges., 1820.— STEINHEIM (L.), Die Eutwickelung der Frosche, Haniburg, 1820, 8vo. fig. — HASSELT (J. CONK., VAN), Dissert, exhibens Observationes de metamorphosi quarumdam partiura Ranee temporaries, Gottingrc, 1820, 8vo. — PREVOST (J. L.), et LEBERT, Mernoire sur la formation des organes de la circulation et du Sang dans les Batracieus,

Ann. Sc. Nat. 3e ser I. p. 193, fig. — RUSCONI (M.), Developpement de la Grenouille commune, depuis le moment de sa naissance jusqu'a son etat parfait, Milan, 1828, 4to. fig. — Amours des Salamandres aquatiques et developpement du Tetard de ces Salamandres, etc., Milan, 1822, 4to. fig. — BAER (K. E.v.), Die Metamorphose des Eies der Batrachier vor der Erscheinung des Embryo, etc., Midler's Archiv, 1834, p. 481.— Entwickelungsgeschichte, etc., vol. 2, p. 280.— REICHERT (K. B.), DasEiitwickelungsleben im Wirbelthierreich, Berlin, 1840, 4to. fig— Vergleicheude Entwickelungsgeschichte des Kopfes der nackten Amphibien, etc., Kouigsberg, 1838, 4to. fig. — Ueber den Furchungsprocess der Batrachier-Eier, Muller's Archiv, 1841, p. 523. — VOGT (C.), Untersuchungen iiber die Entwickelungsgeschichte der Geburtshelferkrote, Solothurn, 1841, 4to. fig. — Quelques observations sur 1'embryologie des Batraciens, Ann. Sc. N., 3e ser. vol. 2, p. 45. — REMAK (R.), Untersuchungen iiber die Entwickelung der Wirbelthiere, Berlin, 1855, fol. — NEWPORT (G.), On the Impregnation of the Ovum in the Amphibia, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 1851, I., p. 169; 1853, II., p. 233; 1854, II., p. 229.— WIT- TICH (W. H. v.), Beitrage zur morphologischen und histologischcn Entwickelung der Ham- mid Geschlechtswerkzeuge der nackten Arnphibien, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1852, vol. 4, p. 125.— WEINLAND (D.), Ueber den Beutelfrosch, Muller's Archiv, 1854, p. 449.— WYMAN (J.), Observations on Pipa Americana, Am. Jour. Sc. and Arts, 2d ser 1854, vol. 17, p. 369.— THOMAS (A.), Note sur la generation du Felody te ponctue, Ann. Sc. Nat. 4e ser., vol. 1.

more resemble the true Fishes. In no class are renewed embryological investigations, extending over a variety of families, so much needed, as in that of Birds, if we desire to derive any assistance in their natural classification from the peculiarities of their development; and yet the general development of these animals is perhaps better known than that of any other type.1 The class of Mammalia2 has found in Bischoff a most successful and

in

thorough investigator.3

1 PANDER (Gnu. H.), Diss. sistens historian! metarnorphoseos quain ovum incubatum prioribus quinque diebus subit ; Wirceb., 1817, 8vo. — Beitrage zur Entwickelungsgeschichte desHlihnckens imEie, Wurzb. 1817, fol., fig.— BAER (K. E. v.), Entwickelungsgeschichte, etc., vol. 1. — • DUTROCHET (H.), Histoire de 1'oeuf des Oiseaux avant la ponte, Bull. Soc. Philom., 1819, p. 38.— HUNTER (JOHN), Observations on Animal Development, eclited, and his Illustrations of that process in the Bird described, by R. OWEN; London, 1841, fol., fig. — PREVOST (J. L.), Memoire sur le developpement du poulet dans 1'oeuf, Ann. Sc. Nat., 1827, vol. 12, p. 415. — PUEVOST (J. L ) et LEBERT, Memoires sur la formation des organes de la circulation et du sang dans 1'ernbryon du Poulet, Ann. Sc. Nat., 3e ser., i, p. 265 ; ii, 222, fig. ; iii, p. 96. — BAUDRIMONT (A. ),et MAR- TIN ST. ANGE (G. J.), Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques sur le developpement du fojtus ; Paris,! 850, 4to. — MECKEL v. HEMSBACH (II.), Die Bildung der fiir partielle Furchung bestirnmten Eier der Vogel, etc., Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zocl., 1852, vol. iii, p. 420. — DARESTE (C.), Memoire sur 1'influence qu'exercesur le developpement du poulet 1'application partielle d'un vernis sur la coquille de 1'oeuf, Ann. Sc. Nat., 4e ser., 1855, vol. 4.— WEINLAND (D.), On the Armature of the Lower Bill of the Hatching Tringa Fusilla, Wils., Proc. Essex Institute, Salern, vol. 2, p. 33. — HOYER (H.), Ueber die Eifollikel, der Vogel, Muller's Arch., 1857, p. 52.— HOR- NER (F. R.), On some discoveries relative to the Chick in ovo, and its liberation from the shell, Proc. Brit. Ass., 1853, p. 68.

2 For the papers relating to the foetal envelopes and the placenta, and also to the different systems of organs or any organ in particular, and for human embryology generally, see Bischoff's article " Entwickelungsgeschichte," in R. Wagner's Handworterbuch der Physiologie, p. 867, where everything that has been done in this direction, up to the year 1843, is enumerated. For more recent researches upon these topics, consult also, MULLER'S Archiv, WIEG- MAN'S Archiv, SIEBOLD und KOLLI- KER'S Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., MILNE- EDWARDS, Ann. Sc. Nat., and the Annals and Magazine of Nat. Hist., etc

3 BISCHOFF (Tn.L.W.), Entwickelungsgeschichte des Kaninchen-Eies, Braunschweig, 1842, 4to. fig.— Entwickelungsgeschichte des Huude- Eics, Braunschweig, 1845, 4to. fig. — Entwickelungsgeschichte des Meerschweinchens, Giessen, 1852, 4to. fig. — Entwickelungsgeschichte des Rehes, Giessen, 1854, 4to. fig. — PRE- VOST (J. L.), et DUMAS (J. A.), De la generation chez les Mamrniferes, etc., Ann. Sc. Nat., 1824, vol. 3, p. 113, fig. — BOJANUS (L.), Observatio anatomica de fcetu canino 24 dierum,

126 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Embryology has, however, a wider scope than to trace the growth of individual animals, the gradual building up of their body, the formation of their organs, and all the changes they undergo in their structure and in their form ; it ought also to embrace a comparison of these forms and the successive steps of these changes between all the types of the animal kingdom, in order to furnish definite standards of their relative standing, of their affinities, and of the correspondence of their organs in all their parts. Embryologists have thus far considered too exclusively the gradual transformation of the egg into the perfect animal. There remains still a wide field of investigation, to ascertain the different degrees of similarity between the successive forms which an animal assumes until it has completed its growth, and the various forms of different kinds of full-grown animals of the same type ; between the different stages of complication of their structure in general, and the perfect structure of their kindred ; between the successive steps in the formation of all their parts and the various degrees of perfection of the parts of other groups ; between the normal course of the whole development of

etc., Act. Ac. Nat. Cur., vol. 10, p. Ornithorhynchus paradoxus, Phil. 139, fig. — COSTE (P.), Embryogunie Trans. 1834, p. 555.— Oil the Young cornparee ; Paris, 1837, Svo. Atlas of the Ornithorhynchus paradoxus, 4to.. — Histoire particuliere et gene- Trans. Zool. Soc., i. p. 221 ; Proc. rale du developperuent des corps Zool. Soc., ii. p. 43 ; Ann. Sc. Nat., organises, q. a. — Recherches sur la 2d ser. ii. p. 303 ; iii. p. 299. — On generation des Mammiferes et le de- the Generation of the Marsupial Aniveloppement de la brebis, Ann. Sc. mals, etc., Phil. Trans., 1824, p. 333. Nat. 1835, III., p. 78. — Recherches —On the Placenta of the Elephant, sur la generation des Mammiferes ; Proc. Roy. Soc. ; London, 1857, p. Paris, 1834, 4to. fig. — BERXHARDT 471. — MEIGS (Cn.), Observations on (C. A.), Syrnbolse ad Ovi Mamma- the Reproductive Organs and on the liuni historian! ante pregnationern, Foetus of jDeIphinusATesarnak,3o\iTu. Vratisl., 4to., Muller's Arch., 1835, Ac. Nat. Sc. Phil., new ser. 1849, vol. p. 228. — BARRY (M.), Researches in 1, p. 267. — WYMAN (F.), On the con- Embryology, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. nection between the Uterus and the 1838, p. 301 ; 1839, p. 307; 1840, p. Chorion in Pigs, Proc. Bost. Nat. 529 ; 1841, p. 195.— BAER (H. E. v.), Hist. Soc., 1858. q. a. — OWEN (R.), On the Ova of the

one type compared with that of other types, as well as between the ultimate histological differences which all exhibit within certain limits. Though important fragments have been contributed upon these different points, I know how much remains to be done, from the little I have thus far been able to gather myself by systematic research in this direction.

I satisfied myself long ago that Embryology furnishes the most trustworthy standard to determine the relative rank among animals. A careful comparison of the successive stages of development of the higher Batrachians furnishes, perhaps, the most striking example of the importance of such investigations. The earlier stages of the Tadpole exemplify the structure and form of these Ichthyoids which have either no legs or very imperfect legs, with and without external gills ; next it assumes a shape reminding us more of the Tritons and Salamanders, and ends with the structure of the Frog or Toad.1 A comparison between the two latter families proves further that the Toads are higher than the Frogs, not only on account of their more terrestrial habits (see Section 16), but because the embryonic web, which, to some extent, still unites the fingers in the Frogs, disappears entirely in the Toads, and, possibly also, because glands are developed in their skin, which do not exist in Frogs. A similar comparison of the successive changes of a new species of Comatula discovered by Prof. Holmes in the harbour of Charleston, hi South Carolina, has shown me in what relation the different types of Crinoids of past ages stand to these changes, and has furnished a standard to determine their relative rank ; as it cannot be doubted that the earlier stages of growth of an animal exhibit a

1 AGASSIZ (L.), Twelve Lectures, etc., p. 8.

128 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

condition of relative inferiority, when contrasted with what it grows to be after it has completed its development, and before it enters upon those phases of its existence which constitute old age, and certain curious retrograde metamorphoses observed among parasites.

In the young Comatula there exists a stem, by which the little animal is attached, either to sea weeds or to the cirrhi of the parent ; the stem is at first simple and without cirrhi, supporting a globular head, upon which the so-called arms are next developed and gradually completed by the appearance of branches ; a few cirrhi are at the same time developed upon the stem, winch increase in number until they form a wreath between the arms and the stem. At last, the crown having assumed all the characters of a diminutive Comatula, drops off, freeing itself from the stem, and the Comatula moves freely as an independent animal. l

The classes of Crustacea and of Insects2 are particularly instructive in this respect. Eathke, however, has described the transformations of so many Crustacea, that I cannot do better than refer to his various papers upon this subject,3 for details relating to the changes these animals undergo during then' earlier stages of growth. I would only add, that, while the embryo of the highest Crustacea, -the Brachyura, — resembles by its form and structure the lowest types of this class, the Entomostraca and Isopoda, it next assumes the shape of those of a higher order, the

1 A condensed account of the trans- .3 See AGASSIZ'S Twelve Lectures,

formations of the European Coma- p. 62, and Classification of Insects,

tula maybe found in E. FORBES'S etc., q. a. It is expected that Embry-

History of the British Starfishes, p. ology will furnish the means of as-

10. The embryology of our species certaining the relative standing of

will be illustrated in one of the next every family,

volumes of my contributions to the 3 See above, page 119, note 2. Natural History of the United States.

Maeroura, before it appears with all the characteristics of the Brachyura.

i/

Embryology furnishes also the best measure of the true affinities existing between animals. I do not mean to say that the affinities of animals can only be ascertained by embryonic investigations ; the history of Zoology shows, on the contrary, that even before the study of the formation and growth of animals had become a distinct branch of Physiology, the general relationship of most animals had already been determined, with a remarkable degree of accuracy, by anatomical investigations. It is nevertheless true, that in some remarkable instances, the knowledge of the embryonic changes of certain animals gave the first clue to their true affinities, while, in other cases, it has furnished a very welcome confirmation of relationships, which, before, might have appeared probable, but were still very problematical. Even Cuvier, for instance, considered the Barnacles as a distinct class, which he placed among Mollusks, under the name of Cirripeds. It was not until Thompson l had shown, what was soon confirmed by Burmeister and Martin St. Ange, that the young Barnacle has a structure and form identical with that of some of the most common Entomostraca, that their true position in the system of animals could be determined ; when they had to be removed to the class of Crustacea, among the Articulata. The same was the case with the Lernseans, which Cuvier arranged with the Intestinal Worms, and which Nordmann has shown, upon embryological evidence, to belong also to the class of Crustacea.2 Lamarck associated the Crinoids with the Polyps, and, though they were

1 THOMPSON'S Zool. Researches, ganisation, etc., quoted p. 119, n. 1. etc.; BURMEISTER'S Beitriigc, etc.; a NORBMANU'S Micrographische MAKTIN ST. ANGE, Mem. sur For- Beytrilge, q. a.

K

130 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

removed to the class of Ecliinoderms by Cuvier before the metamorphoses of Comatula were known,1 the discovery of their pedunculated young furnished a direct proof that this was their true position.

Embryology, further, affords a test of homologies in contradistinction to analogies. It shows that true homologies are limited respectively within the natural boundaries of the great branches of the animal kingdom.

The distinction between homologies and analogies, upon which the English naturalists first insisted,2 has removed much doubt respecting the real affinities of animals which could hardly have been so distinctly appreciated before. It has taught us to distinguish between real affinity based upon structural conformity, and similarity based upon mere external resemblance in form and habits. But, even after this distinction had been fairly established, it remained to determine within what limits homologies may be traced. The works of Oken, Spix, Geoffroy, and Cams,3 show to what extravagant comparisons a preconceived idea of unity may lead. It was not until Baer had shown that the development of the four great branches of the animal kingdom is essentially different,4 that it could even be suspected that organs performing identical functions may be different in their essential relations to one another ; and not until Eathke5 had demonstrated that the yolk is in open communication with the main cavity of the Articulata, on the dorsal side

1 THOMPSON and FORBES, q. a., p. vol.i. p. 160 and 224. The extent of 1 19. Baer's information, and the compre-

2 SWAINSON'S Geography and Clas- hensiveness of his views, nowhere sification, etc. See above, Sect. V., appear so strikingly as in this part of p. 26. his work.

3 See above, Sect. IV., notes land 2. 5 RATnKE'sUnters. iiber Bild.,etc.,

4 BAER'S Eutwickelungsgeschichte, see above, p. 119, n. 2,

of the animal, and not on the ventral side, as in the Vertebrata, that a solid basis was obtained for the natural limitation of true homologies. It now appears more and more distinctly at every step of the progress Embryology is making, that the structure of animals is only homologous within the limits of the four great branches of the animal kingdom ; and that general homology, strictly proved, proves also typical identity, as special homology proves class identity.

The results of all embryonic investigations of modern times go to show more and more extensively, that animals are entirely independent of external causes in their development. The identity of the metamorphoses of oviparous and viviparous animals belonging to the same type furnishes the most convincing evidence to that effect.1 Formerly it was supposed that the embryo was affected directly by external influences, to such an extent, that monstrosities, for instance, might be ascribed to the influence of external causes. Direct observation has shown that they are founded upon peculiarities of the normal

1 This seems the most appropriate though they may agree in laying place to remark, that the distinction eggs or bringing forth living young, made between viviparous and ovipa- The essential feature upon which rous animals is not only untenable any important generalization must be as far as their first origin in the egg based is, of course, the mode of deis concerned, but also unphysiolo- velopnient of the germ.^ In this regical, if it is intended, by this de- spect we find that Selachians, whether signation, to convey the idea of oviparous or viviparous, agree with any affinity or resemblance in their one another. This is also the case respective modes of development, with the bony fishes and the reptiles, Fishes show more distinctly than any whether they are respectively oviother class, that animals, the devel- parous or viviparous ; even the plaoprnent of which is identical, in all cental and knplacental Mammalia its leading features, may either be agree with one another in what viviparous or oviparous ; the differ- is essential in their development, ence here arising only from the con- Too much importance has hitherto nection in which the egg is devel- been attached to the connections in oped, and not from the development which the germ is developed, to the itself. Again, viviparous and ovipa- exclusion of the leading features of rous animals of different classes differ the transformations of the germ itgreatly in their development, even self.

K 2

132 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

course of their development.1 The snug berth in which the young of all Mammalia undergo their first transformation— the womb of their mother, excludes so completely the immediate influence of any external agent, that it is only necessary to allude to it to show how independent their growth must be of the circumstances in which even the mother may be placed. This is equally true of all other vivaparous animals, as certain snakes, certain sharks, and the viviparous fishes. Again, the uniformity of temperature in the nests of birds, and the exclusion, to a certain degree, of influences which might otherwise reach them, in the various structures which animals build for the protection of their young or of their eggs,2 show distinctly, that the instinct of all animals leads them to remove their progeny from the influence of physical agencies, or to make these agents subservient to their purposes, as in the case of the ostrich. Reptiles and terrestrial Mollusks bury their eggs to remove them from varying influences ; fishes deposit them in localities where they are exposed to the least changes. Insects secure theirs in various ways. Most marine animals living in extreme climates lay their eggs in winter, when the variations of external influences are reduced to a minimum. Everywhere we find evidence that the phenomena of life, though manifested in the midst of all the most diversified physical influences, are rendered independent of them to the utmost degree, by a variety of contrivances prepared by the animals themselves for self-protection, or for the protection of their progeny from any influence of physical agents not desired by them, or not subservient to their own ends.

1 Biscnopp (Tn. L. W.), in R. 2 BURDACH'S Physiologic, etc., q.

Wagner's Handworterbuch der Phy- a. 2d ed. vol. 2, Sect. 334-8. See, also,

siologie, Article " Eutwickelungs- KIBBY and SPENCE'S Introduction,

geschichte," p. 885. etc., q. a.

There is the most extraordinary inequality in the average duration of the life of different kinds of animals and plants. While some grow and reproduce themselves and die in a short summer, nay, in a day, others seem to defy the influence of time.1

Who has thus apportioned the life of all organized beings ? To answer this question, let us first look at the facts of the case. In the first place, there is no conformity between the duration of life and either the size or structure or habitat of animals ; next, the system in which the changes occurring during any period are regulated differs in almost every species, there being only a slight degree of uniformity between the representatives of different classes, within certain limits.

In most Fishes and the Eeptiles proper, for instance, the growth is very gradual and uniform, and their development continues through life, so much so that their size is continually increasing with age.

In others, the Birds, for instance, the growth is rapid during the first period of their life, until they have acquired their full size, and then follows a period of equilibrium, which lasts for a longer or shorter period in different species.

In others again, which also acquire within certain limits a definite size, the Mammalia, for instance, the growth is slower in early life, and maturity is attained, as in man,

1 SCHUBLER, (GusT.,) Beobachtun- und Pflanzenreich, Tubingen, 1831, gen iiber jiihrliche periodisch wieder- Svo. — QUETELET, (A.,) Pkciiomeues kuhrendc Ersclieiuuugen im TLicr- p&riodiques, Ac. Brux.

134 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

at an age which forms a much longer part of the whole duration of life. In Insects the period of maturity is, on the contrary, generally the shortest, while the growth of the larva is very slow, or, at least, that stage of development lasts for a much longer time than the life of the perfect Insects. There is no more striking example of tins peculiar mode of growth than the seventeen years locust, so fully traced by Miss M. H. Morris.1

Whilst all long-lived animals continue, as a matter of course, their existence through a series of years, under the varying influence of successive seasons, there are many others which are periodical in their appearance ; this is the case with most insects,2 but perhaps in a still more striking manner with Medusas.3

The most interesting point, however, in this subject is the change of character wilich takes place in the different stages of growth of one and the same animal. Neither Vertebrates nor Mollusks, nor even Eadiates, exhibit in this respect anything so remarkable in the continuous changes which an individual animal undergoes as Insects, and among them those with so-called complete metamorphosis. Here the young (the larva) is an active, wormlike, voracious, even carnivorous being, which in middle age (as a chrysalis) becomes a mummy-like, almost motionless maggot, incapable of taking food, and ends life as a winged and active insect. Some of these larvse are aquatic and very voracious, when the perfect insect is aerial and takes no food at all.4

1 See also HARRIS'S Insects in- 4 BURMEISTER'S Handb. d. Entom. jurious to Vegetation, p. 184, 2d. etc. — LACORDAIRE, Introd. a I'Eutoedit. p. 180. mologie, etc. — KIRBY and SPENCE,

2 HEROLD, (E.,)Teutscher Raupen- Introd. to Entomol., etc., q. a., give Kalender, Nordhausen, 1845. accounts of the habits of Insects

3 AGASSIZ'S Acalephs of North during their metamorphoses. America, p. 228.

Is there any thing in this regulation of the duration of life in animals which recalls the agency of physical forces? Does not, on the contrary, the fact, that, while some animals are periodical and bound to the seasons in then- appearance, others are independent of the course of the year, show distinctly their independence of all those influences, which, under a common expression, are called physical causes ? Is this not further illustrated in the most startling manner by the extraordinary changes, above alluded to, which one and the same animal may undergo during different periods of its life \ Does not this directly prove the immediate intervention of a power capable of controlling all these external influences, as well as regulating the course of life of every being, and establishing it upon such an immutable foundation, within its cycle of changes, that the uninterrupted action of these agents does not interfere with the regular order of its natural existence 1

There is, however, still another conclusion to be drawn from these facts : they point distinctly at a discriminating knowledge of time and space, at an appreciation of the relative value of unequal amounts of time and an unequal repartition of small, unequal periods over longer periods, which can only be the attribute of a thinking being.

While some animals go on in gradual development, from the first formation of their germ to the natural end of their life, and bring forth generation after generation, a

136 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

progeny which runs with never-varying regularity through the same course, there are others which multiply in various ways, by division and by budding,1 or by a strange succession of generations, differing one from the other, and not returning in a direct course to their typical cycle.

The facts which have led to the knowledge of the phenomenon now generally known under the name of alternate generation were first observed by Chamisso and Sars, and afterwards presented in a methodical connection by Steenstrup, in his famous pamphlet on that subject.2 As a brief account of the facts may be found in almost every text-book of Physiology, I need not repeat them here, but only refer to the original investigations, in which all the details known upon this subject may be found.3 These facts show, in the first place, with regard to Hydroid Medusae, that individuals born from eggs may be entirely different from those which produced the eggs, and may end their life without ever undergoing themselves such changes as would transform them into in-

1 Much information useful to the tion of Procreating Individuals from

zoologist, may be gathered from a single Ovum ; London, 1849, Svo.

BRAUN'S paper upon the Budding of — On Metamorphosis and Metagene-

Plants, q. a., p. 24, note 3. The pro- sis, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 2d ser.

cess of multiplication by budding or vol. 8, 1857, p. 59. — PROSCH, (V.,)

by division, and that of sexual repro- On Parthenogenesis og Generationsduction, are too often confounded by vexel et Bidrag til Generationslseren ;

zoologists, and this confusion has al- Kiobenhavn, 1851. — LEUCKART, (R.,)

ready led to serious misconstructions Ueber Metamorphose, ungeschlechtof well known facts. liche Vermehrung, Generationswech-

3 STEENSTRUP, J.,) Ueber den Ge- sel, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., vol. 3, 1851.

ncrationswechsel, q. a., p. 103, note 3. — DANA, (J. D.,) On the Analogy be-

3 See the works quoted above, p. tween the Mode of Reproduction in

103, note 3, and p. 105, note 1, also Plants and the " Alternation of Gene-

CARUS, (V.,) Zur nahern Kenntniss rations" observed in some Radiata,

des Generationswechsels ; Leipzig, Amer. Journ. A. and Sc., 2d ser. vol.

1849, 8vo.— Einige Worte iiber Me- 10, p. 341.— EIIRENBERO, (C. G.,)

tamorphose und Generationswechsel, Ueber die Formeubestiindigkeit und

Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool., 1851, vol. 3, den Entwickelungskreis cler organp. 359. — OWEN, (R.,) On Partheno- ischen Formeu,Mouatsber. dcr Akad. ;

genesis, or the Successive Produc- Berlin, 1852, 8vo.

dividuals similar to their parents ;T and they show further that this brood, originated from eggs, may increase and multiply by producing new individuals like themselves (as in SyncaryneJ, or of two kinds (as in Campamdaria), or even individuals of various kinds, all differing to a remarkable extent one from the other (as in Hydr actinia), but in no case resembling their common parent. None of these new individuals have distinct reproductive organs, any more than the first individuals born from eggs, their multiplication taking place chiefly by the process of budding ; but, as these buds remain generally connected with the first individual born from an egg, they form compound communities, similar to some polypstocks. Now some of these buds produce, at certain seasons, new buds of an entirely different kind. These generally drop off from the parent stock at an early period of their development (as in Syncoryne, Campamdaria, etc.), and then undergo a succession of changes, which end by their assuming the character of the previous egg-laying individuals. Organs of reproduction of the two sexes are developed in them meanwhile, which, when mature, lead to the production of new eggs. In others (as in Hydractinia), the buds of this kind do not drop off, but fade away upon the parent stock, after having undergone all their transformations, and also produced in due time a number of eggs.2

1 Polymorphism among individuals and fourth volumes of my Contrib. to

of the same species is not limited to the Nat. Hist, of the U. S., and to

Acalcphs ; it is also observed among which I do not allude here, as they

genuine Polyps, the Madrepores for could not be understood without nuexample, and among Bryozoa, As- merous drawings. The case of Hycidiaus, Worms, and Crustacea (Lu- dractinia is not quite correctly reprepeci), and even among Insects (Bees), sented in the works in which that

3 I have observed many other com- animal has been described. Respectbinations of a similar character among ing Physalia and the other Siphouothe llydroicl Medusce, which I shall phora, see the works quoted above,

describe at full length in the third p. 103, note 3.

138 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

In the case of the Medusae proper,1 the parent lays eggs from which polyplike individuals originate ; but here these individuals separate by transverse constrictions into a number of disks, and every one of these undergoes a succession of changes, which end in the production of as many individuals, each identical with the parent, and capable in its turn of laying eggs, (some, however, being males, and others females.) But the polyplike individuals born from eggs may also multiply by budding, and each bud undergo the same changes as the first, the base of which does not die, but is also capable of growing up again and of repeating the same process.

In other classes, other phenomena of a similar character have been observed, which bear a similar explanation. J. Muller2 has most fully illustrated the alternate generations of the Echinoderms ; Chamisso, Steenstrup, Eschricht, Krohn, and Sars, those of the Salpse ; 3 von Siebold, Steenstrup, and others, those of certain Intestinal Worms.4

This alternate generation differs essentially from metamorphosis, though some writers have attempted to identify these two processes. In metamorphosis, as observed among Insects, the individual born from an egg goes on undergoing change after change in direct and immediate succession, until it has reached its final transformation ; but, however different it may be at different periods of its life, it is always one and the same individual. In alternate generations, the individual born from an egg never assumes through a succession of transformations the character of its parent, but produces, either by internal or external budding or by division, a number — sometimes

1 See SIEBOLD, and SARS, q. a., p. 3 See the works, q. a., page 108, 103, note 3. note 3.

2 MULLER, (J.,) Ueber den allge- 4 See the works, q. a., p. 115, note meinen Plan, etc., q. a., p. 105, note 1. 1, and 116, note 1.

even a large number — of new individuals, and it is this progeny of the individuals born from eggs which grows and assumes again the characters of the egg-laying individuals.

There is really an essential difference between the sexual reproduction of most animals and the multiplication of individuals in other ways. In ordinary sexual reproduction, every new individual arises from an egg, and, by a regular succession of changes, assumes the character of its parents. Now, though all species of animals reproduce their kind by eggs, and though in each there is at least a certain number of individuals, if not all, which have sprung from eggs, this mode of reproduction is not the only one observed among animals. We have already seen how new individuals may originate from buds, which in their turn may produce sexual individuals ; and we have also seen how, by division, individuals may also produce other individuals, differing from themselves quite as much as the sexual buds, alluded to above, differ from the individuals which produce them. There are yet still other combinations in the animal kingdom. In Polyps, for instance, every bud, whether it is freed from the parent stock or not, grows up at once to be a new sexual individual ; and in many animals which multiply by division, every new individual thus produced assumes also at once the characters of those born from eggs.1 There is, finally, one mode of reproduction which is peculiar to certain Insects, in which several generations of fertile females follow one another, before males appear again.2

What comprehensive views must physical agents be

1 MILNE-EDWAKDS, Rech. anat. et logie, etc. ; Paris, 1745. — OWEN, Parzool. faites pendant un Voyage sur thenogenesis, etc., q. a., p. 136; comles cotes de Sicile, 3 vols. 4to. fig. pare also SIEBOLD, (C. TH. E. VON.,)

" BONNET, (On.,) Traite d'lnsecto- Wahre Parthenogenesis, q. a. p. 120.

140 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

capable of taking, and wliat a power of combination must they possess, to be able to ingraft all these complicated modes of reproduction upon structures already so complicated ! — But, if we turn away from mere fancies, and consider the wonderful phenomena just alluded to in all their bearings, how instructive they appear with reference to this very question of the influence of physical agents upon organized beings ! For here we have animals endowed with the power of multiplying in the most extraordinary ways, every species producing new individuals of its own kind differing to the utmost from their parents. Does this not seem, at first, as if we had before us a perfect exemplification of the manner in which different species of animals may originate one from the other, and increase the number of types existing at first ? And yet, with all this apparent freedom of transformation, what do the facts finally show 1 That all these transformations are the successive terms of a cycle, as definitely closed within precise limits, as in the case of animals the progeny of which resembles the immediate parent in all successive generations. For here, as everywhere in the organic kingdoms, these variations are only the successive expressions of a well regulated cycle ever returning to its o\vn type.

Geologists hardly seem to appreciate fully the extent of the intricate relations exhibited by the animals and plants whose remains are found in the different successive geological formations. I do not mean to say that the investigations we possess respecting the zoological and

botanical characters of these remains are not remarkable for the accuracy and for the ingenuity with which they have been traced. On the contrary, having myself thus far devoted the better part of my life to the investigation of fossil remains, I have learned early, from the difficulties inherent in the subject, better to appreciate the. wonderful skill, the high intellectual powers, the vast erudition, displayed in the investigations of Cuvier and his successors upon the faunce and florae of past ages.1 But I cannot refrain from expressing my wonder at the puerility of the discussions in which some geologists still allow themselves to indulge, in the face of such a vast amount of well digested facts as our science now possesses. They have hardly yet learned to see that there exists a definite order in the succession of these innumerable extinct beings ; and of the relations of this gradation to the other

1 CUVIER, (G.,) Recherches sur les et Bonnse, 1836, 4to. fig. — Die Gat-

Ossemens fossiles des Quadrupedes, tungen der fossilen Pflanzen, veretc. ; Paris, 1812, 4 vols. 4to. ; nouv. glichen mit deuen der Jetztwelt, etc.,

edit. Paris, 1821-23, 5 vols. 4to, ; 4e Bonn, 1841-48, 4to. fig.— Monograedit. 10 vols. 8vo. and 2 vols. pi. 4to. phie der fossilen Coniferen. Diissel-

— SOWERBY, (JAMES,) The Mineral dorf, 1850, 4to. fig. — More special

Conchology of Great Britain ; Lond., works are quoted hereafter ; but

1812-19, 6 vols. 8vo. fig. — SCHLOTT- only such will be mentioned as

HEIM,E. F. v.,)Die Petrefactenkunde, have advanced the progress of Geoetc., Gotha, 1820, 8vo. fig. — LAMARCK, logy and Palaeontology, or contain

(J. B. DE,) Memoires sur les fossiles full reports of the present state of

des environs de Paris, Paris, 1823, 4to. our science, or such as have spefig. — GOLDFUSS, (G. A.,) Petrefacta cial reference to America. Refer-

Germaniaj, Diisseldorf, 1826-33, fol. ences to the description of species

fig. — STERNBERF, (KASPAR, M. GR. may be found in BRONN, (H. G.,)

v.,) Versuch einer geognostisch-bo- Index palajontologicus ; Stuttgart,

tanischen Darstellung der Flora der 1848-49, 3 vols. 8vo. — SeealsoKEFER-

Vorwelt ; Leipzig und Prag, 1820-38, STEIN, (CnR.,) Geschichte und Litcfol. fig. — BRONGNIART, (Ac.,) Pro- ratur der Geognosie ; Halle, 1840, 1

drome d'une Histoire des Vegetaux vol. Svo. — ARCHIAC, (Vic. D',) Hisfossiles ; Paris, 1818, 2 vols. Svo. — toire des progres de la Geologic ;

Histoire des Vegetaux fossiles ; Paris, Paris, 1847, et suiv. 4 vols. Svo. ; and

1828-43, 2 vols. 4to. fig. — LINDLEY, the Transactions, Journals, and Pro-

(J.,) and HUTTON, (W.,) The Fossil ceedings of the Geological Societies of

Flora of Great Britain ; London, 1831- London, of Paris, of Berlin, of Vienna,

37, 3 vols. Svo. — GOPPERT, (H. R.,) etc. ; also, LEONHARD and BRONN'S

Systema Filicum fossiliuui, Vratisl. Neues Jahrbuch, etc.

142 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

great features exhibited by the animal kingdom, of the great fact that the development of life is the prominent trait in the history of our globe,1 they seem either to know nothing, or to look upon it only as a vague speculation, plausible perhaps, but hardly deserving the notice of sober science.

It is true, Palseontology as a science is very young; and it has had to fight its course through the unrelenting opposition of ignorance and prejudice. What amount of labour and patience it has cost merely to establish the fact that fossils are really the remains of animals and plants that once actually lived upon earth,2 only those know who are familiar with the history of science. Then it had to be proved that they are not the wrecks of the Mosaic deluge, which, for a time, was the prevailing opinion, even among scientific men.3 After Cuvier had shown beyond question that they are the remains of animals no longer to be found upon earth among the living, Palaeontology acquired for the first time a solid basis. Yet the amount of labour which it has cost to ascertain by direct evidence how these remains are distributed in the solid crust of our globe, what differences they exhibit in successive formations,4 and what their geographical distribu-

1 AGASSIZ'S Geological Times, etc., fossils of the oldest geological formaq. a., p. 35, note 2. — DANA'S Address tions, see the works quoted above, p. to the Arner. Ass. for Adv. Sc. 8th 32, note 1. Also, McCoY, (F.,) Sy- Meeting, held at Providence, 1855. nopsis of the Silurian Fossils of

2 SCILLA, (Aa.,) La vaua specula- Ireland ; Dublin, 1846, 4to. fig. — zione desingannata dal senso ; Napoli, GEIXITZ (H. D.), Die Versteinerun- 1670, 4to. fig. gen der Grauwackenformation ; Leip-

3 SCHEUCHZER, (J. J.,) Homo Di- zig, 1850-53, 4to. fig. — And for local luvii testis et 0* 6vKoiros ; Tiguri, 1726, information, see the geological reports 4to. — BUCKLAND, (W.,) Reliquiae di- of the different States of the Union, a luvianse, or Observations on the Or- complete list of which, with a sumganic Remains attesting the Action rnary of the Geology, may be found of an Universal Deluge ; London, in MARCOU'S (J.), Resume explicatif 1826, 4to. fig. d'une carte geologique des Etats-

4 For references respecting the Unis, Bull. Soc. Geol. de France;

tion is, only those can fully appreciate who have had a hand

Paris, 1855, 2de ser., vol. 12.— For the Devonian system: PHILLIPS (J.), Figures and Descriptions of the Paleozoic Fossils of Cornwall, Devon, and West Somerset, etc. ; London, li-41, 8vo. — ARCHIAC (Vic. D') and VERNEUIL (Ei>. DE), Memoir on the Fossils of the Older Deposits in the Rhenish Provinces; Paris, 1842, 4to., fig. — SANDBERGER (G. und FR.), Systematische Beschreibung und Abbilduug der Versteinerungen des Rheinischen Schichtensysterns in Nassau ; Wiesbaden, 1850-54, 4to., fig. — For the Carboniferous period: PHILLIPS (J.), Illustrations of the Geology of Yorkshire ; London, 1836, 2nd vol., 4to., fig. — DE KONINCK (L.), Descriptions des animaux fossiles qui se trouvent dans le terrain houiller de la Belgique ; Liege, 1842, 2 vols. 4to., fig.; suppl., etc. — McKoY (Ffi.), Synopsis of the Carboniferous Fossils of Ireland; Dublin, 1844, 4to., fig. — GERMAR (E. FR.), Die Versteinerungen des Steinkohlengebirges ; Halle, 1844-53, fol., fig.— GEINITZ (H. B.), Die Versteinerungen der Steiukohlenformation ; Leipzig, 1855, fol., fig. — For the Permian system: QUEN- STEDT (A.), Ueber die Identitilt der Petrificate des Thtiringischen und Englischen Zechsteins, Wiegrnau's Archiv, 1835, i, p. 75. — GEINITZ (H. B.) und GUTBIER (A.), Die Versteinerungen des Zechsteingebirges, etc.; Dresden, 1849, 4to., fig.— KING (W.), Monograph of the Permian Fossils of England (Palseont. Soc.) ; London, 1850, 4to., fig. — SWALLOW (J. C.) and HAWN (F.), The Rocks of Kansas, with Descriptions of New Permian Fossils, by J. C. Swallow, Trans. Ac. Sc., St'. Louis, 1858.— For the Triasic system: ALBERTI (FR. v.), Beitrag zur einer Monographic des bunten Sandsteius, Mushelkalks, und Keupers ; Stuttgart und Tubingen, 1834, 8vo. — For the Jurassic: PHILLIPS (J.), Illustrations of the Geology of Yorkshire; York, 1829, vol. i, 4to., fig. — PUSCH (G. G.), Polens Palseontologie, etc. ; Stuttgart, 1836, 4to., fig. — ROMER (FR. A.), Die Versteinerungen des NorddeutschenOolithen- Gebirges ; Hanover, 1836, 4to., fig. — ZIETEN (C. H. v.), Die Versteinerungen Wurternbergs ; Stuttgart, 1830- 34, fol., fig. — ORBIGNY (ALC. D'), Paleontologie fra^aise ; Paris, 1840-53, 8vo., fig. — MORRIS (J.) and LYCETT (J.), Mollusca from the Great Oolite (Palreont. Soc.) ; London, 1850-55, 4to., fig.. — For the Cretaceous period : MORTON (S. G.), Synopsis of the Remains of the Cretaceous Group of the United States; Philadelphia, 1834, 8vo., fig. — ORBIGNY (ALC. D'), Paleont. franc., q. a. — GEINITZ (II. BR.), Charakteristik der Schichten und Petrefakten des Kreidegebirges ; Dresden, 1839-42, 4to., fig.— PICTET (F. J.) et Roux (W.), Description des fossiles qui se trouvent dans les gres verts des environs de Geneve, Mem. Soc. Phys., etc.; Geneve, 1847-52, vols. 12 et 13.— ROMER (F. A.), Die Versteinerungen des norddeutschen Kreidegebirges ; Hanover, 1841 , 4to., fig. — DieKreidebildungen von Texas; Bonn, 1852, 4to., fig.— REUSS (A. E.), Die Versteinerungen der bohmischen Kreideformation ; Stuttgart, 1845-46, 4to., fig. — MULLER (Jos.), Monographic der Petrefacten der Aachener Kreideformation; Bonn, 1851, 4to., fig. — SHARPE (D.), Fossil Remains of Mollusca found in the Chalk of England (Palaaont. Soc.) ; London, 1854, 4to., fig. — HALL (JAMES) and MEEK (F. B.), Descriptions of New Species of Fossils from the Cretaceous Formations of Nebraska, Mem. Arner. Akad., 1856, vol. 5.— For the Tertiaries : BROCCHI (G. B.), Conchiologia fossile subappennina, etc.; Milano, 1814-43, 2 vols., 4to., fig.— DES HAYES (G. P.), Description des coquilles fossiles des environs de Paris, 1824-37, 3 vols. 4to., AtL— BRONN (H. G.), Italiens Tertiargebilde; Heidelberg, 1831, 8vo.— LEA (I.), Contributions to Geology; Philadelphia, 1833, 8vo., fig.— CONRAD (T. A.), Fos-

in the work.1 And even now how many important questions still await an answer !

One result, however, now stands unquestioned — the existence during each great geological era2 of an assemblage of animals and plants differing essentially for each period. And by period I mean those minor subdivisions in the successive sets of beds of rocks which constitute the stratified crust of our globe, the number of which is daily increasing as our investigations become more extensive and more precise.3 What remains to be done is to ascertain with

sil Shells of the Tertiary Formations of North America ; Philadelphia, 1832-36, 8vo., fig.— GRATELOUP (Dr.), Conchyliologie fossile du bassin de 1'Adour, etc.; Bordeaux, 1837, Svo., fig. — MATHERON (Pn.), Catalogue methodique et descriptif des corps organises fossiles, etc. ; Marseilles, 1842, 8vo. — BERENDT (G. C.), Organische Reste im Bernstein ; Berlin, 1845-54, fol., fig.— WOOD (S. V.), A Monograph of the Crag Mollusks (Palasont. Soc.), 1848-50, 4to., fig.— EDWARDS (F. E.), Eocene Mollusca (Palteont. Soc.); London, 1849-52, 4to., fig. — HORNESS (M.), Die Fossilen Mollusken des TertiJir-Beckens von Wien; Wicn, 1851, 4to., fig. — BEYRICII (E.), Die Conchylien des norddeutschen Tertiargebirges ; Berlin, 1854-57, Svo., fig.— TUOMEY (M.), and HOLMES (FR.S.), Fossils of South Carolina; Charleston, 1855-57, 4to., fig.

1 Btrcn (L. v.), Purifications recueillies en Amerique, par M. Alex, de Humboldt et par M. Ch. Dcgenhard; Berlin, 1838, fol., fig.— OR- BIGNY (ALC. D'), Voyage dans I'Amurique Meridionale, etc. ; Paris, 1834- 43, 7 vols., 8vo., Atl., 4to. — ARCHIAC (Vic. D',)et HAIME, (J.,) Description des animaux fossiles du groupe uummulitiquede 1'Inde ; Paris, 1853, 4to. fig. — LEUCKART, (F. S.,) Ueber die Verbreitung der iibriggebliebenen Rcste einer vorweltlichen Schopfung; Freiburg, 1835, 4to.

3 Geological text-books : DE LA BE- CHE, (Sir H. T.,) Geological Manual ; London, 1833, 1 vol. Svo. ; German Trans, by Dechen ; French by Brochant de Villers. — The Geological Observer ; London, 1851, 8vo. — LYELL, (Sir C.,) Manual of Elementary Geology ; London, 1851, 1 vol. Svo. — Principles of Geology, etc. ; London, 1830, 2 vols. 8vo. ; 8th edit. 1850, 1 vol. Svo. — NAUMANN, (C. FR.,) Lehrbuch der Geognosie ; Lepzig, 1850- 54, 2 vols. 8vo. Atl. 4to.— VOGT, (C.,) Lehrbuch der Geologic und Petrefaktenkunde ; Braunschweig, 1854, Svo. 2 vols., 2d edit. — Text-books on Fossils : BRONN, (H. G.,) Letheea Geognostica ; Stuttgart, 1835-37, 2 vols. Svo. Atl. fol. ; 3d edit, with FR. ROEMER, 1846, et seq. — PICTET, (F. J.,) Traite elementaire de Paleontologie, etc. ; Paris, 1844-45, 4 vols. 8vo. fig. ; 2de edit. 1853 et seq. 8vo. Atl. 4to. — ORBIGNY, (ALC. D',) Cours elementaire de Paleontologie ; Paris, 1852, 3 vols. 12mo.— GIEBEL, (E. G.,) Fauna der Vorwelt ; Leipzig, 1852, 2 vols. 8vo. — Allgerneine Palreontologie ; Leipzig, 1852, 1 vol. Svo. — QOENSTEDT, (F. A.,) Handbuch der Petrefaktenkunde ; Tubingen, 1852, Svo. fig. Unfortunately, there does not exist a single English text-book of Palaeontology. A translation of Pictet's and Bronn's works would be particularly desirable.

3 At first only three great periods were distinguished, the primary, the

more and more precision the true affinities of these remains with the animals and plants now living, the relations of those of the same period to one another and to those of the preceding and following epochs, the precise limits of these great eras in the development of life, the character of the successive changes which the animal kingdom has undergone, the special order of succession of the representatives of each class,1 their combinations into distinct faunae

secondary, and the tertiary ; afterwards,six or seven (Dela Beche) ; lately from ten to twelve; and now, the number is almost indefinite, at least undetermined in the present stage of our knowledge, when many geologists would only consider as subdivisions of longer periods, what some palaeontologists are inclined to consider as distinct periods.

1 The principal Monographs relating to special classes or families, are the following ; Polyps and Infusoria: MICHELIN (H.), Iconographie Zoophytologique, Paris, 1841- 45, 4to. fig. — EDWARDS (H. MILNE), et HAIME (J.), Recherches, etc., q. a., p. 44. — Polypiers fossiles des terrains paleozoiques, Arch. Mus., vol. 5. — Monograph of the British Fossil Corals, Palteont. Soc. London, 1850- 55, 4to. fig. — LONSDALE (W.), On the Corals from the Tertiary Formations of North America, Journ. Geol. Soc., I., p. 495 ; Sill. Journ. 2d ser. IV., p. 357.— McCoy (FR.), Contributions to British Paleontology, Cambridge, 1854, 1 vol. 8vo. tig-. — References to all minor papers may be found in Edwards and Haime's Recherches. — EIIRENBERG (C. G.), Mikrogeologie, Leipzig, 1854,fol. fig. — Echinoderms: MILLER (J. C.), A Natural History of the Crinoidea, Bristol, 1821, 4to. fig. — ORBIGNY (ALC. D'), Histoire naturelle general e et particuliere des Crinoides vivans et fossiles, Paris, 1840, 4to. fig.— AUSTIN (Tn. and TH. Jr.), Monograph of Recent and Fossil Crinoidea, Bristol, 4to.

fig. (without date.) — HALL (J.), Palasont. of New York, q. a. — GOLD- FUSS (G. A.), Petref. Germ., q. a. — DEKONINCK (L.), et LEUON (H.), Recherches sur les Crinoides, etc., Bruxelles, 1854, 4to. fig. — OWES (D.D.), and SHUMARD (B. F.), Description of New Species of Crinoidea, Journ. Ac. Nat. Sc. ; Philad. 1850, 4to. fig.— SISMONDA (E.), Monographia degli Echiuidi fossili del Piemonte ; Torino, 1840, 4to. fig. — DES MOULTNS (C.), Etude sur les Echinides ; Bordeaux, 1835-37, 8vo. fig. — AGASSIZ (L.), Monogr. Echin , q. a., p. 80. — Catalogue raisonne, etc., q. a., p. 44. I quote this paper under my name alone, because that of Mr. Desor, which is added to it, has no right to be there. It was added by him, after I had left Europe, not only without authority, but even without my learning it, for a whole year. The genera Goniocidaris, Mespilia, Boletia, Lenita, Gualteria, Lovenia, Breynia, which bear his name — whereas they should bear mine, as I established and named them, while Mr. Desor was travelling in Sweden — were appropriated by him, without any more right, by a mere dash of the pen, while he was carrying my manuscript through the press. How many species he has taken to himself, in the same manner, I cannot tell. As the printed work, and a paper presented by me to the Academy of Sciences of Paris, in 1846, exhibit, to every one acquainted with zoological nomenclature, internal evidence of

during each period ; not to speak of the causes of these changes, or even the circumstances under which they have taken place.

my statement, — such, for instance, as my name left standing as authority for the species of Mespilia, Lenita, Gualteria, and Breynia, while the genera bear his, — I need not allude further to the subject. This is one of the most extraordinary cases of plagiarism I know of. — DESOR (E.), Synopsis desEchinides fossiles ; Paris, 1854-56, 8vo. fig. ; partly reprinted from my Catalogue, with additions and figures. — BUCH (L. v.), Ueber die Cystideen ; Berlin, 1844, 4to. fig. ; Ak. d. Wiss. — MULLER (J.), Ueber den Bau der Echinodermen ; Berlin, 1854, 4to. fig.— ROEMER (F.), Ueber Stephauocrinus, etc., Wiegm. Arch., 1850, p. 365. — Monographic der fossilen Crinoidenfamilie der Blastoideen, etc., Wiegm. Arch., 1851, p. 323. — FORBES (ED.), Echinodermata of the British Tertiaries (Palaeont. Soc.), 1852, 4to. fig.— Mem. of the Geol. Surv. of the Unit. Kingdom ; London, 1849, 8vo. fig., Dec. 1st, 3d, and 4th. — Mollusks : DBS HAYES (G. P.), Traite elementaire de Conchyliologie, etc. ; Paris, 1835-39, 2 vols. 8vo. fig. — Description des coquilles caracteristiques des terrains ; Paris, 1831, 8vo. fig. — WOODWARD (S. P.), A Manual of the Mollusca, etc. ; London, 1851-54, 12mo. fig. — HAGE- NOW (FR. v.), Die Bryozoen der MaastrichterKreideformation,Cassel,1851, 4to. fig. — DES MOULINS (C.), Essai sur les Spherulites, Bull. Soc. Lin. ; Bordeaux, 1827. — ROQUAN (0. R. DU), Description des Coquilles fossilles de la famille des Rudistes, etc., Carcassonne, 1841, 4tO. fig. — HOENINGHAUS (FR. W.), Monographic der Gattung Crania, Diisseldorf, 1828, 4to. fig.— BUCH (L. v.), Ueber Terebrateln, etc. ; Berlin, 1834, 4to. fig. ; Ak.d. Wiss. Ueber Productus und Leptsena ; Berlin, 1842, 4to. fig. ; Ak. d. Wiss.— DAVID- SON (Tn.), British Brachiopoda (Paloeont. Soc.) : London, 1851-55, 4to.

fig. — DE KONINCK (L.), Recherches sur les auimaux fossiles ; Lieges, 1847, 4to. fig. — AGASSIZ (L.), Etudes crit. q. a., p. 80. — FAVRE (A.), Observations sur les Diceratos ; Geneve, 1843, 4to. fig.— -BELLARDI (L.), e Mi- CHELLOTTI (G.), Saggio orittografico sulla classe dei Gasteropodi fossili, Torino, 1840, 4to.fig.—DE HAAN(W.), Monographic Ammoniteorum et Goniatiteorum Specimen ; Lugduni- Batav., 1825, 8vo.— BUCH (L. v.), Ueber Ammoniten, iiber ihre Sonderung in Familien, etc. ; Berlin, 1832, 4to. fig. Ak. d. Wiss. — Ueber Goniotiten und Clymenien in Schlesien ; Berlin, 1839, 4to. fig. ; Ak. d. Wiss. — MUNSTER (GR. v.), Ueber Goniatiten und Planuliten im Uebergangskalk, etc. : Baireuth, 1832, 4to. fig. — VOLTZ (Pn. L.), Observations sur les Beleranites ; Paris, 1830, 4to. fig.— QUENSTEDT (F. A.), De Notis Nautileorum priniariis, etc. ; Berolini, 1834. 8vo. — Crustacea : BRONGNIART (AL.), et DESMAREST (A. G.), Histoire naturelle des Trilobites, etc. ; Paris, 1822, 4to. fig. — DALMAN (J. W.), Ueber die Palacaden oder die sogenannten Trilobiten, a. d. Schwed. ; Niirnberg, 1828, 4to .fig. — GREEN ( J.), A Monograph of the Trilobites of North America, etc. ; Philadelphia, 1833, 8vo. fig. — EMMERICH (H. F.), De Trilobitis ; Berolini, 1839, 8vo. fig. — Zur Naturgeschichte der Trilobiten ; Meiningen, 1844, 4to. — BURMEISTER (H.), Die Organisation der Trilobiten ; Berlin, 1843, 4to. fig. ; (Ray Society.) — BEYRICH (E.), Ueber einige bShmische Trilobiten ; Berlin, 1845, 4to. ; 2d part, 1846, 4to. — CORDA (A. J. C.), und HAWLE (!G.), Prodrom einer Monographic der bohmischen Trilobiten ; Prag, 1848, 8vo. fig. — BARRANDE (J.), Syst. Sil., q. a., p. 32. — SALTER (J. W.), In Mem. Geol. Surv., etc., Dec. 2. — MONSTER (GR. G. v.), Beitrage zur

In order to be able to compare the order of succession of tlie animals of past ages with some other prominent

Petrefaktenkunde ; Beyrouth, 1839, 4to. 2d Fasc., fig. — MEYER (H. v.), Neue Gattungen fossiler Krebse, etc., Stuttgart, 1840, 4to.fig. — DEKONINCK (L.), Memoire sur les Crustaces fossiles dc Belgique ; Liege, 1841, 4to. fig. — CORNUEL (J.), Description des Entomostraces fossiles, etc., Mem. Soc. Geol. de France, 2de ser., vol. 1, part 2d ; Paris, 1846, 4to. fig.— BOS- QUET, Description des Entomostraces fossiles de la Craie de Maestricht, Mem. Soc. Roy. de Liege, 1847, 8vo. — JONES (T. R.), The Entomostraca of the Cretaceous Formation of England (Palasont. Soc.) ; London, 1848, 4to. fig. — DARWIN (Cn.), Fossil Cirripedia (Palseout. Soc.) ; London, 1851 and 1854, 4to. fig. — Insects: BRODIE (P. B.), History of the Fossil Insects of the Secondary Rocks of England ; London, 1845, 8vo. — HEER (0.), Die Insektenfauna der Tertiargebilde von Oeningeu und von Radeboy : Leipzig, 1853, 4to. fig.— HEER (0.), et ESCHER v. DER LINTH (A.), Zwei geologische Vortrage, etc., N. Denk., Helv. Gessellsch; Zurich, 1852, 4to. — Fishes : AGASSIZ (L.), Rech. s. les poiss. foss., q. a., p. 81. — EGERTON (SiR PHIL.), A Systematic and Stratigraphical Catalogue of the Fossil Fishes, etc.; London, 1837, 4to. 2d edit. — On some new Ganoid Fishes, Proc. Geol. Soc. ; London, IV., p. 183. — On some New Species of ChimsGroid Fishes, Ibid., p. 153 and 211, and several other papers in Trans. Geol. Soc. Lond. ; Journ. Geol. Soc. ; Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., and Memoirs of the Geol. Surv. of the United Kingdom. — PICTET (F. J.), Poissons fossiles du Mt. Liban ; Geneve, 1850, 4to. fig.— HECKEL (J. J.), Beitrage zur Kenntniss der fossilen Fische Oesterreichs ; Wien, 1849, 4to. fig.— GIBBES (R. W.), Monograph of the Fossil Squalidte of the United States, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sc., Philadelphia, 1848 and 1849, 4to. fig. — New Species of Myliobates, Ibid., 1849, p. 299.— McCoY (F.), In Sedgwick and McCoy's British Palaeoz. Rocks, q. a., p. 32. — NEWBERRY (J. S.), Fishes of the Carbonif. Deposits of Ohio, Proc. Ac. Nat. Sc., Philadelphia, 1856.— Reptiles: CUVIER (G.), Rech. Oss. foss., q. a., p. 75. — JAEGER (G. FR.), Ueber die fossilen Reptilien welche in Wiirtemberg aufgefunden worden sind, Stuttgart, 1828, 4to. fig. — GEOFFROY ST. HILAIRE (ET.), Recherches sur les grands Sauriens, etc., Paris, 1831, 4to. fig. — DESLONGCHAMPS (EuD.), Mem. sur le Poecilopleuron Buck- Icendi, Caen, 1837, 4to. fig. — BRONN (H. G.), und KAUP (J. J.), Abhandlungen iiber die Gavialartigen Reptilien, Stuttgart, 1842, fol. fig.— GOLDFUSS (A.), Der Schiidelbau des Mosasaurus, N. Act. Ac. Nat. Car., 1844, 4to. fig. — ALTON (E. D') und BURMEISTER (H.), Der fossile Gavial von Boll, Halle, 1854, fol. fig.— BUR- MEISTER (H.), Die Labyrinthodonten, Berlin, 1850, 4to. fig. — QUENSTEDT (A.), Die Mastodonsaurier sind Batrachier, Tubingen, 1850, 4to. fig. — GIBBES (R.W.), A Memoir on Mosasaurus and three New Genera, etc., Smithson, Contrib. 1851, 4to. fig. — MEYER (H. v.) Zur Fauna der Vorwelt. Die Saurier des Muschelkalkes, etc., 'Frankfurt a. M., 1845-52, fol.— MEYER (H. v), und PLIENINGER (Tn.), Beitrage zur Palaeontologie Wurtembergs, Stuttgart, 1844, 4to. fig. — OWEN (R), Report on British Fossil Reptiles, Brit. Ass. 1839, p. 43 ; 1841, p. 60.— Fossil Reptilia of the London Clay (Palaeont. Soc.), London, 1849, 4to. fig. (the Chelonia with T. BELL.)— Fossil Reptilia of the Cretaceous Formation (Palteont. Soc.), London, 1851, 4to. fig. — Fossil Reptilia of the Wealden Formation (Palseont. Soc.), London, 1852-55, 4to. fig. — LEA (L), On a Fossil Saurian of the New Red Sandstone, etc., Philadelphia, 1852, 4to. fig.— LEIDY (Jos.), Description of Extinct Mam-

L 2

traits of the animal kingdom, it is necessary for me to make a few more remarks upon this topic. I can, fortunately, be very brief, as we possess a text-book of Palaeontology, arranged in zoological order, in which every one may at a glance see how, throughout all the classes of the animal kingdom, the different representatives of each, in past ages, are distributed in the successive geological formations.1 From such a cursory survey it must appear that, while certain types prevail during some periods, they

malia and Chelonia from Nebraska Territory, iu D. I). OWEN, Geol. Surv. of Wisconsin, Iowa, Miuesota, etc., Philadelphia, 1852, 4to. fig. — On Bathyynathus borealis, an extinct Saurian, Journ. Ac. Nat. Sc., Philad., 1854, 4to. fig. — Description of a New Species of Crocodile, etc., Ibid., 1851. — WYMAN (JEFFU.), On some remains of Batrachian Reptiles discovered in the Coal Formation of Ohio, Amer. Journ., 1858, vol. 25, p. 158. — Birds: OWEN (R), History of Bi'itish Fossil Mammalia and Birds, London, 1844-46, 1 vol. 8vo. fig. — Fossil Birds from the Wealden, Journ. Geol. Soc., II., p. 96. — Memoir on the Dinornis, Trans. Zool. Soc., vol. 3, p. 3, London, 1844, 4to. fig. — Mammalia: CUVIEB (G.), Oss. foss., q. a. — BUCKLANB (W.), Rel. Diluv., q. a., p. 142. — DE BLAINVILLE (DucR.), Osteographie ou Description iconographique comparee du Squelette, etc., Paris, 1841, et suiv. 4to. Atlas fol.— KAUP (J. J.) Descriptions d'ossemens fossiles de Mammiteres incounus, Darmstadt, 1832-39, 4to. fig.— OWEN (R.) Odontography, or a Treatise on the Comparative Anatomy of the Teeth, London, 1840-41, 3 vols. 8vo. fig.— Brit, foss. Mam. and Bii'ds, q. a. — The Fossil Mammalia of the Voyage of H. M. S. BEAGLE, London, 1838, 4to. fig. — Description of the Skeleton of an extinct gigantic Sloth, Mylodon robustus. London, 1842, 4to. fig.; and many papers in Journal of Geological Society ; Trans. Zool. Society, etc. — SCIIMERLING (P. C.), Recherches sur les ossemens fossik's des cavernes de Liege, Liege, 1833- 36, 2 vols. 4to. fig. — CROIZET et JOBERT, Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles du departement du Puy-dc-D6me, Paris, 1828, fol. fig.— MEYER (H. v.), Zur Fauna, ete., q. a. — Die fossilen Ziihne und Knochen, in der Gegend von Georgensgmund, Frankfurt a. M., 1834, 4to. fig.— JAEGER (G. FR.), Die fossilen Saugethiere Wiirtembergs, Stuttgardt, 1835-39, fol. fig. — FALCONER (H.), and CAUTLEY (P. T.), Fauna autiqua Sivalensis, etc., London, 1846, fol. fig. — GERVAIS (P.), Zoologie et Paleontologie frangaises, Paris, 1848-52, 4to. fig.— MiiLLER ( J.) Ueber die fossilen R,este der Zcuglodonten, etc., Berlin, 1849, fol. fig.— LE CONTE (J.), On Platygonus compressus, Mem. Amer. Acad. Arts and Sc., 1848, 4to. fig. — WYMAN (J.), Notice of the Geological Position of Castoroides Ohioensis, by J. HALL, and an Anatomical Description of the same, Boston Journ. Nat. Hist., 1847, vol. 5, p. 385, 8vo. fig.— WARREN (J. C.) Description of a Skeleton of the Mastodon giganteus, Boston, 1852, 4to. fol. — LEIDY (J.), The Ancient Fauna of Nebraska, Suiithson. Contr., Washington,1852,4to. fig. See also Sec. 22. 1 I allude to the classical work of PICTET, Traite elementaire de Paleontologie, q. a., a second edition of which is now being published.

are entirely foreign to others. Tins limitation is conspicuous with reference to entire classes among Vertebrata, while, in other types, it relates more to the orders or to the families, and extends frequently only to the genera or the species. But, whatever be the extent of their range in time, we shall presently see that all these types bear, as far as the order of their succession is concerned, the closest relation to the relative rank of living animals of the same types compared with one another, and to the phases of the embryonic growth of these types in the present day, and even to their geographical distribution upon the present surface of our globe. I will, however, select a few examples for further discussion. Among Echinoderms the Crinoids are, for a long succession of periods, the only representatives of that class; next follow the Starfishes, and next the Sea-Urchins, the oldest of which belong to the type of Cidaris and Echinus, followed by the Clypeastroids and Spatangoids. No satisfactory evidence of the existence of Holothurise has yet been found. Among Crustacea, a comparison of the splendid work of Barrande1 upon the Silurian System of Bohemia with the paper of Count von Miinster upon the Crustacea of Solenhofen,2 and with the work of Desniarest upon fossil Crabs,3 will at once show that, while Trilobites are the only Crustacea of the oldest palaeozoic rocks, there is found in the Jurassic period a carcinological fauna entirely composed of Macroura, to which Brachyura are added in the tertiary period. The formations intermediate between the older palaeozoic rocks and the Jura contain the remains of other Entomostraca, and later of some Macroura also. In both classes

1 BARRANDE'sSyst.Silur.,q.a.,p.32. 3 DESMAREST, see Brongniart and

2 GR. G. v. MUNSTER, Beitnige Desmarest's Hist. Nat. cl. Tril. et zuv Petrefactenkunde, q. a., p. 146. Crust., q. a., p. 146.

150 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the succession of their representatives, in different periods, agrees with their respective standing, as determined by the gradation of their structure.

Among plants, we find in the Carboniferous period Ferns and Lycopodiaceae prominent;1 in the Triassic period, EquisetaCeae2 and Coniferae prevail; in the Jurassic deposits, Cycadeae3 and Monocotyledonese ; while later only Dicotyledoneae take the lead.4 The iconographic illustration of the vegetation of past ages has of late advanced beyond the attempts to represent the characteristic features of the animal world in different geological periods.5

Without attempting here to characterize this order of succession, so much already follows from the facts mentioned,— that, while the material world is ever the same through all ages in all its combinations as far back as direct investigations can trace its existence, organized beings, on the contrary, ever transform these same materials into new forms and new combinations. The carbonate of lime of all ages is the same carbonate of lime in form as well as in composition, as long as it is under the action of physical agents only. Let life be introduced upon earth, and a Polyp builds its coral out of it, and each family, each genus, each species, a different coral, which is again different in'every successive geological epoch. Phosphate of lime in palaeozoic rocks is the same phosphate as when prepared artificially by Man ; but Fishes make their

1 See, above, p. 141. der Vorwelt ; Leipzig, 1841, 4to. fig.

3 SCHIMPER (W. P.), et MOUGEOT — HEER(0.),Flora tertiaria Helvetia,

(A.) Monographic des Plantes Fos- Wintherthur, 1855, fol. fig.

siles du Gres-bigarre de la chaine 4 Landscapes of the different geodes Vosges, Strasb. et Paris, 1840- logical periods are represented in

43, 4to. fig. UNGER (Fn.), Die Vorwelt in ihren

3 BUCKLAND (W,), On the Cyca- verschiedenen Bildungsperioden,

deoidfe, a Family of Plants found in Wien,fol.(no date.) These landscapes

Oolite, etc., Trans. Geol. Soc. Lond. are ideal representations of the vege-

2d ser. II., p. 395. UNGER (FR.), tation of past ages. Chloris protogsea, Beitrage zur Flora

spines out of it, and every Fish in its own way; Turtles their shields, Birds their wings, Quadrupeds their legs, and Man, like all other Vertebrates, his whole skeleton; and during each successive period in the history of our globe, these structures are different in different species. What similarity is there between these facts ? Do they not plainly indicate the working of different agencies excluding one another ? Truly the noble frame of Man does not owe its origin to the same forces which combine to give a definite shape to the crystal. And what is true of the carbonate of lime is equally true of all inorganic substances; they present the same characters, in all ages past, as those which they exhibit now.

Let us look upon the subject again in another light, and we shall see that the same is also true of the influence of all physical causes. Among these agents the most powerful certainly is electricity; the only one to winch, though erroneously, the formation of animals has ever been directly ascribed. The effects which it now produces, it has always produced, and produced them in the same manner. It has reduced metallic ores and various earthy minerals and deposited them in crystalline form, in veins, during all geological ages; it has transported these and other substances from one point to another, in times past, as we may do now in our laboratories under its influence. Evaporation upon the surface of the earth has always produced clouds in the atmosphere, which, after accumulating, have been condensed in rain showers in past ages as now. Rain-drop marks in the carboniferous and triassic rocks have brought to us this testimony of the identity of the operation of physical agents in past ages, and remind us that what these agents do now they also did in the same way in the oldest geological times, and have

152 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

done at all times. Who, in presence of such facts, could assume any casual connexion between two series of phenomena, the one of which is ever obeying the same laws, while the other presents at every successive period new relations, an ever changing gradation of new combinations, leading to a final climax with the appearance of Man 1 Who does not see, on the contrary, that this identity of the products of physical agents in all ages totally disproves any influence on their part in the production of these ever changing beings which constitute the organic world, and which exhibit, as a whole, such striking evidence of connected thoughts !

The study of the geographical distribution of the animals now living upon earth has taught us that every species of animals and plants has a fixed home, and even that peculiar types may be circumscribed within definite limits upon the surface of our globe. But it is only recently, since geological investigations have been carried on in remote parts of the world, that it has been ascertained that this special localization of types extends to

J- t/ JL

past ages. Lund for the first time showed that the extinct Fauna of the Brazils,1 during the latest period of a past age, consisted of different representatives of the very same types now prevalent in that continent; and Owen has observed similar relations between the extinct Fauna

1 LOND, (DR.,) Blik paa Brasiliens Afhandl. VIII. ; Kiobenhavn, 1841, Byi'everdeii for sidste Jordonivtelt- 4to. tig., p. 61, etc. ; Engl. Abstract, K. Daiiske Vidensk. Selsk. Aim. aiid Mag. vol. 3, p. 422.

of Australia1 and the types now living upon that continent.

If there is any naturalist left who believes that the Fauna of one continent may be derived from another portion of the globe, the study of these facts, in all their bearings, may undeceive him.

It is well known how characteristic the Edentata are of the present Fauna of the Brazils, for there is the home of the Sloths (Bradypus), the Tatous (Dasypus), the Anteaters (Myrmecophaga) ; there also have been found those extraordinary extinct genera, the Megatherium, the Mylodon, the Megaloiix, the Glyptodon, and the many other genera described by Dr. Lund and Professor Owen, all of which belong to this same order of Edentata. Some of these extinct genera of Edentata had also representatives in North America during the same geological period,2 thus showing that, though limited within a similar area, the range of this type has been different in different epochs.

Australia, at present almost exclusively the home of Marsupials, has yielded also a considerable number of equally remarkable species and two extinct genera of that type, all described by Owen in a report to the British Association in 1844, and in Mitchell's Expeditions into the Interior of Australia.

How far similar facts are likely to occur in other classes remains to be ascertained. Our knowledge of the geographical distribution of the fossil remains is yet too fragmentary to furnish any further data upon this point. It is, however, worthy of remark, that, though the types of

2 OWEN, (R.,) On the Geographical Srnithson. Contrib. 1855, 4to. fig. — Distribution of Extinct Mammalia, WYMAN, (J.,) Notice of Fossil Bones, Ann. aucl Mag. Nat. Hist., 1846, vol. etc., Am. Journ. Sc. and A., 2d ser., 17, p. 197. 1850, vol. 10.— OWEN, (R.,) On the

3 LEII>VT, (Jos.,) A Memoir on the Megatherium, Trans. Roy. Soc., 1855, Extinct yioth Tribe of North America, II, p. 359 ; 1856, II, p. 571.

154 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the oldest geological periods had a much wider distribution than most recent families exhibit now, some families of fishes largely represented in the Devonian system of the Old World have not yet been noticed among the fossils of that period in America, as, for instance, the Cephalaspids, the Dipteri, and the Acanthodi. Again, of the many gigantic Eeptiles of the Triasic and Oolitic periods, none are known to occur elsewhere than in Europe ; and this can hardly be owing simply to the less extensive distribution of these formations in other parts of the world, since other fossils of the same formations are known from other continents. It is more likely that some of them, at least, were peculiar to limited areas of the surface of the globe, as, even in Europe, their distribution is not extensive.

Without, however, entering upon debateable ground, it remains evident, that, before the establishment of the present state of things, peculiar types of animals, which were formerly circumscribed within definite limits, have continued to occupy the same or similar grounds in the present period, even though no genetic connection can be assumed between them, their representatives in these different formations not belonging even to the same genera. Such facts are in the most direct contradiction with any assumption that physical agents could have had anything to do with their origin ; for, though their occurrence within similar geographical areas might at first seem to favour such a view, it must be borne in mind that these beings, so localized, are associated with other types, which have a much wider range ; and, what is still more significant, they belong to different geological periods, between which great physical changes have undoubtedly taken place. Thus the facts indicate precisely the reverse of what the

theory assumes : they prove a continued similarity of organized beings during successive geological periods, notwithstanding the extensive changes in the prevailing physical conditions which the country they inhabited may have undergone at different periods. In whatever direction tin's theory of the origin of animals and plants, under the influence of physical agents, is approached, it can nowhere stand a critical examination. Only the deliberate intervention of an Intellect, acting continuously, according to one plan, can account for phenomena of this kind.

Without entering into a discussion respecting the precise limits within which the fact is true, there can no longer be any doubt that not only species, but all other groups of animals and plants, as well as individuals,1 have a definite range of duration. The limits of this duration, as far as species are concerned, generally coincide with great changes in the physical conditions of the earth's surface ;2 though, strange to say, most of those investigators who would ascribe the origin of organized beings to the influence of such causes, maintain also that species may extend from one period to another, which implies that they are not affected by such changes.3

When considering, in general, the limitation of species

1 Compare Sect. XIX. BRONN, (H. G.,) Index palaeontologi-

2 ELIE DE BEAUMONT, Recherches cus ; Stuttgardt, 1848-49, 3 vols. 8vo. sur quelques unes des Revolutions de — ORBIGNY, (A. D',) Prodome de Pala surface du Globe ; Paris, 1830, 1 laeontologie stratigraphique univervol. Svo. selle, etc. ; Paris, 1850, 2 vols. 12mo.

3 For indications respecting the — MORRIS, (J.,) Catalogue of the occurrence of all species of fossil or- British Fossils ; London, 1854, 1 vol. ganized beings now known, consult 8vo. ; 2d edit., 1854, 1 vol. Svo.

156 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

to particular geological periods, we might very properly disregard the question of the simultaneousness of the successive appearance and disappearance of Faunae, as in no way affecting the result of the investigation, as long as it is universally conceded that there is no species, known among the fossils, which extends through an indefinite series of geological formations. Moreover, the number of the species, still considered as identical in several successive periods, is growing smaller and smaller, in proportion as they are more closely compared. I have already shown, long ago, how widely many of the tertiary species, .generally considered as identical with living ones, differ from them,1 and also how different the species of the same family may be in successive subdivisions of the same great geological formation.2 Hall has come to the same result, in his investigations of the fossils of the State of New York.3 Every monograph reduces their number in each formation. Thus Barrande, who has devoted so many years to the most minute investigation of the Trilobites of Bohemia,4 has come to the conclusion that their species do not extend from one formation to the other ; D'Orbigny5 and Pictet6 have come to the same conclusion for the fossil remains of all classes. It may well be said, that, as fossil remains are studied more carefully in a zoological point of view, the supposed identity of species, in different geological formations, gradually vanishes more and more ; so that the limitation of species in time, already ascertained in a general way, by the earlier investigations of

1 AGASSIZ, (L.,) Coquilles tertiaires 4 BARKAM)E,Systemesilurien, etc., reputees identiques avec les especes q. a. ; see, also, my Monographies vivantes ; Neuchatel, 1845, 4to. fig. d'Echinodermes, q. a., p. 80.

2 AGASSIZ, (L.,) Etudes critiques 5 D'OKBIGNY, Paleoutologie Fransur les Mollusquesfossiles; Neuchatel, gaise, q. a., p. 143.

1845-46, 4to. fig. G PICTET, Traite de Paleontologie,

3 HALL, (J.,) Palaeontology of the etc., q. a., p. 144, note 2. State of New York, q. a, p. 32, note 1.

their remains in successive geological formations, is circumscribed, step by step, witliin narrower, more definite, and also more equable periods. Species are truly limited in time, as they are limited in space, upon the surface of the globe. The facts do not exhibit a gradual disappearance of a limited number of species, and an equally gradual introduction of an equally limited number of new ones ; but, on the contrary, the simultaneous creation and the simultaneous destruction of entire faunae, and a coincidence between these changes in the organic world and the great physical changes our earth has undergone. Yet, it would be premature to attempt to determine the extent of the geographical range of these changes, and still more questionable to assert their synchronism upon the whole surface of the globe, in the ocean and upon dry land.

To form adequate ideas of the great physical changes which the surface of our globe has undergone, and the frequency of these modifications of the character of the earth's surface, and of their coincidence with the changes observed among the organized beings, it is necessary to study attentively the works of Elie de Beaumont.1 He, for the first time, attempted to determine the relative age of the different systems of mountains, and first showed also, that the physical disturbances occasioned by their upheaval coincided with the successive disappearance of entire faunae, and the reappearance of new ones. In his earlier papers he recognized seven, then twelve, afterwards fifteen, such great convulsions of the globe ; and now he has traced, more or less fully and conclusively, the evidence that the number of these disturbances has been at least sixty, perhaps one hundred. But, while the genesis and genealogy

4 ELIE DE BEAUMONT, Notice sur (LEOP. v.,) Ueber die geognotischen les systemes dc Montagnes ; Paris, Systeme von Deutschland,Leonhard's 1852, 3 vols. 12mo. ; see, also, BUCH, Taschenb., 1824, II, p. 501.

158 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

of our mountain systems have been thus illustrated, palaeontologists, extending their comparisons between the fossils of different formations more carefully to all the successive beds of each great era, have observed more and more marked differences between them, and satisfied themselves that faunae also have been more frequently renovated than was formerly supposed ; so that the general results of geology proper and of palaeontology concur in the main to prove, that, while the globe has been at repeated intervals, and indeed frequently, though after immensely long periods, altered and altered again, until it has assumed its present condition, so also have animals and plants, living upon its surface, been again and again extinguished and replaced by others, until those now living were called into existence, with man at their head. The investigation is not in every case sufficiently complete to show everywhere a coincidence between this renovation of animals and plants and the great physical revolutions which have altered the general aspect of the globe, but it is already extensive enough to exhibit a frequent synchronism and correlation, and to warrant the expectation that it will, in the end, lead to a complete demonstration of their mutual dependence, not as cause and effect, but as steps in the same progressive development of a plan which embraces the physical as well as the organic world.

In order not to misapprehend the facts, and perhaps to fall back upon the idea that these changes may have been the cause of the differences observed between the fossils of different periods, it must be well understood, that, while organized beings exhibit, through all geological formations, a regular order of succession, the character of which will be more fully illustrated hereafter, this succession has been from time to time violently interrupted by physical

disturbances, without any of these altering in any way the progressive character of that succession of organized beings. Truly this shows that the important, the leading feature, of this whole drama, is the development of life,1 and that the material world affords only the elements for its realization. The simultaneous disappearance of entire faunae, and the following simultaneous appearance of other faunae, show further, that, as all these faunae consist in every formation of a great variety of types2 combined into natural associations of animals and plants, between which there have been definite relations at all times, their origin can never be attributed to the limited influence of monotonous physical causes, which always act in the same way. Here, again, the intervention of a Creator is displayed in the most striking manner, in every stage of the history of the world.

The total absence of the highest representatives of the animal kingdom in the oldest deposits forming part of the crust of our globe, has naturally led to the very general belief that the animals which have existed during the earliest period of the history of our earth wrere inferior to those now living, nay, that there is a natural gradation from the oldest and lowest animals to the highest now in existence.3 To some extent, this is true ; but it is certainly not true, that all animals form one simple series

1 'DANA, (J. D.,) Address, q. a., p. p. 35.

142, note 1. 3 See the palseontological works

2 AGASSIZ, (L.,) Geol. Times, q. a., quoted in Sect. 21.

160 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

from the earliest times, during which only the lowest types of animals were represented, to the last period, when Man appeared at the head of the animal creattion.1 It has already been shown, (Sect. VII.), that representatives of all the great types of the animal kingdom have existed from the beginning of the creation of organized beings. It is not, therefore, in the successive appearance of the great branches of the animal kingdom, that we may expect to trace a parallelism between their succession in geological times and their relative standing at present. Nor can any such correspondence be observed between the appearance of classes, at least not among Eadiata, Mollusks, and Articulata, as their respective classes seem to have been introduced simultaneously upon our earth, with perhaps the sole exception of the Insects, which are not known to have existed before the Carboniferous period. Among Vertebrata, however, there already appears a certain coincidence, even within the limits of the classes, between the time of their introduction, and the rank which their representatives hold in comparison with one another. But upon this point more hereafter.

It is only within the limits of the different orders of each class, that the parallelism between the succession of their representatives in past ages and their respective rank in the present period, is decidedly characteristic. But if this is true, it must be at the same time obvious to what extent the recognition of this correspondence may be influenced by the state of our knowledge of the true affinities and natural gradation of living animals, and that, until our classifications have become the correct expression of these natural relations, even the most striking

1 AGASSIZ, (L.,) Twelve Lect., etc., p. 68 and p. 128.

coincidence with the succession of their representatives in past ages may be entirely overlooked. On that account, it would be presumptuous on my part to pretend that I could illustrate this proposition through the whole animal kingdom, as such an attempt would involve the assertion that I know all these relations ; or that, where there exists a discrepancy between the classification and the succession of animals, the classification must be incorrect, or the relationship of the fossils incorrectly appreciated. I shall, therefore, limit myself here to a general comparison, which may, however, be sufficient to show that the improvements which have been introduced into our systems upon purely zoological grounds have nevertheless tended to render more apparent the coincidence between the relative standing among living animals and the order of succession of their representatives in past ages. I have lately attempted to show, that the order of Halcyoiiaria among the Polyps, is superior to that of Actinaria ; l that in this class compound communities constitute a higher degree of development, when contrasted with the characters and mode of existence of single Polyps, as exhibited by the Actinia ; that top-budding is superior to lateral budding ; and that the type of Madrepores, with their top-animal, or at least with a definite and limited number of tentacles, is superior to all other Actinoids. If this be so, the prevalence of Actinoids in older geological formations, to the exclusion of Halcyonoids, the early prevalence of Astrseoids, and the very late introduction of Madrepores, at once exhibits a correspondence between the rank of the living Polyps and the representatives of that class in past ages, though we can

1 For classification of Polyps, see and AQASSIZ, (L.,) Classification of DANA, q. a., p. 44, note 1 ; also Polyps, Proc. Am. Acad. Sc. and S and HAIME, q. a., Arts, 1856, p. Ib7.

M

162 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

hardly expect a very close coincidence in this respect between animals whose structure is so simple. The prevalence of Rugosa and Tabulata in the oldest deposits1 appears in a new light, since it has been known that the Tabulata are Hydroids, and not genuine Polyps.2

The gradation among the orders of Echinoderins is perfectly plain. Lowest stand the Crinoids, next the Asterioids, next the Echinoids, and highest the Holothurioids. Ever since this class has been circumscribed within its natural limits, this succession has been considered as expressing their natural relative standing, and modern investigations respecting their anatomy and embryology, however extensive, have not led to any important change in their classification, as far as the estimation of their rank is concerned. This is also precisely the order in which the representatives of this class were successively introduced upon the earth in past geological ages. Among the oldest formations we find pedunculated Crinoids 3 only, and this order remains prominent for a long series of successive periods ; next come free Crinoids and Asterioids ; next Echinoids,4 the successive appearance of which, since the Triassic period to the present day, coincides also with the gradation of their subdivisions, as determined by their structure ; and it was ngt until the present period, that the highest Echinoderms, the Holothurioids, assumed a prominent position in their class.

Among Acephala there is no more uncertainty re-

1 See MILNE-EDWARDS and HAIME, System der Asteriden ; Braunschweig, q. a., p. 44. 1842, 4to. fig. — MULLER, (J.,) Ueber

2 Comp. the notes, pp. 34 and 107. den Bau der Echinodermen ; Berlin,

3 MILLER, Crinoids, q. a. — D'On- 1854, 4to. — TIEDEMAN, (FR.,) Anato- BIGNY, q. a. — J. HALL, q. a. — Aus- mie der Rohren-Holothurie, des See- TIN, q. a., p. 145. igels, etc.; Landshut, 1817, fol. fig. —

4 See the works q. a., p. 145; also, VALENTIN, (G.,) Anat. du genre Echi- MULLEE, (J.,) and TROSCHEL, (F. H.,) nus ; Neuchatel, 1842, 4to.

specting the relative rank of their living representatives than among Echinodcrms. Every zoologist acknowledges the inferiority of the Bryozoa and the Brachiopods1 when compared with the Lamellibranchiata ; and among these, the inferiority of the Monomyaria in comparison with the Dimyaria would hardly be denied. Now, if any fact is well established in Palaeontology, it is the earlier appearance and prevalence of Bryozoa and Brachiopods in the oldest geological formations, and their extraordinary development for a long succession of ages, until Lamellibranchiata assume the ascendancy, which they maintain to the fullest extent at present. A closer comparison of the different families of these orders might further show how close this correspondence is through all ages.

Of Gasteropoda I have nothing special to say, as every palaeontologist is aware how imperfectly their remains have been investigated, in comparison with what has been done for the fossils of other classes. Yet the Pulmonata are known to be of more recent origin than the Branchifera, and among these the Siphonostomata to have appeared later than the Holostoma, and this already exhibits a general coincidence between their succession in time and their respective rank.

Our present knowledge of the anatomy of the Nautilus, for which science is indebted to the skill of Owen,2 must

1 OBBIGNY, (A. D',) Bryozoires, Anatomy of the Terebratula, 1853,

Ann. Sc. Nat., 3e ser. 1851, vol. 16, 4to. fig. (Palseont. Soc.)— Bucn, (L.

p. 292. — BUSK, (G.,) Catalogue of v.,) Ueber Terebrateln, q. a., p. 146.

marine Polyzoa in the collection of — DAVIDSON, (Tn.,) Monogr. etc., q.

the British Museum ; London, 1854. a., p. 146. — POLI (XAV.,) Testacea

— CUVIER, (G.,) Memoire sur 1'animal utriusque Sicilue, eorumque Historia

de la Lingule, Ann. Mus. I, p. 69, fig. et Anatornia ; Parma3, 1791-93, 2 vols.

— VOGT, (C.,) Anatomic der Lingula fol. fig., continued by Delle Chiaje. anatina, N. Mem. Soc. Ilelv. 1843, 2 OWEN, (R.) Memoir on the Pearly

VII, 4to. fig.— OWEN, (R.,) On the Nautilus ; London, 1832, 4to. fig. —

Anatomy of the Brachiopoda, Trans. VALENCIENNES, (A.,) Nouvelles Re-

Zool. Soc., I, 4to. p. 145, fig. — On the cherches anatomiques sur le Nautile.

M 2

164 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

satisfy everybody that among Cephalopoda the Tetrabranchiata are inferior to the Dibranchiata ; and it is not too much to say, that one of the first points a collector of fossils may ascertain for himself is the exclusive prevalence of the representatives of the first of these types in the oldest formations, and the later appearance, about the middle geological ages, of representatives of the other type, which at present is the most widely distributed.1

Of Worms, nothing can be said of importance with reference to our inquiry ; but the Crustacea again exhibit the most striking coincidence. Without entering into details, it appears, from the classification of Milne- Edwards, that Decapods, Stomapods, Amphipods, and Isopods, constitute the higher orders ; while Branchiopods, Entomostraca, Trilobites, and the parasitic types, constitute, with Limulus, the lower orders of this class.2 In the classification of Dana,3 his first type embraces Decapods and Stomapods, the second Amphipods and Isopods, the third Entomostraca including Branchiopods, the fourth Cirripedia, and the fifth Eotatoria. Both authors acknowledge, in the main, the same gradation ; though they differ greatly in the combination of the leading groups, and also in the exclusion, by Milne- Edwards, of some types, as the Rotifera, which Burmeister first and then Dana and Ley dig, justly, as I believe, united

C. R., Paris, 1841, 4to. — MACDONALD, M.,) QUATREFAGES, (An. DE,) et

(J. D.,) On the anatomy of Nautilus BLANCHARD, (En.) Voyage en Sicile ;

umbilicatus, compared with that of Paris, 3 vols. 4to. fig., without date.

Nautilus Pom2)ilius, Trans. Roy. Sc.; 1 Some Ammonites, and especially

London, 1855, II, p. 277. — VAN DER the splendid Crioceras of Bogota,

HOEVEN, (J.,) Beitrag zur Anatomic described by Valenciennes, exhibit

von Nautilus Pompilius, L., besonders plainly a combination of characters

des mannliehen Thieres, Arch, fur found separately in Nautilus and in

Naturg., 1857, I, p. 77. — CUVIER, Argonauta.

(G.,) Mumoires pour servir a 1'His- 2 MIL^E-EDWARDS, Hist. Nat. des

toire et a, 1'Anatomie des Mollusques ; Crustaces ; Paris, 1834-40, 3 vols. 8vo.

Paris, 1817, 4to. fig. — EDWARDS, (H. 3 DANA(J.D-), Crustacea, q.a.,p. 45.

to the Crustacea.1 Now this gradation presents the most perfect coincidence with the order of succession of Crustacea in past geological ages, even down to their subdivisions into minor groups. Trilobites and Entomostraca are the only representatives of the class in palaeozoic rocks ; in the middle geological ages there appears a variety of Shrimps, among which the Macrouraii Decapods are prominent, and in the later only the Brachyura, which are the most numerous in our days.

The fragmentary knowledge which we possess of fossil Insects does not justify us, yet, in expecting to ascertain with any degree of precision the character of their succession through all geological formations, though much valuable information has already been obtained respecting the entomological faunae of several geological periods.2

The order of succession of Vertebrata in past ages exhibits features in many respects differing greatly from the Articulata, Mollusks, and Eadiata. Among the latter we find the respective classes appearing simultaneously in the oldest periods of the history of our earth. Not so with the Vertebrata, for though Fishes may be as old as any of the lower classes, Keptiles, Birds, and Mammalia are introduced successively in the order of their relative rank in their types. Again, the earliest representatives of these classes do not always seem to be the lowest ; on the contrary, they are, to a certain extent, and in a certain sense, the highest, in as far as they embody characters, which, in later periods, appear separately in higher classes (see Sect. 26), to the exclusion of what henceforth constitutes the special character of the lower class. For instance,

1 LEYDIG, (FR.,) Riiderthiere, etc., thiere, Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1856,

Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zool. 1854, vol. 6, p. vol. 8, p. 152.— GOSSE, (Tn. H.,) On

1. — DANA, (J. D.,) Crustacea q. a. — the Structure of the class Rotifera

BURMEISTER, Noch einige Worte iiber q. a. die systematischeStelluug dcr lliider- 2 HEEB, q. a.; BKODIE, q. a., p. 147.

166 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the oldest known Fishes partake of characters, which, at a later time, are exclusively found in Eeptiles, and no longer belong to the Fishes of the present day. It may be said that the earliest Fishes are rather the oldest representatives of the type of Vertebrata than of the class of Fishes, and that this class only assumes its proper characters after the introduction of the class of Eeptiles upon the earth. Similar relations may be traced between the Keptiles and the classes of Birds and Mammalia-, which they- precede. I need only allude here to the resemblance of the Pterodactyli to Birds, and to that of the Ichthyosauri to certain Cetacea. Yet, tlirough all these intricate relations there runs an evident tendency towards the production of higher and higher types, until, at last, Man crowns the whole series. Seen, as it were, at a distance, so that the mind can take a general survey of the whole, and perceive the connection of the successive steps, without being bewildered by the details, such a series appears like the development of a great conception, expressed in proportions so harmonious that every link appears necessary to the full comprehension of its meaning, and yet so independent and perfect in itself, that it might be mistaken for a complete whole, and again so intimately connected with the preceding and following members of the series, that one might be viewed as flowing out of the other. What is universally acknowledged as characteristic of the highest conceptions of genius is here displayed in a fullness, a richness, a magnificence, an amplitude, a perfection of details, a complication of relations, which baffle our skill and our most persevering efforts to appreciate all its beauties. Who can look upon such series, coinciding to such an extent, and not read in them the successive

manifestations of a thought, expressed at different times in forms ever new, and yet tending to the same end, onwards to the coming of Man, whose advent is already prophesied in the first appearance of the earliest Fishes !

The relative standing of plants presents a somewhat different character from that of animals. Their great types are not built upon plans of structure so strictly different ; they exhibit, therefore, a more uniform gradation, from their lowest to their highest types, which are not personified in one highest plant, as the highest animals are in Man.

Again, Zoology is more advanced respecting the limitation of the most comprehensive general divisions than Botany, while Botany is in advance respecting the limitation and characteristics of families and genera. There is, on that account, more diversity of opinion among botanists respecting the number and the relative rank of the primary divisions of the vegetable kingdom, than among zoologists respecting the great branches of the animal kingdom. While most writers1 agree in admitting among plants such primary groups as Acotyledones, Monocotyledones, and Dicotyledones, under these or other names, others would separate the Gymnosperms from the Dicotyledones.2

It appears to me that this point in the classification of the living plants cannot be fully understood without a thorough acquaintance with the fossils and their distribution in the successive geological formations, and that this case exhibits one of the most striking examples of the influence classification may have upon our appreciation of the gradation of organized beings in the course of time. As long as the Gymnosperms stand among the Dicotyledones, no relation can be traced between the relative

1 GOPPEIIT, etc., (|. a., p. 141. - AD. BBO»GiriART,ete.,q.a.,p.l41.

168 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

standing of living plants and the order of succession of their representatives in past ages. On the contrary, let the true affinity of the Gymnosperms with the Ferns, Equisetacese, and especially with the Lycopodiacese, be fully appreciated, and we at once see how the vegetable kingdom has been successively introduced upon earth, in an order which coincides with the relative position its primary divisions bear to one another, in respect to their rank, as determined by the complication of their structure. Truly, the Gymnosperms, with their imperfect flower, their open carpels supporting their polyembryonic seeds in their axis, are more nearly allied to the ananthic Acrophytes with their innumerable spores than to either the Monocotyledones or Dicotyledones ; and if the vegetable kingdom constitutes one graduated series, beginning with the Cryptogams, followed by the Gymnosperms, and ending with the Monocotyledones and Dicotyledones, have we not in that series the most striking coincidence with the order of succession, as exhibited by the Cryptogams of the oldest geological formations, especially the Ferns, Equisetacese, and Lycopodiacese of the Carboniferous period, followed by the Gymnosperms of the Trias and Jura and the Monocotyledones of the same formation and the late development of the Dicotyledones I Here, as everywhere, there is but one order, one plan in nature,

AND THE EMBRYONIC GROWTH OF THEIR LIVING REPRE- SENTATIVES.

Several authors have already alluded to the resemblance which exists between the young of some of the animals

now living and the fossil representatives of the same families in earlier periods.1 But these comparisons have, thus far, been traced only in isolated cases, and have not yet led to a conviction, that the character of the succession of organized beings in past ages is such, in general, as to show a remarkable agreement with the embryonic growth of animals ; though the state of our knowledge in Embryology and Palaeontology now justifies such a conclusion. The facts most important to a proper appreciation of this point have already been considered in the preceding paragraph, as far as they relate to the order of succession of animals, when compared with the relative rank of their living representatives. In now examining the agreement between this succession and the phases of the embryonic growth of living animals, we may, therefore, take for granted that the order of succession of their fossil representatives is sufficiently present to the mind of the reader to afford a satisfactory basis of comparison. Too few Corals have been studied ernbryologically to furnish extensive means of comparison ; yet so much is known,2 that the young polyp, when hatched, is an independent, simple animal, that it is afterwards incased in a cup, secreted by the foot of the actinoid embryo, which may be compared to the external wall of the Rugosa? and that the polyp gradually widens until it has reached its maximum diameter, prior to budding or dividing; while in ancient Corals this stage of enlargement seems to last during their whole life, as, for example,

1 AGASSIZ (L.), Poiss. foss., q. a., 3 I have ascertained these facts

p. 81. Embryonic Types, q. a., p. 14. from the investigation of several

Twelve Lect., etc., p. 8. — EDWARDS corals of the reef of Florida, especi-

(H. MILNE,) Considerations sur quel- ally of the genera Porites, Astraea

ques principes relatifs a la Classifica- and Manicina.

tion naturelle des Animaux, Ann. Sc. 3 MILNE-EDWAKDS et HAIME, q. a.,

Nat., 3e ser., 1844, 1 vol., p. 65. p. 44.

170 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

in the Cyathophylloids.1 None of the ancient Corals form those large communities, composed of myriads of united individuals, so characteristic of our coral reefs ; on the contrary, the more isolated and more independent character of the individual polyps of past ages presents a striking resemblance to the isolation of young Corals, in all the living types. In no class, however, is there so much to learn still, as in the Polyps, before the correspondence of then1 embryonic growth, and their succession in time, can be fully appreciated. In this connection I would also remark, that, among the lower animals, it is rarely observed that any one, even the highest type, represents in its metamorphoses all the stages of the lower types, either in their development, or in the order of their succession ; and that frequently the knowledge of the embryology of several types of different standing is requisite to ascertain the connection of the whole series in both spheres.

No class, as yet, affords more complete and more beautiful evidence of the correspondence of their embryonic changes with the successive appearance of their representatives in past ages than the Echinoderms, thanks to the extensive and patient investigations of J. Miiller upon the metamorphoses of these animals.2 Prior to the publication of his papers, the metamorphosis of the Euro-

1 Since I have ascertained that the their true affinity is rather with the

Tabulata are Hydroids and not Po- Acalephs than with the Polyps, and

lyps, I have had rny doubts respecting that the family of Lucernaria is a

the real affinities of the Rugosa. The living representative of that type,

tendency to a quadripartite arrange- but without hard parts. In this case

rnent of their septa indicates uuques- the foot-secretion of the Actinoids

tionably a nearer relation to Aca- would only indicate a typical resemlephs than to Polyps. Moreover, blance between Polyps and Acalephs,

their successive floors are different and not constitute an evidence of the

from the interseptal floors of the true relative standing of the two types. Polyps, and resemble those of the - MULLEK, (J.), Seven papers, q. a.,

Tabulata. It may be, therefore, that p. 105.

pean Comatula alone was known. (See Sect. XVIII, p. 105.) This had already shown that the early stages of growth of this Echinoclerm exemplify the pedunculated Crinoids of past ages. I have myself further seen that the successive stages of the embryonic growth of Comatula typify, as it were, the principal forms of Crinoids which characterize the successive geological formations. First, it recalls the Cistoids of the palaeozoic rocks, which are represented in its simple sphseroidal head, next the few-plated Platycrinoids of the Carboniferous period, next the Pentacrinoids of the Lias and Oolite with their whorls of cirrhi, and finally, when freed from its stem, it stands as the highest Crinoid, as the prominent type of the family, in the present period. The investigations of Mttllcr upon the larvse of all the families of living Asterioids and Echinoids enable us to extend these comparisons to the higher Echinoderms also. The first point which strikes the observer in the facts ascertained by Muller is the extraordinary similarity of so many larvae of such different orders and different families as the Ophiuroids and Asterioids, the Echinoids proper and the Spatangoids, and even the Holothurioids, all of which end, of course, in reproducing their typical peculiarities. Secondly, it is very remarkable that the more advanced larval state of Echinoids and Spatangoids should continue to show such great similarity that a young Amphidetus hardly differs from a young Echinus.1 Finally, not to extend these remarks too far, I would only add that these young Echinoids (Spatangus as well as Echinus proper) have a general resemblance to Cidaris, on account of their large spines, rather than to Echinus proper. Now, these facts agree

1 Compare J. Midler's 1st paper, pi. Ill, with pis. IV- VII, and with pis. VI aud VII, 4th paper.

172 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

exactly with what is known of the successive appearance of Echinoicls in past ages :a their earliest representatives belong to the genera Diadema and Cidaris, next come true Echinoids, later only Spatangoids. When the embryology of the Clypeastroids is known, it will, no doubt, afford other links to connect a larger number of the members of this series.

What is known of the embryology of Acephala, Gasteropoda, and Cephalopoda, affords but a few data for such comparisons. It is, nevertheless, worthy of remark, that, while the young Lamellibranchiata are still in their embryonic stage of growth, they resemble Brachiopods,2 externally at least, more than their own parents, and the young shells of all Gasteropods3 known in their embryonic stage of growth being all holostomate, recall the oldest types of that class. Unfortunately, nothing is yet known of the embryology of the Chambered Cephalopoda, which are the only ones found in the older geological formations, and the changes which the shield of the Dibranchiata undergoes have not been observed, so that no comparisons can be established between them and the Belemnites and other representatives of this order in the middle and more recent geological ages.

Eespecting Worms, our knowledge of the fossils is too fragmentary to lead to any conclusion, even should our information of the embryology of these animals be sufficient, as a basis for similar comparisons. The class of Crustacea, on the contrary, is very instructive in this respect ; but, to trace our comparisons through the whole scries, it is necessary that we should consider simul-

1 ACASSIZ (L.,) Twelve Lectures, 3 See the works, q. a., p. 110, n. 1, q. a., etc., p. 25. especially those relating toNutlibrau-

2 See the works, q. a., p. 110, n 1. chiata.

taneously the embryonic growth of the higher Entomostraca, such as Limulus, and that of the highest order of the class,1 when it will appear, that, as the former recall in early life the form and character of the Trilobites, so does the young Crab passing through the form of the Isopods, and that of the Macrouran Decapod before it assumes its typical form as Brachyuran, recall the wellknown succession of Crustacea through the geological middle ages and the Tertiary periods to the present day. The early appearance of Scorpions, in the Carboniferous period, is probably also a fact to the point, if, as I have attempted to show, Arachnoids may be considered as exemplifying the chrysalis stage of development of Insects ;2 but, for reasons already stated, (Sect. XXIV.), it is hardly possible to take Insects into consideration in these inquiries.

In my researches upon fossil Fishes,3 I have pointed out at length the embryonic character of the oldest fishes ; but much remains to be done in that direction. The only fact of importance I have learned of late is that the young Lepidosteus, long after it has been hatched, exhibits, in the form of its tail, characters hitherto only known among the fossil fishes of the Devonian system.4 It is to be hoped that the embryology of the Crocodile will throw some light upon the succession of the gigantic Keptiles of the middle geological ages, as I shall show that the embryology of Turtles throws light upon the fossil Chelonians.5 It is already plain that the embryonic changes of Batrachians coincide with what is known of

1 AGASSIZ (L.,) Twelve Lectures, * AGASSIZ (L.,) Lake Superior, etc., etc., p. 68. p. 254.

2 Classif. of Insects, q. a., page 5 See ray Contributions to the Nat. 128. Hist, of the United States, vol. i, pp.

3 Poiss. fossiles, q. a,, p. 81. 290, 303 and 386.

174 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

their succession in past ages.1 Fossil Birds are too little

known, and fossil Mammalia2 do not extend throuoii

&

a sufficiently long series of geological formations, to afford many striking points of comparison ; yet, the characteristic peculiarities of their extinct genera exhibit everywhere indications that their living representatives in early life resemble them more than they do their own parents. A minute comparison of a young elephant with any mastodon will show this most fully, not only in the peculiarities of their teeth, but even in the proportion of their limbs, their toes, etc.

It may therefore be considered as a general fact, very likely to be more fully illustrated as investigations cover a wider ground, that the phases of development of all living animals correspond to the order of succession of their extinct representatives in past geological times. As far as this goes, the oldest representatives of every class may then be considered as embryonic types of their respective orders or families among the living. Pedunculated Crinoids are embryonic types of the Comatuloids, the oldest Ecliinoids embryonic representatives of the higher living families, Trilobites embryonic types of Entomostraca, the Oolitic Decapods embryonic types of our Crabs, the Heterocercal Ganoids embryonic types of the Lepidosteus, the Andrias Scheuchzeri an embryonic prototype of our Batrachians, the Zeuglodonts embryonic SirenidaB, the Mastodonts embryonic Elephants, etc.

To appreciate, however, fully and correctly all these relations, it is further necessary to make a distinction between embryonic types in general, which represent in

1 See the works, q. a., p. 124, note siz (L.,) Zoological Character of

Young Mammalia, Proc. Am. Ass.

2 Cuv., Oss. foss., q. a.; also, AGAS- Adv. Sc.; Cambridge, 1849, p. 85.

their whole organization early stages of the growth of higher representatives of the same type, and embryonic features prevailing more or less extensively in the characters of allied genera, as in the case of the Mastodon and Elephant, and what I would call liypeinbryonic types, in which embryonic features are developed to extremes in the further periods of growth, as, for instance, the wings of the Bats, which exhibit the embryonic character of a webbed hand, as all Mammalia have it at first, but here grown out and developed into an organ of flight, or assuming in other families the shape of a fin, as in the Whale, or the Sea-turtle, in which the close connection of the fingers is carried out to another extreme.

Without entering into further details upon this subject, which will be fully illustrated in my Contributions to the Natural History of the United States, enough has already been said to show that the leading thought which runs through the succession of all organized beings in past ages is manifested again in new combinations in the phases of the development of the living representatives of these different types. It exhibits everywhere the working of the same creative Mind, through all times, and upon the whole surface of the globe.

We have seen in the preceding Section, how the embryonic conditions of higher representatives of certain types, called into existence at a later time, are typified, as it were, in representatives of the same types which have existed at an earlier period. These relations, now

176 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

they are satisfactorily known, may also be considered as exemplifying, as it were, in the diversity of animals of an earlier period, the pattern upon which the phases of the development of other animals of a later period were to be established. They now appear like a prophecy in those earlier times of an order of things not possible with the earlier combinations then prevailing in the animal kingdom, but exhibiting in a later period, in a striking manner, the antecedent consideration of every step in the gradation of animals.

This is, however, by no means the only, nor even the most remarkable case, of such prophetic connections between facts of different dates.

Eecent investigations in Palaeontology have led to the discovery of relations between animals of past ages and those now living, which were not even suspected by the founders of that science. It has, for instance, been noticed that certain types, which are frequently prominent among the representatives of past ages, combine in their structure peculiarities which at later periods are only observed separately in different, distinct types. Sauroid Fishes existed before Eeptiles, Pterodactyles before Birds, Ichthyosauri before Dolphins, etc.

There are entire families, among the representatives of older periods, of nearly every class of animals, which, in the state of their perfect development, exemplify such prophetic relations, and afford, within the limits of the animal kingdom at least, the most unexpected evidence that the plan of the whole creation had been maturely considered long before it was executed. Such types I have for some time past been in the habit of calling prophetic types. The Sauroid1 Fishes of the past geological

1 AGASSIZ (L.,) Poiss. foss., vol. 2, part 2.

ages are an example of this kind. These Fishes, which have preceded the appearance of Eeptiles, present a combination of ichthyic and reptilian characters, not to be found in the true members of this class, which form its bulk at present. The Pterodactyles1 which preceded the class of Birds, and the Ichthyosauri2 which preceded the appearance of the Cetacea, are other examples of such prophetic types. These cases suffice, for the present, to show that there is a real difference between embryonic types and prophetic types. Embryonic types are in a measure also prophetic types, but they exemplify only the peculiarities of development of the higher representatives of their own types ; while prophetic types exemplify structural combinations observed at a later period in two or several distinct types, and are moreover not necessarily embryonic in their character, as, for example, the Monkeys in comparison with Man ; while they may be so, as in the case of the Pinnate, Plantigrade, and Digitigrade Carnivora, or, still more so, in the case of the pedunculated Crinoids.3

Another combination is also frequently observed among animals, when a series exhibits such a succession as exemplifies a natural gradation, without immediate or necessary reference to either embryonic development or succession in time, as the Chambered Cephalopods. Such types I call progressive types :4

Again : a distinction ought to be made between prophetic types proper and what I would call synthetic types, though both are more or less blended in nature. Prophetic types proper are those, which in their structural

1 CUVIER (G.), Oss. foss., vol. 5, 4 AGASSIZ (L.), On the Difference p. 2. between Progressive, Embryonic and

2 CUVIER (G.), Oss. foss., as q. a. Prophetic Types, etc., Proc. Am. Ass.

3 See above, Sect. 25. Adv. Sc.; Cambridge, 1849, p. 432.

N

178 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

complications lean towards other combinations fully realized in a later period, wliile synthetic types are those which combine in a well balanced measure features of several types occurring as distinct, only at a later time. Sauroid Fishes and Ichthyosauri are more distinctly synthetic than prophetic types, while Pterodactyles have more the character of prophetic types; so also are the genera Echinocrinus with reference to the Echini, Pentremites with reference to the Asterioids, and Pentacrinus with reference to Comatula. Full illustrations of these different cases will yet be needed to render obvious the importance of such comparisons ; and I shall not fail to present ample details upon this subject in my Contributions to the Natural History of the United States, now in course of publication. Enough, however, has already been said to show that the character of these relations among animals of past ages, compared with those of later periods or of the present day, exhibits more strikingly than any other feature of the animal kingdom, the thoughtful connection which unites all living beings, through all ages, into one great system, intimately linked together from beginning to end.

So striking is the resemblance of the young of higher animals to the full-grown individuals of lower types, that it has been assumed by many writers that all the higher animals pass, during the earlier stages of their growth, through phases corresponding to the permanent constitution of the lower classes. These suppositions, the results

of incomplete investigations, have even become the foundation of a system of philosophy of Nature which represents all animals as the different degrees of development of a few primitive types.1 These views have been too generally circulated of late, in an anonymous work, entitled Vestiges of Creation, to require further mention here. It has also been shown above (Sect. VIII.) that animals do not form such a simple series as would result from a successive development. There now, therefore, remains only for us to show within what limits the natural gradation which may be traced in the different types of the animal kingdom,2 corresponds to the changes they undergo during their growth, having already considered the relations which exist between these metamorphoses and the successive appearance of animals upon earth, and between the latter and the structural gradation or relative standing of their living representatives. Our knowledge of the complication of structure of all animals is sufficiently advanced to enable us to select, almost at random, our examples of the correspondence between the structural gradation of animals and their embryonic growth, in all those classes, whose embryological development has been sufficiently investigated. Yet, in order to show more distinctly how closely ah1 the leading features of the animal kingdom are combined, whether we consider the complication of their structure, or their succession in time, or their embryonic development, I shall refer by preference to the same types which I have chosen before for the illustration of the other relations.

1 LAMARCK, q.a., p. 36. — DE MAIL- LehrbuchderNatur-Philosophie,q.a.,

LET (Pseudon. TELLIAMED), Entre- p. 24. — The Vestiges of Creation, etc.

tiens d'un Philosophe indien avec un 2 See the works quoted from,p.!01rnissionaire fran§ais ; Amsterdam, 126, also MILNE-EDWARDS, q.a.,p. 169.

1748, 2 vols. 8vo. — OKEN (LoR ), — THOMPSON, Crinoids, q. a.

N 2

180 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Among the Echinoderms,we find in the order of Crinoids the pedimculated types standing lowest,1 Comatulee highest, and it is well known that the young Comatula is a pedunculated Crinoicl, which only becomes free in later life.2 J. Mliller has shown, that, among the Echinoids, even the highest representatives, the Spatangoids, differ but slightly in early youth from the Echinoids, and no zoologist can doubt that these are inferior to the former. Among the

o

Crustacea, Dana3 has insisted particularly upon the serial gradation which may be traced between the different types of Decapods, their order being natural from the highest Brachyura, through the Anomoura, the Macroura, the Tetradecapods, etc., to the Entomostraca. The Macrouran character of the embryo of our Crabs has been fully illustrated by Rathke,4 in his beautiful investigations upon the embryology of the Crustacea. I have further shown that the young of the Macroura represent Entomostracan forms, some of them having even been described as representatives of that order.5 The correspondence between the gradation of Insects and their embryonic growth I have illustrated fully in a special paper.6 Similar comparisons have been made in the class of Fishes ;7 in that of Eeptiles we find the most striking examples of tin's kind among Batrachians8 (see above, Sect. XII.) ; in the Birds,9 the uniformly webbed foot of all the young, exhibits another correspondence between the young of higher orders and the permanent character of the lower ones. In the order of

1 MiiLLER (J.), TJeber Pentacrinus 4 RATHKE, q. a., p. 119. Caput Medusae ; Berlin, 1833, 4to., 5 Twelve Lectures, etc., p. 67. Ak. d. Wiss. e Classification of Insects, q. a.

2 FORBES (En ), History of British 7 Poissons fossiles, q. a. Starfishes; London, 1851, 1 vol. 8vo., 8 Twelve Lectures, etc., p. 8.

P- 10- 9 AGASSIZ (L.), Lake Superior, etc.,

3 DANA, q. a., p. 45. — BURMEISTER, p. 194. Cirripeds, q. a., p. 119.

Carnivora, the Seals, the Plantigrades, and the Digitigrades exemplify the same coincidence between higher and higher representatives of the same types, and the embryonic changes through which the highest pass successively.

No more complete evidence can be needed to show that there exists throughout the animal kingdom the closest correspondence between the gradation of their types and the embryonic changes their respective representatives exhibit throughout. And yet what genetic relation can there exist between the Pentacrinus of the West Indies and the Comatulce found in every sea ; what between the embryos of Spatangoids and those of Echinoids, and between the former and the adult Echinus ; what between the larva of a Crab and our Lobsters ; what between the Caterpillar of a Papilio and an adult Tinea, or an adult Sphinx ; what between the Tadpole of a Toad and our Menobranchus ; what between a young Dog and our Seals, unless it be the plan designed by an intelligent Creator ?

THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION, AND THE GEOGRAPHICAL DIS-

It requires unusual comprehensiveness of view to perceive the order prevailing in the geographical distribution of animals. We need not wonder, therefore, that this branch of Zoology is so far behind the other divisions of that science. Nor need we wonder at the fact that the geographical distribution of plants is so much better known than that of animals, when we consider how marked a feature the vegetable carpet which covers the surface of our globe is, when compared with the little

182 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

show animals make almost everywhere. And yet it will, perhaps, some day be easier to understand the relations existing between the geographical distribution of animals and the other general relations prevailing among animals, because the range of structural differences is much greater among animals than among plants. Even now, some curious coincidences may be pointed out, which go far to show that the geographical distribution of animals stands in direct relation to their relative standing in their respective classes, and to the order of their succession in past geological ages, and more indirectly also to their embryonic growth.

Almost every class has its tropical families, and these stand generally highest in their respective classes ; or when the contrary is the case, when they stand evidently upon a lower level, there is some prominent relation between them and the prevailing types of past ages. The class of Mammalia affords striking examples of these two kinds of connection. In the first place, the Quadrmnana, wdiich, next to Man, stand highest in their class, are aU tropical animals ; and it is worthy of remark that the two highest types of Anthropoid Monkeys, the Orangs of Asia and the Chimpanzees of Western Africa, bear, in the coloration of their skin, an additional similarity to the races of Man inhabiting the same regions, the Orangs being yellowish red, as the Malays, and the Chimpanzees blackish, as the Negroes. The Pachyderms, on the contrary, stand low in their class, though chiefly tropical ; but they constitute a group of animals prominent among the earliest representatives of that class in past ages. Among the Chiroptera the larger, frugivorous representatives are essentially tropical ; the more omnivorous, on the contrary, occur everywhere. Among the Carnivora the largest, most

powerful, and also highest types, the Digitigrade, prevail in the tropics ; while among the Plantigrades, the most powerful, the Bears, belong to the temperate and to the arctic zone, and the lowest, the Pinnate, are marine species of the temperate and arctic seas. Among the Euminants we find the Giraffe and the Camels in the wanner zones, the others everywhere. In the class of Birds, the gradation is not so obvious as in other classes, and yet the aquatic types form by far the most numerous representatives of this class in temperate and cold regions, and are almost the only ones found in the arctic, while the higher, land birds prevail in the warm regions. Among the Reptiles, the Crocodilians are entirely tropical ; the largest land Turtles are also only found in the tropics, and the aquatic representatives of this order, which are evidentlv inferior to

it

their land-kindred, extend much further north. The Rattlesnakes and Vipers extend further north and higher up the mountains than the Boas and the common harmless snakes. The same is true of the Salamanders and Tritons. The Sharks and Skates are most diversified in the tropics. It is also within the tropics that the most brilliant diurnal Lepidoptera are found, and this is the highest order of Insects. Among the Crustacea the highest order, the Brachyora, are most numerous in the torrid zone ; but Dana has shown, what was not at all expected, that they nevertheless reach their highest perfection in the middle temperate regions.1 The Anornoura and Macroura, on the contrary, are nearly equally divided between the torrid and temperate zones ; while the lower Tetradecapods are far more numerous in extra-tropical latitudes than in the tropical. The Cephalopoda are most diversified within the tropics ; yet the Nautilus is a reminiscence of past

1 DANA, Crustacea, p. 1501.

184 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

ages. Among the Gasteropoda, the Stromboids belong to the tropics; but among the lamellibranchiate Acephala,the Naiades, which seem to me to stand very high in their class, have their greatest development in the fresh waters of North America. The highest Echinoderrns, the Holothurians and Spatangoids, are most diversified within the tropics, while the Echini, Starfishes, and Ophiurse extend to the arctics. The presence of Pentacrinus in the West Indies has undoubtedly reference to the prevalence of Crinoids in past ages. The Madrepores, the highest among the Actinoid Polypi, are entirely tropical ; while the highest Halcyonoids, Eenilla, Veretillum, and Pennatula, extend to the tropics and the temperate zone.

Another interesting relation between the geographical distribution of animals and their representatives in past ages, is the absence of embryonic types in the warm regions. We find in the torrid zone no true representatives of the oldest geological periods : Pentacrinus is not found before the Lias ; among Cephalopods we find the Nautilus, but nothing like Orthoceras ; Limulus, but nothing like Trilobites.

This study of the relations between the geographical distribution of animals and their relative standing is rendered more difficult, and in many respects obscure, by the circumstance that entire types, characterized by peculiar structures, are so strangely limited in their range ; and yet, even this shows how closely the geographical distribution of animals is connected with their structure. Why New Holland should have no Monkeys, no Carnivora, no Ruminants, no Pachyderms, no Edentata, is not to be explained ; but that this is the case, every zoologist knows, and is further aware that the Marsupials1 of that

1 See Sect. 11.

continental island represent, as it were, the other orders of Mammalia, under their special structural modifications. New Holland appears thus as a continent with the characters of an older geological age. No one can fail, therefore, to perceive of how great an interest for Classification will be a more extensive knowledge of the geographical distribution of animals in general, and of the structural peculiarities exhibited by localized types.

Though it had long been known, by the experiments of De Saussure, that the breathing process is very different in animals and plants, and that while the former inhale atmospheric air and exhale carbonic acid gas, the latter appropriate carbon and exhale oxygen, it was not until Dumas and Bousingault1 particularly called the attention of naturalists to the subject, that it was fully understood how direct is the dependence of the animal and vegetable kingdoms one upon the other in that respect, or rather how the one consumes what the other produces, and vice versa, thus tending to keep the balance, which either of them singly would disturb to a certain degree. The common agricultural practice of manuring exhibits on another side the dependence of one kingdom upon the other : the undigested particles of the food of animals return to the ground to fertilize it for fresh production.2 Again, the whole animal kingdom is either directly or indirectly dependent upon the vegetable kingdom for its

1 DUMAS, Le9on sur la statique chi- p. 122.

rnique des etres organises, Ann. Sc. 2 LIEBIG, Agricultural Chemistry; Nat., 2de ser., vol. 6, p. 33; vol. 17, Auiinal Chemistry.

186 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

sustenance, as the herbivorous animals afford the needful food for the carnivorous tribes. We are too far in advance of the time when it was supposed that Worms originated in the decay of fruits and other vegetable substances, to need here a repetition of what is known respecting the reproduction of these animals. Nor can it be necessary to show how preposterous the assumption would be that physical agents produced plants first, in order that from these animals might spring forth. Who could have taught the physical agents to make the whole animal world dependent upon the vegetable kingdom ?

On the contrary, such general facts as those above alluded to, show, more directly than any amount of special disconnected facts could do, the establishment of a well-regulated order of things, considered in advance ; for they exhibit well-balanced conditions of existence, prepared long beforehand, such as only an intelligent being could ordain.

However independent of each other some animals may appear, there are yet many which live only in the closest connection with their fellow-creatures, and which are known only as parasites upon or within them. Such are the intestinal Worms, and all the vermin of the skin.1 Among plants, the Mistletoe, Orobanche, Eafflesia, and

1 See above, p. 114, p. 115, note 1, (C. M.), Historia Vermium, etc., q. a.,

and p. 116, notes 1 and 2; see also p. 45. — KUCHENMEISTER (Fit.), Die

RUDOLPHI (K. A.), Entozoorum sive in und an dem Korper des lebenden

Vermium, etc., q.a., p. 45. BREMSER Menschen vorkoramenden Parasiten;

(J. G ), Ueber lebende Wiirmftr im Leipzig, 1855, 8vo., Engl.byLANKASlebenden Menschen; Wien, 1819, 4to. TER (Cavendish Society). — LECCKART

— DDJARDIN (F.), Hist. Nat. des Hel- (R.)> Parasiten in Parasitismus. Vieminthes, etc., y. a., p. 45. — DIESING rord's Archiv., 1852. — ROBIN (Cn.),

many of the Orcliidese, may be quoted as equally remarkable examples of parasitism.

There exists the greatest variety of parasites among animals. It would take volumes to describe them and to write their history, for their relations to the animals and plants upon which they are dependent for their existence are quite as diversified as their form and their structure.

It is important, however, to remark, at the outset, that these parasites do not constitute for themselves one great division of the animal kingdom. They belong, on the contrary, to all its branches ; almost every class has its parasites, and in none do they represent one natural order. This fact is very significant, as it shows at once that parasitism is not based upon peculiar combinations of the leading structural features of the animal kingdom, but upon correlations of a more specific character. Nor is the degree of dependence of parasites upon other organized beings equally close. There are those which only dwell upon other animals, while others are so closely connected with them that they cannot subsist for any length of time out of the most intimate relation to the species in which they grow and multiply. Nor do these parasites live upon one class of animals ; on the contrary, they are found on all of them.

Among the Vertebrata there are few parasites properly speaking. None among the Mammalia. Among the Birds a few species depend upon others to sit upon their eggs and hatch them, as the European Cuckoo, and the North American Cowbird. Among Fishes some small Ophidiums (Fierasfers) penetrate into the cavity of the body of large Holothurise in which they dwell.1 Echeneides

Ilistoirc natnrollc ties vegetatix para- les animaux vivans ; Paris, 1853, 8vo. sites qui croisseitt sur I'homiue et sur l See above, p. Ill, note I.

188 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

attach themselves to other fishes, but only temporarily. Among the Articulata the number of parasites is largest. It seems to lie in the very character of this type, so remarkable for the outward display of their whole organization, to include the greatest variety of parasites. And it is really among them that we observe the most extraordinary combinations of this singular mode of existence.

Insects in general are more particularly dependent upon plants for their sustenance than herbivorous animals usually are, inasmuch as most of them are limited to particular plants for their whole life, such as the Plant-lice, the Coccus, the Gall Insects. In others the larvae only are so limited to particular plants, while the larvae of others again, such as the Bots, grow and undergo their development under the skin or in the intestines, or in the nasal cavities of other animals. The Ichneumons lay their eggs in the larvse of other insects, upon which the young larvae prey until hatched. Among perfect Insects, there are those which live only in community with others, such as the Ant-Hill Insects, the Clavigers, the Cleri and the Bees. Different kinds of Ants live together, if not as parasites one upon another, at least in a kind of servitude. Other Insects live upon the bodies of warm-blooded animals, such as the Fleas and Lice, and of these the number is legion. Some Hydrachnas are parasitic upon aquatic MoUusks.1

Among the Crustacea there are Crabs which constantly

1 NITZSCH (CHR. L.), Darstellung vols. 4to., fig. — CLARK (En.), Obserder Familien und Gattungen der vations on the Genus Oestrus, Trans.

Thierinsekten ; Halle, 1818, Svo.— Lin. Soc., iii, p. 289, fig. — KOCH (C.

HAYDEN (C. v.), Versuch einer sys- L.), Die Pflanzen-Lause, Aphiden,

tematischen Eintheilung der Acari- Niirnberg, 1846, 8vo., fig. — DUGES

den; Isis, 1826, p. 608. — RATZEN- (ANT.), Recherches sur 1'ordre des

BURG (J. S. C.), Die Ichneumoncn der Acariens, Ann. Sc. Nat., 2de ser.,

Forstinsekten ; Berlin, 1844-52, 3 1834, i, p. 5 ; ii, p. 18, fig.

live in the shells of Mollusks, such as the Pinnotheres of the Oyster and Mussel. I have found other species upon Sea- Urchins (Pinnotheres Melittce, a new species, upon Melitta quinquefom.) The Paguri take the shells of Mollusks to protect themselves ; while a vast number of Amphipods live upon Fishes, attached to their gills, upon their tongue, or upon their skin, or upon Starfishes.1 The Cyamus Ceti lives upon the Whale. Some Cirripeds are parasites upon the Whales, others upon Corals. In the family of Lernseans, the females are mostly parasites upon the gills or fins or upon the bodies of Fishes, while the males are free. Among Worms this mode of existence is still more frequent, and while some dwell only among Corals, entire families of others consist only of genuine parasites ; but here again we find the most diversified relations ; for, while some are constantly parasitic, others depend only for a certain period of their life upon other animals for their existence. The young Gordius is a free animal ; it then creeps into the body of Insects, and leaves them again to propagate ; the young Distoma lives free in the water as Cercaria, and spends the remainder of its life in other animals ; the Tsenia, on the contrary, is a parasite through life, and only its eggs pass from one animal into the other. But what is most extraordinary in this, as in many other intestinal Worms, is the fact, that, while they undergo their first transformations in some kind of animals, they do not reach their complete development until they pass into the body of another higher type, being swallowed up by this while in the body of their first host. Such is the case with many Filarise, the Tseniee and Bothrocephali. These at first inhabit lower Fishes, and these Fishes, being swallowed by Sharks or Water Birds, or

2 I have found a new genus of this family upon Asterias helianthoides.

190 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Mice with their Worms being eaten up by Cats, the parasites living in them undergo their final transformation in the latter. Many Worms undertake extensive migrations through the bodies of other animals, before they reach the proper place for their final development.1

Among the Mollusks parasites are very few, if any can properly be called true parasites, as the hectocotylized arm of the males of some Cephalopods living upon their own females ; 2 as the Gasteropods growing buried in Corals,3 and the Lithodomus and a variety of Areas found in Corals. Among Eadiata there are no parasites, properly speaking ; some of them only attaching themselves by preference to certain plants, while the young of others remain connected with their parent, as in all Corals, and even among Crinoids, as in the Comatula of Charleston.

In all these different cases, the chances that physical agents may have a share in producing such animals are still less than in the cases of independent animals, for here we have, superadded to the very existence of these beings, all the complicated circumstances of their peculiar mode of existence, and their various connections with other animals. Now if it can already be shown, from the mere connections of independent animals, that external circumstances cannot be the cause of their existence, how much less could such an origin be ascribed to parasites ! It is true, they have been supposed to originate in the body of the animals upon which ^ they live. What, then, of those who enter the body of other animals at a somewhat ad-

1 See above, p. 114, note 2; SIE- 1858.

BOLD, Wanderung, etc., p. 116, notel; 2 See above, p. Ill, note 1, KOLLI-

STEENSTRUP, Generationswechsel, q. KER, MULLER, VERANY, VOGT, STEENa., p. 69 — WEINLAND (D.), The Plan STRUP, FRONTED, etc.

adopted by Nature for the Preserva- 3 RUPPELL (Eo.), Memoire snr le

tion of the Various Species of Hel- Magilus antiytnts, Trans. Soc. Strasb.,

minths, Proc. Bost. Nat. Hist. Soc., 1832, i, fig.

vancecl stage of growth, as the Gordius ? Is it a freak of the latter ? Or, what of those which only live upon other animals, such as lice ; are they the product of the skin \ Or what of those which have to pass from the body of a lower into that of a higher animal to undergo their final metamorphosis, and in which this succession is normal ? Was such an arrangement devised by the first animal, or imposed upon the first by the second, or devised by physical agents for the two 1 Or, what of those in which the females only are parasites \ Had the two sexes a different origin ? Did the males and females perhaps originate in different ways ?

I am at a loss to conceive how the origin of parasites can be ascribed to physical causes, unless indeed animals themselves be considered as physical causes with reference to the parasites they nourish ; and if so, why can they not get rid of them, as well as produce them, for it cannot be supposed, that all this is not done consciously, when parasites bear such close structural relations to the various types to which they belong ?

The existence of parasitic animals belonging to so many different types of the animal as well as of the vegetable kingdom is a fact of deep meaning, which Man himself cannot too earnestly consider ; and, while he marvels at the fact, let him take it as a warning for himself, with reference to his boasted and yet legitimate independence. All relations in nature are regulated by a superior wisdom. May we only learn in the end to conform, within the limits of our own sphere, to the laws assigned to each race !

192 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

It must occur to every reflecting mind, that the mutual relation and respective parallelism of so many structural, embryonic, geological, and geographical characteristics of the animal kingdom, are the most conclusive proof that they were ordained by a reflective mind, while they present at the same time the side of nature most accessible to our intelligence, when seeking to penetrate the relations between finite beings and the cause of their existence.

The phenomena of the inorganic world are all simple, when compared to those of the organic world. There is not one of the great physical agents, — electricity, magnetism, heat, light, or chemical affinity, — which exhibits, in its sphere, phenomena so complicated as the simplest organized beings ; and we need not look for the highest among the latter to find them presenting the same physical phenomena as are manifested in the material world, besides those which are exclusively peculiar to them. When, then, organized beings include everything the material world contains, and a great deal more that is peculiarly their own, how could they be produced by physical causes, and how can the physicists, acquainted with the laws of the material world, and who acknowledge that these laws must have been established at the beginning, overlook that a fortiori the more complicated laws which regulate the organic world, of the existence of which there is no trace for a long period upon the surface of the earth, must have been established, later and successively, at the time of the creation of the successive types of animals and plants ?

Thus far we have been considering chiefly the contrasts existing between the organic and inorganic worlds.1 At this stage of our investigation it may not be out of place to take a glance at some of the coincidences which may be traced between them, especially as they afford direct evidence that the physical world has been ordained in conformity with laws which obtain also among living beings, and disclose, in both spheres equally plainly, the workings of a reflective mind. It is well known, that the arrangement of the leaves in plants2 may be expressed by very simple series of fractions, all of which are gradual approximations to, or the natural means between ^ or ^, which two fractions are themselves the maximum and the minimum divergence between two single successive leaves. The normal series of fractions which expresses the various combinations most frequently observed among the leaves of plants, is as follows : |, i, f, %, rV, -&, if, H> etc. Now, upon comparing this arrangement of the leaves in plants with the revolutions of the members of our solar system, Pierce has discovered the most perfect identity between the fundamental laws which regulate both; as may be at once seen by the following diagram, in which the first column gives the names of the planets, the second column indicates the actual time of revolution of the successive planets, expressed in days, the third column the successive times of revolution of the planets, which are derived from the hypothesis that each time of revolution should have a ratio to those upon each side of it, which shall be one of the ratios of the law of phyllotaxis ; and the fourth column, finally, gives the normal series of fractions expressing the law of the phyllotaxis.

1 Compare Sects. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 24, note 3.— WRIGHT (C.), On the 29, and 30. Phyllotaxis, Astr. Jonvn., vol. 5, Dec.

2 See the works quoted above, p. 1856.

O

194 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Neptune . . 60,129 . . 62,000 .

Uranus . 30,687 . . 31,000 . i

Saturn . 10,759 . . 10,333 . £

Jupiter 4,333 . . 4,133 .

Asteroids.. 1,200 to 2,000 1,550 . .

Mars . 687 . . 596 .. -fr

Earth 365 . 366 . T8T ) _8_

Venus . 225 . 227 . |f I ¥T

Mercury . 88 .. 87 . . £f

In this series the Earth forms a break ; but this apparent irregularity admits of an easy explanation. The fractions, | i, f , f, •£?, ¥8r, if > etc., as expressing the position of successive leaves upon an axis, by the short way of ascent along the spiral, are identical, as far as their meaning is concerned, with the fractions expressing these same positions, by the long way, namely, i, f, f, |, ^,

-L-3_ 2.1

21) 34)

Let us therefore repeat our diagram in another form, the third column giving the theoretical time of revolution.

Neptune . . }- . . 62,000 . . 60,129

. . £ . . . 62,000 . .

Uranus -. ± . . 31,000 . . 30,687

- i . . - . 15,500 . .

Saturn . f . . . 10,333 . . 10,759

. f . . . 6,889 . .

Jupiter . . f . . . 4,133 . . 4,333

. f . . 2,480 . .

Asteroids . f . J,550 . . 1,200

. . | . . . 968 ..

Mars . J»T . . . 596 .. 687

Earth • f8T • • 366 . . 365

Venus . -Lf- . 227 .. 225

• i-f ... 140 .. Mercury . f-i . 87 88

It appears, from this table, that two intervals usually

elapse between two successive planets, so that the normal order of actual fractions is \, \, f , I, j5?, etc., or the fractions by the short way in phyllotaxis, from which, however, the Earth is excluded, while it forms a member of the series by the long way. The explanation of this, suggested by Peirce, is, that, although the tendency to set off a planet is not sufficient at the end of a single interval, it becomes so strong, near the end of the second interval, that the planet is found exterior to the limit of this second interval. Thus, Uranus is rather too far from the Sun relatively to Neptune, Saturn relatively to Uranus, and Jupiter relatively to Saturn, and the planets thus formed engross too large a proportionate share of material, and this is especially the case with Jupiter. Hence, when we come to the Asteroids, the disposition is so strong at the end of a single interval, that the outer Asteroid is but just within this interval, and the whole material of the Asteroids is dispersed in separate masses over a wide space, instead of being concentrated into a single planet. A consequence of this dispersion of the forming agents is, that a small proportionate material is absorbed into the Asteroids. Hence, Mars is ready for formation so far exterior to its true place, that, when the next interval elapses, the residual force becomes strong enough to form the Earth, after which the normal law is resumed without any further disturbance. Under this law, there can be no planet exterior to Neptune, but there may be one interior to Mercury.

Let us now look back upon some of the leading features alluded to before, omitting the simpler relations of organized beings to the world around, or those of individuals to individuals, and consider only the different parallel series which we have been comparing when showing,

o 2

196 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

that, in their respective great types, the phenomena of animal life correspond to one another, whether we compare their rank as determined by structural complication with the phases of their growth, or with their succession in past geological ages ; whether we compare this succession with their embryonic growth, or all these different relations with each other and with the geographical distribution of animals upon earth. The same series everywhere ! l These facts are true of all the great divisions of the animal kingdom, so far as we have pursued the investigation ; and though, for want of materials, the train of evidence is incomplete in some instances, yet we have proof enough for the establishment of this law of a universal correspondence in all the leading features which binds all organized beings, of all times, into one great system, intellectually and intelligibly linked together, even where some links of the chain are missing. It requires considerable familiarity with the subject even to keep in mind the evidence ; for, though yet imperfectly understood, it is the most brilliant result of the combined intellectual efforts of hundreds of investigators during half a century. The connection, however, between the facts, it is easily seen, is only intellectual ; and implies, therefore, the agency of Intellect as its first cause.

And if the power of thinking connectedly is the privilege of cultivated minds only ; if the power of combining different thoughts, and of drawing from them new thoughts, is a still rarer privilege of a few superior minds; if the ability to trace simultaneously several trains of thought, is such an extraordinary gift, that the few cases in which

l Compare all the preceding sec- 2 AGASSIZ (L.), Contemplation of tions, where every topic is considered God in the Kosmos, Christian Exaeeparately. miner, January 1851, Boston.

evidence of this kind has been presented have become a matter of historical record (Caesar dictating several letters at the same time), though they exhibit only the capacity of passing rapidly, in quick succession, from one topic to another, while keeping the connecting thread of several parallel thoughts : if all this is only possible for the highest intellectual powers, shall we, by any false argumentation, allow ourselves to deny the intervention of a Supreme Intellect in calling into existence combinations in nature, by the side of which all human conceptions are child's play 1

If I have succeeded, even very imperfectly, in showing that the various relations observed between animals and the physical world, as well as between themselves, exhibit thought, it follows that the whole has an Intelligent Author ; and it may not be out of place to attempt to point out, as far as possible, the difference there may be between Divine thinking and human thought.

Taking nature as exhibiting thought for my guide, it appears to me, that, while human thought is consecutive, Divine thought is simultaneous, embracing at the same time and for ever, in the past, the present, and the future, the most diversified relations among hundreds of thousands of organized beings, each of which may present complications again, which, to study and understand even imperfectly, as for instance, Man himself, Mankind has already spent thousands of years. And yet, ah1 this has been done by one Mind, must be the work of one Mind only, of Him before whom Man can only bow in grateful acknowledgment of the prerogatives he is allowed to enjoy in this world, not to speak of the promises of a future life.

I have intentionally dismissed many points in my

198 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

argument with mere questions, in order not to extend unduly a discussion which is, after all, only accessory to the plan of my work. I have felt justified in doing so because, from the point of view under which my subject is treated, those questions find a natural solution, which must present itself to every reader. We know what the intellect of Man may originate, we know its creative power, its power of combination, of foresight, of analysis, of concentration ; we are, therefore, prepared to recognize a similar action emanating from a Supreme Intelligence to a boundless extent. We need, therefore, not even attempt to show that such an Intellect may have originated all that which the Universe contains. It is enough to demonstrate, that the constitution of the physical world, and more particularly the organization of living beings in their connection with the physical world, prove in a general way, the existence of a Supreme Being, as the Author of all things. The task of science is rather to investigate what has been done, to inquire, if possible, how it has been done, than to ask what is possible for the Deity, as we can know that only by what actually exists. To attack such a position, those who would deny the intervention in nature of a creative mind must show, that the cause to which they refer the origin of finite beings is by its nature a possible cause, which cannot be denied of a being endowed with the attributes we recognize in God. Our task is therefore completed, as soon as we have proved His existence. It would, nevertheless, be highly desirable that every naturalist who has arrived at similar conclusions should go over the subject anew, from his point of view and with particular reference to the special field of his investigations ; for thus only can the whole evidence be brought out.

I foresee already that some of the most striking illustrations may be drawn from the morphology of the vegetable kingdom, especially from the characteristic succession and systematic combination of different kinds of leaves in the formation of the foliage and the flowers of so many plants, all of which end their development by the production of an endless variety of fruits. The inorganic world, considered in the same light, would not fail to exhibit also unexpected evidence of thought, in the character of the laws regulating chemical combinations, the action of physical forces, the universal attraction, etc., etc. Even the history of human culture ought to be investigated from this point of view. But I must leave it to abler hands to discuss such topics.

In recapitulating the preceding statements, we may present the following conclusions :—

1st.1 The connection of all the known features of nature into one system exhibits thought, the most comprehensive thought, in limits transcending the highest wonted powers of man.

2d. The simultaneous existence of the most diversified types under identical circumstances exhibits thought, the ability to adapt a great variety of structures to the most uniform conditions.

3d. The repetition of similar types, under the most diversified circumstances, shows an immaterial connection

1 The numbers inscribed here cor- may at once refer back to the evirespoud to the preceding sections, in dence, when needed, the same order, so that the reader

200 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

between them ; it exhibits thought, proving directly how completely the Creative Mind is independent of the influence of a material world.

4th. The unity of plan in otherwise highly diversified types of animals, exhibits thought ; it exhibits more immediately premeditation, for no plan could embrace such a diversity of beings, called into existence at such long intervals of time, unless it had been framed in the beginnino; with immediate reference to the end.

O o

5th. The correspondence, now generally known as special homologies, in the details of structure in animals otherwise entirely disconnected, down to the most minute peculiarities, exhibits thought, and more immediately the power of expressing a general proposition in an indefinite number of ways, equally complete in themselves, though differing in all their details.

6'th. The various degrees and different kinds of relationship among animals which can have no genealogical connection, exhibit thought, the power of combining different categories into a permanent, harmonious whole, even though the material basis of this harmony be ever changing.

7th. The simultaneous existence, in the earliest geological periods in which animals existed at all, of representatives of all the great types of the animal kingdom, exhibits most especially thought, considerate thought, combining power, premeditation, prescience, omniscience.

8th. The gradation, based upon complications of structure, which may be traced among animals built upon the same plan, exhibits thought, and especially the power of harmoniously distributing unequal gifts.

9th. The distribution of some types over the most extensive range of the surface of the globe, while others are

limited to particular geographical areas, and the various combinations of these types into zoological provinces of unequal extent, exhibit thought, a close control over the distribution of the earth's surface among its inhabitants.

10th. The identity of structure of these types, notwithstanding their wide geographical distribution, exhibits thought ; that deep thought, which, the more it is scrutinized, seems the less capable of being exhausted, though its meaning at the surface appears at once plain and intelligible to every one.

llth. The community of structure, in certain respects, of animals otherwise entirely different, but living within the same geographical area, exhibits thought, and more particularly the power of adapting most diversified types with peculiar structures to either identical or to different conditions of existence.

12th. The connection, by series, of special structures observed in animals widely scattered over the surface of the globe, exhibits thought, unlimited comprehension, and more directly omnipresence of mind, and also prescience, as far as such series extend through a succession of geological ages.

13th. The relation there is between the size of animals and their structure and form, exhibits thought ; it shows that in nature the quantitative differences are as fixedly determined as the qualitative ones.

1 4th. The independence, in the size of animals, of the mediums in which they live, exhibits thought, in establishing such close connection between elements so influential in themselves and organized beings so little affected by the nature of these elements.

15th. The permanence of specific peculiarities under every variety of external influences, during each geological

202 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

period, and under the present state of things upon earth, exhibits thought : it shows, also, that limitation in time is an essential element of all finite beings, while eternity is an attribute of the Deity only.

1 6th. The definite relations in which animals stand to the surrounding world, exhibit thought ; for all animals living together stand respectively, on account of their very differences, in different relations to identical conditions of existence, in a manner winch implies a considerate adaptation of their varied organization to these uniform conditions.

17th. The relations in which individuals of the same species stand to one another, exhibit thought, and go far to prove the existence in all living beings of -an immaterial, imperishable principle, similar to that which is generally conceded to man only.

18th. The limitation of the range of changes which animals undergo during their growth, exhibits thought ; it shows most strikingly the independence of these changes of external influences, and the necessity that they should be determined by a power superior to these influences.

19th. The unequal limitation in the average duration of the life of individuals in different species of animals, exliibits thought ; for, however uniform or however diversified the conditions of existence may be under which animals live together, the average duration of life, in different species, is unequally limited. It points, therefore, at a knowledge of time and space, and of the value of time, since the phases of life of different animals are apportioned according to the part they have to perform upon the stage of the world.

20 tli. The return to a definite norm of animals which multiply in various ways, exliibits thought, It shows

how wide a cycle of modulations may be included in the same conception, without yet departing from a norm expressed more directly in other combinations.

21st. The order of succession of the different types of animals and plants characteristic of the different geological epochs, exhibits thought. It shows, that, while the material world is identical in itself in all ages, ever different types of organized beings are called into existence in successive periods.

22d. The localization of some types of animals upon the same points of the surface of the globe, during several successive geological periods, exhibits thought, consecutive thought ; the operations of a mind acting in conformity with a plan laid out beforehand, and sustained for a long period.

23d. The limitation of closely allied species to different geological periods, exhibits thought ; it exhibits the power of sustaining nice distinctions, notwithstanding the interposition of great disturbances by physical revolutions.

24th. The parallelism between the order of succession of animals and plants in geological times and the gradation among their living representatives, exhibit thought ; consecutive thought, superintending the whole development of nature from beginning to end, and disclosing throughout a gradual progress, ending with the introduction of man at the head of the animal creation.

25th. The parallelism between the order of succession of animals in geological times and the changes their living representatives undergo during their embryological growth^ exhibit thought ; the repetition of the same train of thoughts in the phases of growth of living animals and the successive appearance of their representatives in past ages.

204 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

26th. The combination, in many extinct types, of characters, which, in later ages, appear disconnected in different types, exhibits thought, prophetic thought, foresight ; combinations of thought preceding their manifestation in living forms.

27th. The parallelism between the gradation among animals and the changes they undergo during their growth, exhibits thought, as it discloses everywhere the most intimate connection between essential features of animals which have no necessary physical relation, and can, therefore, not be understood otherwise than as established by a thinking being.

28th. The relations existing between these different series and the geographical distribution of animals, exhibit thought ; they show the omnipresence of the Creator.

29th. The mutual dependence of the animal and vegetable kingdoms upon each other for their maintenance, exhibits thought; it displays the care with which all conditions of existence, necessary to the maintenance of organized beings, have been balanced.

30th. The dependence of some animals upon others or upon plants for their existence, exhibits thought; it shows to what degree the most complicated combinations of structure and adaptation can be rendered independent of the physical conditions which surround them.

We may sum up the results of this discussion, up to this point, in still fewer words :—

All organized beings exhibit in themselves all those categories of structure and of existence upon which a natural system may be founded, in such a manner that, in tracing it, the human mind is only translating into human language the Divine thoughts expressed in nature in living realities.

All these beings do not exist in consequence of the continued agency of physical causes, but have made their successive appearance upon earth by the immediate intervention of the Creator. As proof, I may sum up my argument in the following manner :

The products of what are commonly called physical agents are everywhere the same (that is, upon the whole surface of the globe), and have always been the same (that is, during all geological periods) ; while organized beings are everywhere different and have differed in all asfes. Between two such series of phenomena there can

o •>-

be no causal or genetic connection.

31st. The combination in time and space of all these thoughtful conceptions exhibits not only thought, it shows also premeditation, power, wisdom, greatness, prescience, omniscience, providence. In one word, all these facts, in their natural connection, proclaim aloud the One God, whom man may know, adore, and love ; and Natural History must, in good time, become the analysis of the thoughts of the Creator of the Universe, as manifested in the animal and vegetable kingdoms, as well as in the inorganic world.

It may appear strange that I should have presented the preceding disquisition under the title of an " Essay on Classification." Yet it has been done deliberately. In the beginning of this chapter, I have already stated that Classification seems to me to rest upon too narrow a foundation when it is chiefly based upon structure. Animals are linked together as closely by their mode of development, by their relative standing in their respective classes, by the order in which they have made their appearance upon earth, by their geographical distribution, and generally by their connection with the world in which they live, as by their anatomy. All these relations should,

206 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

therefore, be fully expressed in a natural classification ; and, though structure furnishes the most direct indication of some of these relations, always appreciable under every circumstance, other considerations should not be neglected, which may complete our insight into the general plan of creation.

In characterizing the great branches of the animal kingdom, it is not enough to indicate the plan of their structure in all its peculiarities ; there are possibilities of execution which are at once suggested, to the exclusion of others, and which should also be considered, and so fully analyzed, that the various modes in which such a plan may be carried out shall at once be made apparent. The range and character of the general homologies of each type should also be illustrated, as well as the general conditions of existence of its representatives. In characterizing classes, it ought to be shown why such groups constitute a class, and not merely an order or a family ; and, to do this satisfactorily, it is indispensable to trace the special homologies of all the systems of organs which are developed in them. It is not less important to ascertain the foundation of all the subordinate divisions of each class ; to know how they differ, what constitutes orders, what families, what genera, and upon what characteristics species are based in every natural division. This we shall examine in the next chapter.

THE use of the terms types, classes, orders, families, genera and species in the systems of Zoology and Botany is so universal, that it would be natural to suppose that their meaning and extent are well determined and generally understood; but this is so far from being the case, that it may, on the contrary, be said there is no subject in Natural History respecting which there exists more uncertainty, and a greater want of precision. Indeed, I have failed to find anywhere a definition of the character of most of the more comprehensive of these divisions, while the current views respecting genera and species are very conflicting. Under these circumstances, it has appeared to me particularly desirable to inquire into the foundation of these distinctions, and to ascertain, if possible, how far they have a real existence. And, while I hope the results of this inquiry may be welcome and satisfactory, I am free to confess that it has cost me years of labour to arrive at a clear conception of their true character.

It is a fact so universal, in every sphere of intellectual activity, that practice anticipates theory, that no

208 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

philosopher can be surprised to find that zoologists have instinctively adopted natural groups, in the animal and vegetable kingdoms, even before the question of the character and of the very existence of such groups in nature was raised. Did not nations speak, understand, and write Greek, Latin, German and Sanscrit, before it was even suspected that these languages and so many others were akin \ Did not painters produce wonders with colours, before the nature of light was understood \ Had not men been thinking about themselves and the world, before logic and metaphysics were taught in schools 1 Why, then, should not observers of nature have appreciated rightly the relationship between animals or plants before getting a scientific clue to the classifications which, they were led to adopt as practical ?

Such considerations, above all others, have guided and encouraged me when seeking for the meaning of all these systems, so different one from the other in their details, and yet so similar in some of their general features. The history of our science shows how early some of the principles, which obtain to this day, have been acknowledged by all reflecting naturalists. Aristotle, for instance, already knew the principal differences which distinguish Vertebrata from all other animals; and his distinction of Enaima and Anaima1 corresponds exactly to that of Vertebrata and Invertebrata of Lamarck,2 and to that of Flesh- and Gut-Animals of Oken,3 and to that of Myeloneura and Ganglioneura of Ehrenberg;4 and one who is at all familiar with the progress of science at different periods can but smile at the claims to novelty or

1 Histor. Anim., Lib. I, ch. 5 and 6. 3 Naturphilosophie, 3d edit., p. 400.

2 Anim. Vert., 2d edit., vol. i, p. 4 Das Naturreich des Measchen; 313. a diagram upon a large sheet, folio.

originality so frequently brought forward for views long before current among men. Here, for instance, is one and the same fact presented in different aspects; first, by Aristotle with reference to the character of the formative fluid, next by Lamarck with reference to the general frame, — for I will do Lamarck the justice to believe that he did not unite the Invertebrata simply because they have no skeleton, but because of that something which even Professor Owen fails to express,1 and which yet exists, — the one cavity of the body in the Invertebrata containing all organs, — whilst theVertebrata have one distinct cavity for the centres of the nervous system, and another for the organs of the vegetative life. This acknowledgment is due to Lamarck as truly as it would be due to Aristotle not to accuse him of having denied the Invertebrata any fluid answering the office of the blood, though he calls them Anaima; for he knew nearly as well as we now know, that a nutritive fluid moves in their body, though that information is generally denied him, because he had no correct knowledge of the circulation of the blood.

Again, when Oken speaks of Flesh-Animals, he does not mean that Vertebrates consist of nothing but flesh, or that the Invertebrates have no muscular fibres; but he brings prominently before us the presence, in the former, of those masses, forming the main bulk of the body, which consist of flesh and bones, as well as of blood and nerves, and constitute another of the leading features distinguishing Vertebrata and Invertebrata. Ehrenberg presents the same relations between the same beings as expressed by their nervous system. If we now take the expressions of Aristotle, Lamarck, Oken and Ehrenberg

1 Comparafc. Anat. of Inv., 2d edit., p. 11.

P

210 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

together, have we not, as characteristic of their systems, the very words by which every one distinguishes the most prominent features of the body of the higher animals, when speaking of blood relations, of blood and bones, or of having flesh and nerve 1

Neither of these observers has probably been conscious of the identity of his classification with that of Ins predecessors ; nor, indeed, should we consider either of them as superfluous, inasmuch as it makes prominent features more or less different from those insisted upon by the others ; nor ought any one to suppose that with all of them the field is exhausted, and that there is no more room for new systems upon that very first distinction among animals.1 As long as men inquire, they will find opportunities to know more upon these topics than those who have gone before them, so inexhaustibly rich is nature in the innermost diversity of her treasures of beauty, order, and intelligence.

So, instead of discarding all the systems, which have thus far had little or no influence upon the progress of science, either because they are based upon principles not generally acknowledged or considered worthy of confidence, I have carefully studied them with the view of ascertaining what there may be true in them, from the standing-point from which their authors have considered the animal kingdom ; and I own that I have often derived more information from such a careful consideration than I had at first expected.

1 By way of an example, I would what is observed in any of the Invertaention the mode of reproduction, tebrata, that the animal kingdom,

The formation of the egg in Verte- classified according to these facts,

brata ; its origin, in all of them, in a would again be divided into two great

more or less complicated Graafian groups, corresponding to the Vertevesicle, in which it is nursed ; the brata and Invertebrata of Lamarck,

formation and development of the or to the Flesh- and Gut-Animals of

embryo up to a certain period, etc., Oken, or the Enaima and Anaima of

etc., are so completely different from Aristotle, etc.

It was not indeed by a lucky hit, nor by one of those unexpected apparitions, which, like a revelation, suddenly break upon us and render at once clear and comprehensible what has been dark and almost inaccessible before, that I came to understand the meaning of those divisions called types, classes, orders, families, genera, and species, so long admitted in Natural History as the basis of every system, and yet so generally considered as mere artificial devices to facilitate our studies. For years I had been labouring under the impression that they are founded in nature, before I succeeded in finding out upon what principle they are really based. I soon perceived, however, that the greatest obstacle in the way of ascertaining their true significance lay in the discrepancies among different authors in their use and application of these terms. Different naturalists do not call by the same name groups of the same kind and the same extent : some call genera what others call subgenera ; others call tribes, or even families, what are called genera by others ; even the names of tribe and family have been applied by some to what others call sub-genera ; some have called families what others have called orders ; some consider as orders what others have considered as classes ; and there are even genera of some authors which are considered as classes by others. Finally, in the number and limitation of these classes, as well as in the manner in which they are grouped together under general heads, there is found the same diversity of opinion. It is nevertheless possible, that, under these manifold names, so differently applied, groups may be designated which may be natural, even if their true relation to one another have thus far escaped our attention.

It is already certain that most, if not all, investigators

P 2

212 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

agree in the limitation, of some groups at least, under whatever name they may call them, and however much they would blame one another for calling them so, or otherwise. I can, therefore, no longer doubt that the controversy would be limited to definite questions, if naturalists could only be led to an agreement respecting the real nature of each kind of groups. I am satisfied, indeed, that the most insuperable obstacle to any exact appreciation of this subject lies in the fact, that all naturalists, without exception, consider these divisions, under whatever name they may designate them, as strictly subordinate one to the other, in such a manner that their difference is only dependent upon their extent ; the class being considered as the more comprehensive division, the order as the next extensive, the family as more limited, the genus as still more limited, and the species as the ultimate limitation in a natural arrangement of living beings; so that all these groups would differ only by the quantity of their characters, and not by the quality, as if the elements of structure in animals were all of the same kind ; as if the form, for instance, was an organic element of the same kind as the complication of structure, and as if the degree of complication implied necessarily one plan of structure to the exclusion of another. I trust I shall presently be able to show, that it is to a neglect of these considerations that we must ascribe the slow progress which has been made in the philosophy of classification.

Were it possible to show that all these groups do not differ in quantity, and are not merely divisions of a wider or more limited range, but are based upon different categories of characters, genera would be called genera by all, whether they differ much or little one from the other, and

so would families be called families, orders be called orders, etc. Could species, for instance, be based upon absolute size, genera upon the structure of some external parts of the body, families upon the form of the body, orders upon the similarity of the internal structure, or the like, it is plain that there could not be two opinions respecting these groups in any class of the animal kingdom. But, as the problem is not so simple in nature, it was not until after the most extensive investigations that I obtained the clue to guide me through this labyrinth. I knew, for instance, that, though naturalists have been disputing, and are still disputing, about species and genera, they all distinguished the things themselves in pretty much the same manner. What A would call a species, B called only a variety or a race ; but then B might call a subgenus the very same aggregate of individuals which A called a species ; or what A called a genus was considered by B as a family or an order. Now it was this something, called no matter how, for which I tried to find out such characters as would lead all to call it by the same name ; thus limiting the practical difficulty in the application of the name to a question of accuracy in observation, and no longer allowing it to be an eternal contest about mere nomenclature.

At tin's stage of my investigation, it struck me that the character of the writings of eminent naturalists might throw some light upon the subject itself. There are authors, and among them some of the most celebrated contributors to our knowledge in Natural History, who never busied themselves with Classification, or paid only a passing notice to this subject, whilst they are, by universal consent, considered as the most successful biographers of species ; such are Buffon, Reaumur, Roesel,

214 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Trembley, Smeathman, the two Hubers, Bewick, Wilson, Auclubon, Naumann, etc. Others have applied themselves almost exclusively to the study of genera. Latreille is the most prominent zoologist of this stamp ; whilst Linnseus and Jussieu stand highest among botanists for their characteristics of genera, or at least for their early successful attempts at tracing the natural limits of genera. Botanists have thus far been more successful than zoologists in characterizing natural families, though Cuvier and Latreille have done a great deal in that same direction in Zoology, whilst Linnaeus was the first to introduce orders in the classification of animals. As to the higher groups, such as classes and types, and even orders, we find, again, Cuvier leading the procession, in which all the naturalists of this century have followed.

Now, let us inquire what these men have done in particular to distinguish themselves especially, either as biographers of species or as characterizers of genera, of families, of orders, of classes, and of types. And, should it appear that in each case they have been considering their subject from some particular point of view, it strikes me, that, what has been unconsciously acknowledged as constituting the particular eminence or distinction of these men, might very properly be proclaimed, with grateful consciousness of their services, as the characteristic of that kind of groups which each of them has most successfully illustrated ; and I hope every unprejudiced naturalist will agree with me in this respect.

As to the highest divisions of the animal kingdom, first introduced by Cuvier under the name of embranchements (and which we may well render by the good old English word branch), he tells us himself that they are founded upon distinct plans of structure, having been cast, as it were,

in distinct moulds or forms.1 Now there can certainly be no reason why we should not all agree to designate as types or branches all such great divisions of the animal kingdom as are constituted upon a special plan,2 if we should find practically that such groups may be traced in nature. Those who may not see them may deny their existence ; those who do recognize them may vary in their estimation of their natural limits ; but all can, for the greatest benefit of science, agree to call any group which seems to them to be founded upon a special plan of structure, a type or branch of the animal kingdom ; and, if there are still differences of opinion among naturalists respecting their limits, let the discussion upon this point be carried on with the understanding that types are to be characterized by different plans of structure, and not by special anatomical peculiarities. Let us avoid confounding the idea of plan with that of complication of structure, even though Cuvier himself has made this mistake here and there in his classification.

1 It would lead me too far were I sions, in a somewhat modified sense, to consider here the characteristics is found preferable to framing new of the different kingdoms of Nature, ones. I trust the value of the fol- I may, however, refer to the work of lowing discussion will be appreciated I. GEOFFROY ST. HILAIRE, Histoire by its intrinsic merit, tested with a naturelle generale des regnes organ- willingness to understand what has iques (Paris, 1856, 8vo.), who has been my aim, and not altogether by discussed this subject recently,though the relative degree of precision and I must object to the admission of a clearness with which I may have exdistinct kingdom for Man alone. pressed myself, as it is almost ^impos-

2 It is almost superfluous for me sible, in a first attempt of this kind, to mention here that the terms, plan, to seize at once upon the form best ways and means, or manner in which adapted to carry conviction. I wish a plan is carried out, complication of also to be understood as expressing structure, form, details of structure, my views more immediately with reultimate structure, relations of indi- ference to the animal kingdom, as I viduals, frequently used in the fol- do not feel quite competent to extend lowing pages, are taken in a some- the inquiry and the discussion to the what different sense from their usual vegetable kingdom, though I have meaning, as is always necessary when occasionally alluded to it, as far as new views are introduced in a sci- my information would permit, ence, and the adoption of old expres-

216 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

The best evidence I can produce that the idea of distinct plans of structure is the true pivot upon which the natural limitation of the branches of the animal kingdom must ultimately turn, lies in the fact that every great improvement, acknowledged by all as such, which these primary divisions have undergone, has consisted in the removal from among each,*of such groups as had been placed with them from other considerations than those of a peculiar plan, or in consequence of a want of information respecting their true plan of structure. Let us examine this point within limits no longer controvertible. Neither Infusoria nor Intestinal Worms are any longer arranged by competent naturalists among theRadiata. Why they have been removed may be considered elsewhere ; but it was certainly not because they were supposed to agree in the plan of their structure with the true Eadiata, that Cuvier placed them in that division, but simply because he allowed himself to depart from his own principle, and to add another consideration, besides the plan of structure, as characteristic of Kadiata, — the supposed absence of a nervous system, and the great simplicity of structure of these animals; as if simplicity of execution had any necessary connection with the plan of structure. Another remarkable instance of the generally approved removal of a class from one of the types of Cuvier to another, wTas the transfer of the Cirripeds from among the Mollusks to the branch of Articulata. Imperfect knowledge of the plan of structure of these animals was here the cause of the mistake, which was corrected without any opposition, as soon as they became better known.

From a comparison of what is here stated respectingthe different plans of structure characteristic of the primary divisions of the animal kingeom with what I have

to say below about classes and orders, it will appear more fully that it is important to make a distinction between the plan of structure and the manner in which that plan is carried out, or the degrees of. its complication and its relative perfection or simplicity. But even after it is understood that the plan of structure should be the leading characteristic of these primary groups, it does not yet follow, without further examination, that the four great branches of the animal kingdom, first distinguished by Cuvier, are to be considered as the primary divisions which Nature points out as fundamental. It will still be necessary, by a careful and thorough investigation of the subject, to ascertain what these primary groups are ; but we shall have gained one point with reference to our systems, that, whatever these primary groups, founded upon different plans, which exist in nature, may be, when they are once defined, or whilst they are admitted as the temporary expression of our present knowledge, they should be called the branches of the animal kingdom, whether they be the Vertebrata, Articulata, Mollusca., and Radiata of Cuvier, or the Artiozoaria, Actinozoaria, and Amorphozoaria of Blainville, or the Vertebrata and Invertebrata of Lamarck. The special inquiry into this point must be left for a special paper. I will only add, that I am daily more satisfied, that, in their general outlines, the primary divisions of Cuvier are true to nature, and that never did a naturalist exhibit a clearer and deeper insight into the most general relations of animals than Cuvier, when he perceived, not only that these primary groups are founded upon differences in the plan of their structure, but also how they are essentially related to one another.

Though the term type is generally employed to designate the great fundamental divisions of the animal

218 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

kingdom, I shall not use it in future, but prefer the term branch of the animal kingdom, because the term type is employed in too many different acceptations, and quite as commonly to designate any group of any kind, or any peculiar modification of structure stamped with a distinct and marked character, as to designate the primary divisions of the animal kingdom. We speak, for instance, of specific types, generic types, family types, ordinal types, classic types, and also of a typical structure. The use of the word type in this sense is so frequent on almost everypage of our systematic works, in Zoology and in treatises of comparative anatomy, that it seems to me desirable, in order to avoid every possible equivocation in the designation of the most important great primary divisions among animals, to call them branches of the animal kingdom, rather than types. That, however, our systems are more true to nature than they are often supposed to be, seems to me to be proved by the gradual approximation of scientific men to each other, in their results, and in the forms by which they express those results. The idea which lies at the foundation of the great primary divisions of the animal kingdom is, the most general conception possible in connection with the plan of a definite creation ; these divisions are, therefore, the most comprehensive of all, and properly take the lead in a natural classification, as representing the first and broadest relations of the different natural groups of the animal kingdom, the general formula winch they each obey. What we call a branch expresses, in fact, a purely ideal connection between animals, the intellectual conception which unites them in the creative thought. It seems to me, that the more we examine the true significance of this kind of groups, the more we shall be convinced that they are not founded

upon material relations. The lesser divisions which succeed next are founded upon special qualifications of the plan, and differ one from the other in the character of these qualifications. Should it be found that the features in the animal kingdom, which, next to the plan of structure, extend over the largest divisions, are those which determine their rank or respective standing, it would appear natural to consider the orders as the second most important category in the organization of animals. Experience, however, shows that this is not the case ; that the manner in which the plan of structure is executed leads to the distinction of more extensive divisions (the classes) than those which are based upon the complication of structure (the orders). As a classification can be natural only so far as it expresses real relations observed in nature, it follows, therefore, that classes take the second position in a system, immediately under the branches. We shall see below that orders follow next, as they naturally constitute groups that are more comprehensive than families, and that we are not at liberty to invert their respective position nor to transfer the name of one of these divisions to the other, at our own pleasure, as so many naturalists are constantly doing.

Before Cuvier had shown that the whole animal kingdom is constructed upon four different plans of structure, classes were the highest groups acknowledged in the systems of Zoology, and naturaljgts at a very early period understood upon what this kind of division should be founded, in

220 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

order to be natural, even though, in practice, they did not always perceive the true value of the characters upon which they established their standard of relationship. Linnaeus, the first expounder of the system of animals, already distinguished by anatomical characters the classes which he adopted, though very imperfectly; and ever since, systematic writers have aimed at drawing a more and more complete picture of the classes of animals, based upon a more or less extensive investigation of their structure.

Structure, then, is the watchword for the recognition of classes, and an accurate knowledge of their anatomy the surest way to discover their natural limits. And yet, with this standard before them, naturalists have differed, and differ greatly still, in the limits which they assign to classes, and in the number of them which they adopt. It is really strange, that, applying apparently the same standard to the same objects, the results of their estimation should so greatly vary; and it was this fact which led me to look more closely into the matter, and to inquire whether, after all, the seeming unity of standard was not rather a fancied than a real one. Structure may be considered from many points of view : first, with reference to the plan adopted in framing it; secondly, with reference to the work to be done by it, and to the ways and means employed in building it up ; thirdly, with reference to the degrees of perfection or complication exhibited, which may differ greatly, even though the plan be the same and the ways and means employed in carrying out such a plan may not differ in the least; fourthly, with reference to the form of the whole structure and its parts, which bears no necessary relation, at all events no very close relation, to the degree of perfection of the structure, or to the man-

ner in which its plan is executed, or to the plan itself, as a comparison between Bats and Birds, between Whales and Fishes, or between Holothuriaiis and Worms, may easily show; fifthly and lastly, with reference to its last finish, to the execution of the details in the individual parts.

It would not be difficult to show that the differences which exist among naturalists in their limitation of classes have arisen from an indiscriminate consideration of the structure of animals in all these different points of view, and an equally indiscriminate application of the results obtained, to characterizing classes. Those who have not made a proper distinction between the plan of a structure and the manner in which that plan is actually executed, have either overlooked the importance of the great fundamental divisions of the animal kingdom, or have unduly multiplied the number of these primary divisions, basing their distinctions upon purely anatomical considerations, that is to say, not upon differences in the character of the general plan of structure, but upon the material development of that plan. Those, again, who have confounded the complication of the structure with the ways and means by which life is maintained through any given combination of systems of organs, have failed in establishing a proper difference between class and ordinal characters, and have again and again raised orders to the rank of classes. For we shall presently see that natural orders must be based upon the different degrees of complication of structure, exhibited within the limits of the classes, while the classes themselves are characterized by the manner in which the plan of the type is carried out, that is to say, by the various combinations of the systems of organs constituting the body of the representatives of any of the

222 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

great types of the animal kingdom ; or perhaps, still more distinctly, the classes are characterized by the different ways in which life is maintained, and the different means employed in establishing these ways. An example will suffice to show that this distinction implies a marked difference between class and ordinal characters.

Let us compare the Polyps and Acalephs as two classes, without allowing ourselves to be troubled by the different limits assigned to them by different authors. Both are constructed upon the same plan, and belong, on that account, to the type, of Radiata. In establishing this fact, we do not consider the actual structure of these animals, whether they have a nervous system or not, whether they have organs of the senses or not, whether their muscles are striated or smooth, whether they have a solid frame or an entirely soft body, whether their alimentary cavity has only one opening or two opposite openings, whether it has glandular annexes or not, whether the digested food is distributed in the body one way or another, whether the undigested materials are rejected through the mouth or not, whether the sexes are distinct or not, whether they reproduce themselves only by eggs, or by budding also, whether they are simple or not : all we need know, in order to refer them to the branch of Radiata, is whether the plan of their structure exhibits a general radiated arrangement or not. But, when we would distinguish Polyps, Acalephs, and Echinoderms as classes, or rather, when we would ascertain what are the classes among the Radiata, and howmany there are, we must inquire into the manner in which this idea of radiation, which lies at the foundation of their plan of structure, is actually expressed in all the animals exhibiting such a plan, and we easily find that, while in some (the Polyps)

the body exhibits a large cavity, divided by radiating partitions into a number of chambers, into which hangs a sac (the digestive cavity,) open below, so as to pour freely the digested food into the main cavity, whence it is circulated to and fro in all the chambers, by the agency of vibrating cilia ; in others, (the Acalephs,) the body is plain and full, not to be compared to a hollow sac, traversed only in its thickness by radiating tubes, which arise from a central cavity, (the digestive cavity,) without a free communication with one another for their whole length, etc., etc. ; while in others still, (the Echinoderms,) there is a tough or rigid envelope to the body, inclosing a large cavity, in which are contained a variety of distinct systems of organs, etc.

Without giving here a full description of these classes, I only wish to show that what truly characterizes them is not the complication of their structure, (for Hydroid Medusae are hardly more complicated in their structure than Polyps,) but the manner in which the plan of the Radiata is carried out, the ways in which life is maintained in these animals, the means applied to this end : in one word, the combinations of their structural elements. But the moment we would discern what are the orders of these classes, these considerations no longer suffice ; and their structure has to be viewed in a different light ; it is now the complication of these apparatus which may guide us. Actinarians and Halcyonarians among Polyps, as orders, are distinguished, the first by having a larger and usually indefinite number of simple tentacles, an equally large number of internal partitions, etc.; the second by having the eight tentacles lobed and complicated, and all the parts combined in pairs in definite numbers, etc. ; differences which establish a distinct standing between them

224 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

in their class, and assign to the latter a higher rank than to the former.

It follows, then, from the preceding remarks, that classes are to be distinguished by the manner in which the plan of their type is executed, by the ways and means by which this is done, or, in other words, by the combinations of their structural elements ; that is to say, by the combinations of the different systems of organs building up the body of their representatives. We need not consider here the various forms under which the structure is embodied, nor the ultimate details, nor the last finish which this structure may exhibit, as a moment's reflection will convince any one that neither form nor structural details can ever be characteristic of classes.

There is another point to which I would call attention, respecting the characteristics of classes. These great divisions, so important in the study of the animal kingdom, that a knowledge of their essential features is rightly considered as the primary object of all investigations in comparative anatomy, are generally represented as each exhibiting some essential modification of the type to which they belong. This view, again, I consider to be a mistaken appreciation of the facts, to which Cuvier has already called attention, though his warning has remained unnoticed.1 There is, in reality, no difference in the plan of animals beloneino- to different classes of the same branch.

o o

The plan of structure of the Polyps is no more a modification of that of the Acalephs, than that of the Acalephs or Echinoderms is a modification of the plan of the Polyps ; the plan is exactly the same in all three. It may be represented by one single diagram, and may be expressed in one single word, radiation ; it is the manifestation of one

1 CUVIER, Regn. An., 2d edit, p. 48.

distinct, characteristic idea. But tins idea is exhibited in nature under the most different forms, and expressed in different ways, by the most diversified combinations of structural modifications and in the most varied relations. In the innumerable representatives of each branch of the animal kingdom, it is not the plan that differs, but the manner in which this plan is executed. In the same manner as the variations played by a most skilful artist upon the simplest tune are not modifications of the tune itself, but only different expressions of the same fundamental harmony, just so neither the classes, nor the orders, nor the families, nor the genera, nor the species of any great type are modifications of its plan, but only its different expressions, the different ways in which the fundamental thought embodied in it is manifested in a variety of living beings.

In studying the characteristics of classes we have to deal with structural features, while in investigating their relations to the branches of the animal kingdom to which they belong, we have only to consider the general plan, the framework, as it were, of that structure, not the structure itself. This distinction leads to an important practical result. Since, in the beginning of this century, naturalists have begun, under the lead of the German physiophilosophers, to compare more closely the structure of the different classes of the animal kingdom, points of resemblance have been noticed between them which had entirely escaped the attention of earlier investigators ; structural modifications have been identified which at first seemed to exhibit no similarity, so much so, that step by step these comparisons have been extended over the whole animal kingdom, and it has been asserted, that, whatever may be the apparent differences in the organization of

Q

226 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

animals, they should be considered as constructed of parts essentially identical. This assumed identity of structure has been called homology.1 But the progress of science is gradually restricting these comparisons within narrower limits, and it appears now that the structure of animals is homologous only as far as they belong to the same branch, so much so, that the study of homologies is likely to afford one of the most trustworthy means of testing the natural limits of any of the great types of the animal kingdom. While, however, homologies show the close similarity of apparently different structures and the perfect identity of their plan within the same branches of the animal kingdom, yet they daily exhibit more and more striking differences, both in plan and structure, between the branches themselves, leading to the suspicion that systems of organs which are generally considered as identical in different types, will, in the end, prove essentially different, as, for instance, the so-called gills in Fishes, Crustacea, and Mollusks.

It requires no great penetration to see already that the gills of Crustacea are homologous with the tracheae of Insects and the so-called lungs of certain spiders, in the same manner as the gills of aquatic Mollusks are homogous with the so-called lungs of our air-breathing snails and slugs. Now, until it can be shown that all these different respiratory organs are truly homologous, I hold it to be more natural to consider the system of respiratory organs in Mollusks, in Articulates, and in Vertebrates as essentially different among themselves, though homologous within the limits of each type ; and this remark I would extend to all their systems of organs, to their solid frame, to their nervous system, to their muscu-

1 See Chap. I, Sect. 5.

lar system, to their digestive apparatus, to their circulation, and to their reproductive organs, etc. It would not be difficult to show now that the alimentary canal with its glandular appendages, in Vertebrata, is formed in an entirely different way from that of Articulates or Mollusks, and that it cannot be considered as homologous in all these types. And if this be true, we must expect soon an entire reform of our methods of illustrating comparative anatomy.

Finally, it ought to be remembered, in connexion with the study of classes as well as that of other groups, that the amount of difference existing between any two divisions is nowhere the same. Some features in nature seem to be insisted upon with more tenacity than others, to be repeated more frequently and more widely, and to be impressed upon a larger number of representatives. This unequal weight of different groups, so evident everywhere in the animal kingdom, ought to make us more cautious in estimating their natural limits, and prevent us from assigning an undue value to the differences observed between living beings, either by overrating apparently great discrepancies, or by underrating seemingly trifling variations. The right path, however, can only be ascertained by extensive investigations made with special reference to this point.

Everybody must know that the males and females of some species differ much more one from the other than many species do, and yet the amount of difference observed between species is constantly urged, even without a preliminary investigation, as an argument for distinguishing them. These differences, moreover, are not only quantitative, they are to a still greater extent also qualitative. In the same manner do genera differ more or less

Q2

228 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

one from the other, even in the same family ; and such inequality, and not an equable apportionment, is the norm throughout nature. In classes, it is not only exhibited in the variety of their forms, but also, to an extraordinary extent, in their numbers; as, for instance, in the class of Insects compared witji that of Worms or Crustacea. The primary divisions of the animal kingdom differ in the same manner one from the other. Articulata are by far the most numerous branch of the whole animal kingdom ; their number exceeding greatly that of all other animals put together. Such facts are in themselves sufficient to show how artificial those classifications must be which admit only the same number and the same kind of divisions for all the types of the animal kingdom.

Great as is the discrepancy between naturalists respecting the number and limits of classes in the animal kingdom, their disagreement in regard to orders and families is yet far greater. These conflicting views, however, do not in the least shake my confidence in the existence of, fixed relations between animals, determined by thoughtful considerations. I would as soon cease to believe in the existence of one God because men worship Him in so many different ways, or because they even worship gods of their own making, as to distrust the evidence of my own senses respecting the existence of a pre established and duly considered system in nature, the arrangement of which preceded the creation of all things that exist.

From the manner in which orders are generally charac-

terizcd and introduced into our systems, it would seem as if this kind of groups were interchangeable with families. Most botanists make no difference at all between orders and families, and take almost universally the terms as mere synonyms. Zoologists have more extensively admitted a difference between them, but while some consider the orders as superior, others place families higher ; others admit orders without at the same time distinguishing families, or vice versa introduce families into their classification without admitting orders ; others again admit tribes as intermediate groups between orders and families. A glance at any general work on Zoology or Botany will satisfy the student how utterly arbitrary the systems are in this respect. The Regne animal of Cuvier exhibits even the unaccountable feature, that while orders and families are introduced in some classes,1 only orders are noticed in others,2 and some exhibit only a succession of genera under the head of their class, without any further grouping among them into orders or families.3 Other classifications exhibit the most pedantic uniformity of a regular succession in each class, of sub-classes, orders, suborders, families, sub-families, tribes, sub-tribes, genera, sub-genera, divisions, sections, and sub-divisions, subsections, etc., and bear evidence upon their face that they are made to suit preconceived ideas of regularity and

1 In the classes Mammalia, Birds, 3 The classes Echinoderms, Aca-

Reptiles, and Fishes, Cuvier mostly lephs, and Infusoria are divided into

distinguishes families as well as orders, but without families,

orders. In the class of Mammalia 3 Such are his classes of Cephalosome orders number no families, pods, Pteropods, Brachiopods, and

whilst others are divided into tribes Cirripeds (Chrhopods). Of the Ceinstead of families. In the class of phalopods, he says, however, they

Gasteropoda, Annelids, Intestinal constitute but one order (Regn. An.,

Worms, and Polyps, some of the vol. 3, p. 11), and p. 22, he calls them

orders only are divided into families, a family ; and yet he distinguishes

while the larger number are not. them as a class, p. 8.

230 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

symmetry in the system, and that they are by no means studied from nature.

To find out the natural characters of orders from the study of those features which really exist in nature, I have considered attentively the different systems of Zoology in which orders are admitted and apparently considered with more care than elsewhere, and in particular the Systema NatuTce of Linnseus, who first introduced into Zoology this kind of groups, and the works of Cuvier, in which orders are frequently characterized with unusual precision, and it appears to me that the leading idea prevailing everywhere respecting orders, where these groups are not admitted at random, is that of a definite rank among them — the desire to determine the relative standing of these divisions, to ascertain their relative superiority or inferiority, as the name order, adopted to designate them, itself implies. The first order in the first class of the animal kingdom, according to the classification of Liiinoeus, is called by him Primates, expressing no doubt his conviction that these beings, among which Man is included, rank uppermost in their class. Blainville uses here and there the expression of " degrees of organization" to designate orders. It is true Lamarck uses the same expression to designate classes. We find, therefore, here as everywhere, the same vagueness in the definition of the different kinds of groups adopted in our systems. But if we would give up an arbitrary use of these terms, and assign to them a definite scientific meaning, it seems to me most natural, and in accordance with the practice of the most successful investigators of the animal kingdom, to call such divisions as are characterized by different degrees of complication of their structure within the limits of the classes orders. As such I would consider, for

ORDERS AMONG ANIMAES: ' 231

instance, the Actinoids and Halcyonoids in the class of Polypi, as circumscribed by Dana ; the Hydroids, the Discophorse, and the CtenoMs among the Acalephs; the Crinoids, Asterioids, Echinoids, and Holothurise among the Echinoderms; the Bryozoa, Brachiopods, Tunicata, and Lamellibranchiata among the Acephala; the Branchifera and Pulmonata among the Gasteropods; the Ophidians, the Saurians, and the Chelonians among the Eeptilcs ; the Ichthyoids and the Anoura among the Amphibians, etc.

Having shown, in the preceding section, that classes rank next to branches, it would be proper to show here that orders are natural groups, which stand above families in their respective classes ; but for obvious reasons I have deferred this discussion to the following paragraph, which relates to families, as it will be easier for me to show what is the respective relation of these two kinds of groups after their special character has been duly considered.

From the preceding remarks respecting orders, it might be inferred that I deny all gradation among all other groups, or that I assume that orders constitute necessarily one simple series in each class. Far from asserting any such thing, I hold, on the contrary, that neither is necessarily the case. But, to explain fully my views upon this point, I must introduce here some other considerations. It will be obvious, from what has already been said (and the further illustration of this subject will only go to show to what extent this is true), that there exists an unquestionable subordination among the different kinds of groups admitted in our systems, based upon the different kinds of relationship observed among animals: that branches are the most comprehensive divisions, including each several classes, that, orders are subdivisions

232 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

of the classes, families subdivisions of orders, genera subdivisions of families, and species subdivisions of the genera ; but not in the sense that each type should necessarily include the same number of classes, nor even necessarily several classes, as this must depend upon the manner in which, the type is carried out. A class, again, might contain no orders,1 if its representatives presented no different degrees, characterized by the greater or less complication of their structure ; or it may contain many or few, as these gradations are more or less numerous and well marked ; but as the representatives of any and every class have of necessity a definite form, each class must contain at least one family, or many families, indeed, as many as there are systems of forms under which its representatives may be combined, if form can be shown to be characteristic of families. The same is the case with genera and species; and nothing is more remote from the truth than the idea that a genus is better defined in proportion as it contains a greater number of species, or that it may be necessary to know several species of a genus before its existence can be fully ascertained. A genus may be more satisfactorily characterized, its peculiarity more fully ascertained, and its limits better defined, when we know all its representatives ; but I am satisfied that any natural genus may be at least pointed out, however numerous its species may be, from the examination of any single one of them. Moreover, the number of genera, both in the animal and vegetable kingdoms, which contain but a single species, is so great, that it is a matter of necessity in all these cases to ascertain their generic characteristics from that one species. Again, such species require to be cha-

1 See Chap. I, Sect. 1.

•racterized with as much precision, and their specific characters to be described with as much minuteness, as if a host of them, although not yet known, existed besides. It is a very objectionable practice among zoologists and botanists to remain satisfied in such cases with characterizing the genus, and perhaps to believe, what some writers have actually stated distinctly, that in such cases generic and specific characters are identical.

Such being the natural relations and the subordination of branches, classes, orders, families, genera, and species, I believe, nevertheless, that neither branches, nor classes, (orders of course not at all,) nor families, nor genera, nor species, have the same standing when compared among themselves. But this does not in the least interfere with the prominent features of orders, for the relative standing of branches, or classes, or families, or genera, or species, does not depend upon the degrees of complication of their structures as that of orders does, but upon other features, as I will now show. The four great types or branches of the animal kingdom, characterized as they are by four different plans of structure, will each stand higher or lower, as the plan itself bears a higher or lower character, and to show this to be the case we need only compare Vertebrata and Eadiata.1 The different classes of one type will stand higher or lower, as the ways in which, and the means with which, the plan of the type to which they belong is carried out, are of a higher or lower nature. Orders in any or all classes are of course higher or lower, according to the degree of perfection of then- representatives, or according to the complication or simplicity of

1 I must leave out the details of moreover, any text-book of cornparasuch comparisons, as a mere mention tive anatomy will furnish the comof the point suffices to suggest thorn; plete evidence to that effect.

234 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

their structure. Families stand higher or lower, according as the peculiarities of their form are determined by modifications of more or less important systems of organs. Genera stand higher or lower, as the structural peculiarities of the parts constituting the generic characteristics exhibit a higher or lower grade of development. Species, lastly, stand one above the other in the same genus, according to the character of their relations to the surrounding world, or that of their representatives to one another. These remarks must make it plain that the respective rank of groups of the same kind among themselves must be determined by the superior or inferior grade of those features upon which they are themselves founded ; while orders alone are strictly defined by the natural degrees of structural complications exhibited within the limits of the classes.

As to the question, whether orders constitute necessarily one simple series in their respective classes, I would say that this must depend upon the character of the class itself, or the manner in which the plan of the type is carried out within the limits of the class. If the class is homogeneous, that is, if it is not primarily subdivided into sub- classes, the orders will, of course, form a single series ; but if some of its organic systems are developed in a different way from the others, there may be one or several parallel series, each subdivided into graduated orders. This can, of course, only be determined by a much more minute study of the characteristics of classes than has been yet made, and mere guesses at such an internal arrangement of the classes into series as those proposed by Kaup or Fitzinger can only be considered as the first attempts towards an estimation of the relative value of the intermediate divisions which may exist between the classes and their orders.

Oken and the physiophilosophers generally have taken a different view of orders. Their idea is, that orders represent, in their respective classes, the characteristic features of the other types of the animal kingdom. As Oken's Intestinal or Gelatinous animals are characterized by a single system of organs, the intestine, they contain no distinct orders ; but each class has three tribes, corresponding to the three classes of this type, which are Infusoria, Polypi, and Acalephs. The tribes of the class of Infusoria are Infusoria proper, Polypoid Infusoria, and Acalephoid Infusoria ; the tribes of the class of Polypi are Infusorial Polypi, Polypi proper, and Acalephoid Polypi ; the tribes of the class Acalephs are Infusorial Acalephs, Polypoid Acalephs, and Acalephs proper. But the classes of Mollusks, which are said to be characterized by two systems of organs, the intestine and the vascular system, contain each two orders, one corresponding to the Intestinal animals, the other to the type of Mollusks ; and so Acephala are divided into the order of Gelatinous Acephala and that of Molluscoid Acephala, and the Gasteropods and Cephalopods in the same manner into two orders each. The Articulata are considered as repre;senting three systems of organs, — the intestinal, the vascular, and the respiratory systems; hence their classes are divided each into three orders. For instance, the Worms contain an order of Gelatinous Worms, one of Molluscoid Worms, one of Annulate Worms, and the same orders are adopted for Crustacea and Insects. Vertebrata are said to represent five systems : the three lower ones being the intestine, the vessels, and the respiratory organs, and the two higher the flesh, (that is, bones, muscles, and nerves), and the organs of the senses; hence, five orders in each class of this type, as, for example, Gelatinous Fishes, Mol-

23 G ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

luscoid Fishes, Entomoid Fishes, Carnal Fishes, and Sensual Fishes, and so also in the classes of Keptiles, Birds, and Mammalia.1

I have entered into so many details upon these vagaries of the distinguished German philosopher, because these views, however crude, have undoubtedly been suggested by a feature of the animal kingdom which has thus far been too little studied : I mean the analogies which exist among animals, besides their true affinities, and which cross and blend, under modifications of strictly homological structures, other characters, which are only analogical. But, it seems to me that the subject of analogies is too little known, the facts bearing upon this kind of relationship being still too obscure to be taken as the basis of such important groups in the animal kingdom as the orders are; and I would insist upon considering the complication or gradation of structure as the feature which should regulate their limitation, if under order we are to understand natural groups expressing the rank, the relative standing, the superiority or inferiority of animals, in their respective classes. Of course, groups thus characterized cannot be considered as mere modifications of the classes, being founded upon a special category of features.

Nothing is more indefinite than the idea of form, as applied by systematic writers, in characterizing animals. Here it means a system of the most different figures

1 See further developments upon geschichte, vol. iv, p. ,082. Compare this subject in OKEN'S Naturphiloso- also the following chapter, phie, and in his Allgeineiue Natur-

FAMILIES. 237

having a common character, as, for instance, when it is said of Zoophytes that they have a radiated form ; there, it indicates any outline which circumscribes the body of animals, when, for instance, animal forms are alluded to in general, instead of designating them simply as animals ; here, again, it means the special figure of some individual species. There is, in fact, no group of the animal kingdom, however extensive or however limited, from the branches down to the species, in which form it is not occasionally alluded to as characteristic. Speaking of Articulates, C. E. v. Baer characterizes them as the type with elongated forms, Mollusks as the type with massive, forms, Eadiates as that with peripheric symmetry, Vertebrates as that with double symmetry; evidently taking their form, in its widest sense, as expressing the most general relations of the different dimensions of the body to one another. Cuvier speaks of form in general, with reference to these four great types, as a sort of mould, as it were, in which the different types would seem to have been cast. Again, form is alluded to in characterizing orders; for instance, in the distinction between the Brachyourans and the Macrourans among the Crustacea, or between the Saurians, the Ophidians, and the Chelonians. It is mentioned as a distinguishing feature in many families, ex. gr. the Cetacea, the Bats, etc. Some genera are separated from others in the same family on the ground of differences of form ; and in almost every description of species, especially when they are considered isolatedly, the form is described at full length. Is there not, in this indiscriminate use of the term form, a confusion of ideas, a want of precision in the estimation of what ought to be called form, and what might be designated by another name ? Such seems to me to be the case.

238 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

In the first place, when form is considered as characteristic of Kadiata or Articulata, or any other of the great types of the animal kingdom, it is evident that it is not a definite outline and well determined figure which is meant, but that here the word form is used as a synonym for plan. Who, for instance, would describe the tubular body of an Holothuria as characterized by a form similar to that of the Euryale, or that of an Echinus as identical with that of an Asterias ? And who does not see, that, as far as the form is concerned, Holothurise resemble Worms much more than they resemble any other Echinoderm, though, as far as the plan of their structure is concerned, they are genuine Kadiates, and have nothing to do with the Articulates'?

Again, a superficial glance at any and all the classes of the animal kingdom is sufficient to show that each contains animals of the most diversified forms. What can be more different than Bats and Whales, Herons and Parrots, Frogs and Sirens, Eels and Turbots, Butterflies and Bugs, Lobsters and Barnacles, Nautili and Cuttlefishes, Slugs and Conchs, Clams and compound Ascidians, Pentacrinus and Spatangus, Beroe and Physalia, Actinia and Gorgonia ? And yet they belong respectively to the same class, as they are coupled here : Bats and Whales together, etc. It must be obvious, then, that form cannot be a characteristic element of classes, if we intend to designate anything definite under that name.

But form has a definite meaning, understood everywhere, when applied to well-known animals. We speak, for instance, of the human form; an allusion to the form of a horse or that of a bull conveys at once a distinct idea; everybody would acknowledge the similarity of form of the horse and ass, and knows how to distinguish them by

FAMILIES. 239

their form from dogs or cats, or from seals and porpoises. In this definite meaning, form corresponds also to what we call figure when speaking of men and women; and it is when taken in this sense that I would now consider the value of forms as characteristic of different animals. We have seen that form cannot be considered as a character of branches, nor of classes; let us now examine further, whether it is a character of species. A rapid review of some of the best known types of the animal kingdom, embracing well-defined genera with many species, will at once show that this cannot be the case ; for such species do not generally show the least difference in their forms. Neither the many species of Squirrels, nor the true Mice, nor the Weasels, nor the Bears, nor the Eagles, nor the Falcons, nor the Sparrows, nor the Warblers, nor the genuine Woodpeckers, nor the true Lizards, nor the Frogs, nor the Toads, nor the Skates, nor the Sharks proper, nor the Turbots, nor the Soles, nor the Eels, nor the Mackerels, nor the Sculpins, nor the genuine Shrimps, nor the Crawfishes, nor the Hawkmoths, nor the Geometers, nor the Dorbugs, nor the Spring-Beetles, nor the Tapeworms, nor the Cuttlefishes, nor the Slugs, nor the true Asterias, nor the Sea- Anemones, could be distinguished among themselves one from the other by their form only. There may be differences in the proportions of some of their parts, but the pattern of every species belonging to well-defined natural genera is so completely identical that it will never afford specific characters. There are genera in our system which, as they now stand, might be alluded to as examples contrary to this statement; but such genera are still based upon very questionable features, and are likely to be found, in the end, to consist of unnatural associations of heterogeneous species: at all events, all recent improve-

240 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

merits in Zoology have gone to limit genera gradually more and more in such a manner that the species belonging to each have shown successively less and less difference in form, until they have assumed, in that respect, the most homogeneous appearance. Are natural genera any more to be distinguished by their form one from the other r( Is there any appreciable difference in the general form 1 I say purposely general form, because a more or less prominent nose, larger or smaller ears, longer or shorter claws, etc., do not essentially modify the form. Is there any real difference in the general form between the genera of the most natural families'? Do, for instance, the genera of Ursina, the Bears, the Badger, the Wolverines, the Raccoons, differ in form I Do the Phocoidse, the Delphinoidre, the Falconinae, the Turdinse, the Fringillinse, the Picinse, the Scolopacinse, the Chelonioidse, the Geckonina, the Colubrina, the Sparoidse, the Elateridse, the Pyralidoidse, the Echinoidae, etc., differ any more among themselves? Certainly not; though, to some extent, there are differences in the form of the representatives of one genus when compared with those of another genus; but, when rightly considered, these differences appear only as modifications of the same type of forms. Just as there are more or less elongated ellipses, so do we find the figure of the Badgers somewhat more contracted than that of either the Bears, or the Raccoons, or the Wolverines, and that of the Wolverines somewhat more elongated than that of the Raccoons; but the form is here as completely typical as it is among the Viverrina, among the Canina, or among the Bradypodidee, or among the Delphinoidso, etc. We must, therefore, exclude form from the characteristics of natural genera, or at least introduce it only as a modification of the typical form of natural families.

FAMILIES. 241

Of all the natural groups in the animal kingdom there remain, then, only families and orders, for the distinction of which form can apply as an essential criterion. But these two kinds of groups are just those upon which zoologists are least agreed; so that it may not be easy to find a division which all naturalists would agree to ttake as an example of a natural order. Let us, however, do our best to settle the difficulty, and suppose, for a moment, that what has been said above respecting the orders is well founded, — that orders are natural groups characterized by the degree of complication of their structure, and expressing the respective rank of these groups in their class, — then we shall find less difficulty in pointing out some few groups which would be generally considered as orders. I suppose most naturalists would agree, for instance, that among Reptiles the Chelonians constitute a natural order ; that among Fishes, Sharks and Skates constitute an order also; and, if any one would urge the necessity of associating also the Cyclostomes with them, it would only the better serve my purpose. The Ganoids, even when circumscribed within narrower limits than those I have assigned to them, and perhaps reduced to the extreme limits proposed for them by J. Mtiller, I am equally prepared to take as an example, though I have in reality still some objections to this limitation, which, however, do not interfere with my present object. The Decapods, among the Crustacea, I suppose everybody would also admit as an order; and I do not care here what other families are claimed, besides the Decapods, to complete the highest order of the Crustacea. Among the Acephala, I trust, the Bryozoa, Tunicata, Brachiopods, and Lamellibranchiata would be also very generally considered to be natural orders. Among the Echinoderms I suppose the

R

242 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Crinoids, Asterioicls, Echinoids, and Holothurioids would be conceded also as such natural orders; among the Acalephs the Beroids, and perhaps also the Discophorse and Hydroids; while, among the Polyps, the Haley onoids constitute a verynatural orderwhen compared with the Actinoids.

Let us now consider these orders with reference to the characteristic forms they include. The forms of true Testudo, of Trionyx, and of Chelonia are very different one from the other; and yet few orders are so well circumscribed as that of Chelonians. The whole class of Fishes scarcely exhibits greater differences than those observed in the forms of the common Sharks, the Sawfishes, the common Skates, and the Torpedo, not to speak of the Cyclostomes and Myxinoids, if these families were also considered as members of the order of Placoids. The Ganoids cannot be circumscribed within narrower limits than those assigned to them by J. Miiller; and yet this order, thus limited, contains forms as heterogeneous as the Sturgeons, the Lepidosteus, the Polypterus, the Amia, and a host of extinct genera and families, not to speak of those families I have associated with them, and which Prof. Miiller would have removed, which, if included among the Ganoids, would add still more heteromorphous elements to this order. Among the Decapods we need only remember the Lobsters and Crabs to be convinced that it is not similarity of form which holds them so closely together as a natural order. How heterogeneous the Bryozoa, the Brachiopods, and the Tunicata are among themselves, as far as their form is concerned, everybody knows who has paid the least attention to these animals.

Unless, then, form be too vague an element to characterize any kind of natural groups in the animal kingdom, it must constitute a prominent feature of families. I

FAMILIES. 243

have already remarked, that orders and families are the groups upon which zoologists are least agreed, and to the study and characterizing of which they have paid least attention. Does this not arise simply from the fact, that, on the one hand, the difference between ordinal and class characters has not been understood, and only assumed to be a difference of degree; and, on the other hand, that the importance of form, as the prominent character of families, has been entirely overlooked? For, though so few natural families of animals are well characterized, or characterized at all, we cannot open a modern treatise upon any class of animals without finding the genera more or less naturally grouped together, under the heading of a generic name with a termination in idee or ince indicating family and sub-family distinctions; and most of these groups, however unequal in absolute value, are really natural groups, though far from designating always natural families, being as often orders or sub-orders as families or sub-families. Yet they indicate the facility with which, almost without study, the intermediate natural groups between the classes and the genera may be pointed out. This arises, in my opinion, from the fact that family resemblance in the animal kingdom is most strikingly expressed in the general form, and that form is an element which falls most easily under our perception, even when the observation is made superficially. But, at the same time, form is most difficult to describe accurately, and hence the imperfection of most of our family characteristics, and the constant substitution for such characters of features which are not essential to the family. To prove the correctness of this view, I would only appeal to the experience of every naturalist. When we see new animals, does not the first glance, that is, the first impression made

R 2

244 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

upon us by their form, give us at once a very correct idea of their nearest relationship'? "We perceive, before examining any structural character, whether a Beetle is a Carabicine, a Longicorn, an Elaterid, a Curculionid, a Chrysomeline ; whether a Moth is a Noctuelite, a Geometrid, a Pyralid, etc. ; whether a bird is a Dove, a Swallow, a Humming-bird, a Woodpecker, a Snipe, a Heron, etc., etc. But, before we can ascertain its genus, we have to study the structure of some characteristic parts ; before we can combine families into natural groups, we have to make a thorough investigation of their whole structure, and compare it with that of other families. So form is characteristic of families; and I can add, from a careful investigation of the subject for several years past, during which I have reviewed the whole animal kingdom with reference to this and other topics connected with classification, that form is the essential characteristic of families.1 I do not mean the mere outline, but form as determined by structure; that is to say, that families cannot be well defined, nor circumscribed within their natural limits, without a thorough investigation of all those features of the internal structure which combine to determine the form.

The characteristic of the North American Chelonians, which I have published in my Contributions to the Natural History of the United States,2 may serve as an example how this subject is to be treated. I will only add here, that, however easy it is at first, from the general impression made upon us by the form of animals, to

1 These investigations, which have which I would not allow to appear

led to most interesting results, have before I could revise the whole anidelayed thus far the publication of mal kingdom in this new light, in

the systematic part of the Principles order to introduce as much precision

of Zoology, undertaken in common as possible into its classification,

with my friend, Dr. A. A.'Gould, and 2 Seevol.i3pp.317-366of thatwork.

FAMILIES. 245

obtain a glimpse of what may fairly be called families, few investigations require more patient comparisons than those by which we ascertain the natural range of modifications of any typical form, and the structural features upon which it is based. Comparative anatomy has so completely discarded every thing that relates to Morphology, and the investigations of anatomists lean so uniformly towards a general appreciation of the connections and homologies of the organic systems which go to build up the body of animals, that, for the purpose of understanding the value of forms and their true foundation, they hardly ever afford us any information, unless it be here and there a consideration respecting teleological relations.

Taking for granted that orders are natural groups characterized by the complication of their structure, and that the different orders of a class express the different degrees of that complication, — taking now further for granted that families are natural groups, characterized by their form as determined by structural peculiarities, it follows that orders are the superior kind of division, as we have seen that the several natural divisions which are generally considered as orders contain each several natural groups, characterized by different forms, that is to say, constituting as many distinct families.

After this discussion it is hardly necessary to add, that families cannot by any means be considered as modifications of the orders to which they belong, if orders are to be characterized by the degrees of complication of their structure, and families by their forms. I would also further remark, that there is one question relating to the form of animals which I have not touched upon here, and which it is still more important to consider in the study of plants, namely, the mode of association of individuals

246 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

into larger or smaller communities, as we observe them, particularly among Polyps and Acalephs. These aggregations have not, as far as their form. is concerned, the same importance as the form of the individual animals of which they are composed, and therefore seldom afford trustworthy family characters. But this point may be more appropriately considered in connection with the special illustration of our Hydroids, to which the third volume of my Contributions is to be devoted.

I have stated above, that botanists have defined the natural families of plants with greater precision than zoologists those of animals ; I have further remarked also, that most of them make no distinction between orders and families. This may be the result of the peculiar character of the vegetable kingdom, which is not built upon such entirely different plans of structure as are animals of different branches. On the contrary, it is possible to trace among plants a certain gradation between their higher and lower types more distinctly than among animals, even though they do not, any more than animals, constitute a simple series. It seems to me, nevertheless, that if Cryptogams, Gymnosperrns, Monocotyledones, and Dicotyledones can be considered as branches of the vegetable kingdom, analogous to Kadiata, Mollusks, Articulata, and Vertebrata among animals, such divisions as Fungi, Algse, Lichens, Mosses, Hepaticse, and Ferns in the widest sense, may be taken as classes. Diatomacese, Confervse, and Fuci may then be considered as orders, Mosses and Hepaticse as orders, and Equisetaceoe, Ferns proper, Hydropterids, and Lycopodiacere as orders also, as they exhibit different degrees of complication of structure, while their natural subdivisions, which are more closely allied in form or habitus, may be considered as families ;

GENERA. 247

natural families among plants having generally as distinct a port as families among animals have a distinct form. We need only remember the Palms, the Coniferae, the Umbelliferse, the Conipositse, the Leguminosse, the Labiatae, etc., as satisfactory examples of this kind.

Linnaeus already knew very well that genera exist in nature, though what he calls genera frequently constitute groups to which we at present give other names, as we consider many of them as families ; but it stands proved by his writings that he had fully satisfied himself of the real existence of such groups, for he says distinctly, in \iisPhilosophiaBotanica, sect. 169, " Scias characterem non constituere genus, sed genus characterem. Characterem fluere e genere, non genus e charactere. Characterem non esse, ut genus fiat, sed ut genus noscatur."

It is surprising, that, notwithstanding such clear statements, which might have kept naturalists awake respecting the natural foundation of genera, such loose ideas have become prevalent upon this subject, that at present the number of investigators who exhibit much confidence in the real existence of their own generic distinctions is very limited. And as to what genera really are, the want of precision of ideas appears still greater. Those who have considered the subject at all seem to have come to the conclusion that genera are nothing but groups including a certain number of species agreeing in some more general features than those which distinguish species ; thus recognizing no difference between generic and specific characters as such, as a single species may constitute a

248 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

genus, whenever its characters do not agree with the characters of other species, and many species may constitute a genus, because their specific characters agree to a certain extent among themselves.1 Far from admitting such doctrines, I hope to be able to show, that, however much or however little species may differ among themselves as species, yet they may constitute a natural genus, provided their respective generic characters are identical. I have stated before, that, in order to ascertain upon what the different groups adopted in our systems arc founded, I have consulted the works of such writers as are celebrated in the annals of science for having characterized with particular felicity any one kind of these groups ; and I have mentioned Latreille as prominent among zoologists for the precision with which he has defined the genera of Crustacea and Insects, upon which he has written the most extensive work extant.2 An anecdote, which I have often heard repeated by entomologists who knew Latreille well, is very characteristic as to the meaning he connected with the idea of genera. At the time he was preparing the work just mentioned, he lost no opportunity of obtaining specimens, the better to ascertain from nature the generic peculiarities of these animals; and he used to apply to the entomologists for contributions to his collection. It was not show specimens he cared to obtain ; any would do, for he used to say lie wanted them only " to examine their parts." Have we not here a hint, from a master, to teach us what genera are, and how they should

1 SPRING, Ueber die naturhistoris- DANA (J. D.), Thoughts on Species,

chen Begrifte von Gattung, Art und Amer. Journ. Sc. and Arts, 1857, vol.

Abart; Leipzig,18383lvol.8vo. — BUR- 24, p. 305.

MEISTER (H.), Zoonomische Briefe ; 2 LATREILLE, Genera Crustaceo-

Leipzig, 1856, 2 vols. 8vo, — WOLLAS- rum et Insectorum; Paris, et Ar-

TON (T. V.), On the Variation of gent., 1806-1809, 4 vols. 8vo. Species; London, 1856, 1 vol. 8vo. —

GENERA. 249

be characterized ? Is it not the special structure of some part or other, wliich characterizes genera \ Is it not the finish of the organization of the body, as worked out in the ultimate details of structure, which distinguishes one genus from another ? Latreille, in expressing the want he felt with reference to the study of genera, has given us the key-note of their harmonious relations to one another. Genera are most closely allied groups of animals, differing neither in form nor in complication of structure, but simply in the ultimate structural peculiarities of some of their parts ; and this is, I believe, the best definition wliich can be given of genera. They are not characterized by modifications of the features of the families, for we have seen that the prominent trait of family difference is to be found in a typical form; and genera of the same family may not differ at all in form. Nor are genera merely a more comprehensive mould than species embracing a wide range of characteristics ; for species in a natural genus should not present any structural differences, but only such as express the most special relations of thenrepresentatives to the surrounding world and to each other. Genera, in one word, are natural groups of a peculiar kind; and their special distinction rests upon the ultimate details of their structure.

It is generally believed that nothing is easier than to determine species ; and that, of all the degrees of relationship which animals exhibit, that which constitutes specific identity is the most clearly defined. An unfailing criterion of specific identity is even supposed to exist in the

250 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

sexual connexion, which so naturally brings together the individuals of the same species in the function of reproduction. But I hold that this is a complete fallacy, or at least a petitio principii, not admissible in a philosophical discussion of what truly constitutes the characteristics of species. I am even satisfied that some of the most perplexing problems involved in the consideration of the natural limits of species would have been solved long ago had it not been so generally urged that the ability and natural disposition of individuals to connect themselves in fertile sexual intercourse was of itself sufficient evidence of their specific identity. Without alluding to the fact, that every new case of hybridity1 is an ever-returning protest against such an assertion; and without entering here into a discussion respecting the possibility or practicability of setting aside this difficulty by introducing the consideration of the limited fertility of the progeny of individuals of different species, I will only remark, that, as long as it is not proved that all the varieties of dogs, and of any others of our domesticated animals and of our cultivated plants, are respectively derived from one unmixed species; and as long as doubts may be entertained respecting the common origin of all races of men from one common stock, it is not logical to admit that sexual connexion, resulting even in fertile offspring, is a trustworthy evidence of specific identity.

To justify this assertion I would only ask, Where is the

1 WIEGMAN, Gekronte Preisschrift Hybridity in Animals, and on some

iiber die Bastarderzeugung im Pflan- collateral subjects ; Charleston Med.

zenreich ; Braunschweig, 1828, 8vo. Journ., 1850. — DE SELYS LONG-

— BRAUN (A.), Ueber die Erschein- CHAMPS, Recapitulation des hybrides

uug der Verjiiugung in der Natur; observes dans la famille des Anati-

Freiburg, 1849, 4to.— MORTON (S. dees, Bull. Ac. Brux., 1845 ; and

G.), Essay on Hybridity, Amer. Juuru., Additions, ibid., 185(5, 2cle part., page

1847.— Additional Observations on 6.

SPECIES. 251

unprejudiced naturalist who in our days would dare to maintain: 1st, that it is proved that all the domesticated varieties of sheep, of goats, of bulls, of llamas, of horses, of dogs, of fowls, etc., are respectively derived from one common stock; 2nd, that the supposition that these varieties have originated from the complete amalgamation of several primitively distinct species is out of the question ; and 3rd, that varieties imported from distant countries and not before brought together, such as the Shanghae fowl, for instance, do not completely mingle'? Where is the physiologist who can conscientiously affirm that the limits of the fertility between distinct species are ascertained with sufficient accuracy to make it a test of specific identity? And who can say that the distinctive characters of fertile hybrids and of unmixed breeds are sufficiently obvious to enable anybody to point out the primitive features of all our domesticated animals, or of all our cultivated plants'? As long as this cannot be done, as long as the common origin of all races of men, and of the different animals and plants mentioned above, is not proved, while their fertility with one another is a fact which has been daily demonstrated for thousands of years ; as long as large numbers of animals are hermaphrodites, never requiring a connection with other individuals to multiply their species; as long as there are others wThich multiply in various ways without sexual intercourse, — it is not justifiable to assume that those animals and plants are unmixed species, and that sexual fecundity is the criterion of specific identity. Moreover, this test can hardly ever have any practical value in most cases of the highest scientific interest. It is never resorted to, and, as far as I know, has never been applied with satisfactory results to settle any doubtful case. It

252 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

has never assisted any anxious and conscientious naturalist in investigating the degree of relationship between closely allied animals or plants living in distant regions or in disconnected geographical areas. It will never contribute to the solution of any of those difficult cases of seeming difference of identity between extinct animals and plants found in different geological formations. In all critical cases, requiring the most minute accuracy and precision, it is discarded as unsafe, and of necessity questionable. Accurate science must do without it; and the sooner it is altogether discarded, the better. But, like many relics of past time, it is dragged in as a sort of theoretical bugbear, and exhibited only now and then to make a false show in discussions upon the question of the unity of origin of mankind.

There is another fallacy, connected with the prevailing ideas about species, to which I would also allude, — the fancy that species do not exist in the same way in nature as genera, families, orders, classes, and types. It is actually maintained by some, that species are founded in nature in a manner different from these groups ; l that then- existence is, as it were, more real, whilst that of the other groups is considered as ideal, even when it is admitted that these groups have themselves a natural foundation.

Let us consider this point more closely, as it involves the whole question of individuality. I wish, however, not to be understood as undervaluing the importance of sexual relations as indicative of the close ties which unite, or may unite, the individuals of the same species. I know as well as any one to what extent they manifest themselves in nature, but I mean to insist upon the un-

1 BuiiMEisTEii (II.)) Zoon. Briefe, q. av vol. 1, p. 11.

SPECIES. 253

deniable fact that these relations are not so exclusive as those naturalists would represent them who urge them as an unfailing criterion of specific identity. I would remind those who constantly forget it, that there are animals, which, though specifically distinct, do unite sexually, which do produce offspring, mostly sterile, it is true, in some species, but fertile to a limited extent in others, and in others even fertile to an extent which it has not yet been possible to determine. Sexual connection is the result, or rather one of the most striking expressions, of the close relationship established in the beginning between individuals of the same species, and is by no means the cause of their identity in successive generations. When first created, animals of the same species paired because they were made one for the other; they did not take one another in order to build up their species, which had full existence before the first individual produced by sexual connection was born.

This view of the subject acquires greater importance in proportion as it becomes more apparent that species did not originate in single pairs, but were created in large numbers in those numeric proportions which constitute the natural harmonies between organized beings. It alone explains the possibility of the procreation of Hybrids, as founded upon the natural relationship of individuals of closely allied species, which may become fertile with one another the more readily as they differ less structurally.

To assume that sexual relations determine the species, it should further be shown that absolute promiscuousness of sexes among individuals of the same species is the prevailing characteristic of the animal kingdom; while the fact is, that a large number even of animals, not to speak of Man, select their mates for life, and rarely have any

254 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

intercourse with others. It is a fact known to every farmer, that different breeds of the same species are less inclined to mingle than individuals of the same breed. For my own part, I cannot conceive how moral philosophers, who urge the unity of origin of Man as one of the fundamental principles of their religion, can at the same time justify the necessity which it involves of a sexual intercourse between the nearest blood relations of that assumed first and unique human family, when such a connection is revolting even to the savage. Then again, there are innumerable species in which vast numbers of individuals are never developed sexually, others in which sexual individuals appear only now and then at remote intervals, while many intermediate generations are produced without any sexual connection, and others still which multiply more extensively by budding than by sexual generation. I need not again allude here to the phenomena of alternate generation, now so well known among Acalephs and Worms, nor to the polymorphism of many other types. Not to acknowledge the significance of such facts, would amount to the absurd pretension, that we are to take distinctions and definitions, introduced into our science during its infancy, as standards for our appreciation of the phenomena of nature, instead of framing and remodelling our standards, according to the laws of nature, as our knowledge extends. It is, for instance, a specific character of the Horse and the Ass to be able to connect sexually with each other, and thus to produce an offspring different from that which they bring forth among themselves. It is characteristic of the Mare, as the representative of its species, to bring forth a Mule with the Jackass, and of the Stallion to procreate Hinnies with the She-ass. It is equally characteristic of them to produce again other

SPECIES. 255

kinds of lialfbreeds with the Zebra, the Daw, etc. And yet, in face of all these facts, which render sexual reproduction, or at least promiscuous intercourse among the representatives of the same species, so questionable a criterion of specific identity, there are still naturalists who would represent it as an unfailing test, only that they may sustain one single position, that all men are derived from one single pair.

These facts, with other facts which every day go more extensively to show the great probability of the independent origin of individuals of the same species in disconnected geographical areas, force us to remove from the philosophic definition of species the idea of a community of origin, and consequently, also, the idea of a necessary genealogical connection. The evidence, that all animals have originated in large numbers, is growing so strong that the idea that every species existed in the beginning in single pairs may be said to be given up almost entirely by naturalists. Now if this is the case, sexual derivation does not constitute a necessary specific character, even though sexual connection be the natural process of their reproduction and multiplication. If we are led to admit as the beginning of each species the simultaneous origin of a large number of individuals, and if the same species may originate at the same time in different localities, these first representatives of each species, at least, were not connected by sexual derivation ; and as this applies equally to any first pair, this fancied test criterion of specific identity must at all ev.ents be given up ; and with it goes also the pretended real existence of the species, in contradistinction to the mode of existence of genera, families, orders, classes, and types ; for what really exist are individuals, not species. We may, at the utmost,

256 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

consider individuals as representatives of species ; but no one individual nor any number of individuals represents its species only, without representing also at the same time, as we have seen above (Sect. I to V) its genus, its family, its order, its class, its branch.

Before attempting to prove the whole of this proposition, I will first consider the characters of the individual animals. Their existence is scarcely limited as to time and space within definite and appreciable limits. No one nor all of them represent fully, at any particular tim«, their species; they are always only the temporary representatives of the species, inasmuch as each species exists longer in nature than any of its individuals. All the individuals of any or of all species now existing are only the successors of other individuals which have gone before, and the predecessors of the next generations : they do not constitute the species, they represent it. The species is an ideal entity, as much as the genus, the family, the order, the class, or the type; it continues to exist, while its representatives die, generation after generation. Again, these representatives do not represent simply what is specific in the individual, but they exhibit and reproduce in the same manner, generation after generation, all that is generic in them, all that characterizes the family, the order, the class, the branch, with the same fulness, the same constancy, the same precision. Species, then, exist in nature in the same manner as any other group; they are quite as ideal in their mode of existence as genera, families, etc., or quite as real. But individuals truly exist in a different way: no one of them exhibits at one time all the characteristics of the species, even though it be hermaphrodite, neither do any two represent it, even though the species be not polymorphous, for individuals

SPECIES. 257

have a growth, a youth, a mature age, an old age, and are bound to some limited home during their lifetime. It is true that species are also limited in their existence; but for our purpose we can consider these limits as boundless, inasmuch as we have no means of fixing their duration, either for the past geological ages or for the present period, whilst the short cycles of the life of individuals are quantities easily measurable. Now, as truly as individuals, while they exist, represent their species for the time being and do not constitute them, so truly do these same individuals represent at the same time their genus, their family, their order, their class, and their type, the characters of which they bear as indelibly as those of the species.

As representatives of Species, individual animals bear the closest relations to one another; they exhibit definite relations also to the surrounding elements, and their existence is limited within a definite period.

As representatives of Genera, these same individuals have a definite and specific ultimate structure, identical with that of the representatives of other species.

As representatives of Families, these same individuals have a definite figure, exhibiting, with similar forms of other genera, or for themselves, if the family contains but one genus, a distinct, specific pattern.

As representatives of Orders, these same individuals stand in a definite rank when compared to the representatives of other families.

As representatives of Classes, these same individuals exhibit the plan of structure of their respective types in a special manner, carried out with special means and in special ways.

As representatives of Branches, these same individuals

258 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

are all organized upon a distinct plan, differing from the plan of other types.

Individuals, then, are the bearers, for the time being, not only of specific characteristics, but of all the natural features in which animal life is displayed in all its diversity.

Viewing individuals in this light, they resume all their dignity; and they are no longer so absorbed in species as to be ever its representatives without being anything for themselves. On the contrary, it becomes plain, from this point of view, that the individual is the worthy bearer, for the time being, of all the riches of nature's wealth of life. This view further teaches us how we may investigate not only the species in the individual, but also the genus, the family, the order, the class, the branch, as indeed naturalists have at all times done in practice, whilst denying the possibility of it in theory.

Having thus cleared the field of what does not belong to it, it now remains for me to show what in reality constitutes species, and how they may be distinguished with precision within their natural limits.

If we would not exclude from the characteristics of species any feature which is essential to it, nor force into it any one which is not so, we must first acknowledge that it is one of the characters of species to belong to a given period in the history of our globe, and to hold definite relations to the physical conditions then prevailing, and to animals and plants then existing. These relations are manifold, and are exhibited: 1st, in the geographical range natural to any species, as well as in its capability of being acclimatized in countries where it is not primitively found; 2nd, in the connection in which they stand to the elements around them, when they inhabit either the water or the land, deep seas, brooks, rivers and lakes,

SPECIES. 259

shoals, flat, sandy, muddy, or rocky coasts, limestone banks, coral reefs, swamps, meadows, fields, dry lands, salt deserts, sandy deserts, moist land, forests, shady groves, sunny hills, low regions, plains, prairies, high table-lands, mountain peaks, or the frozen barrens of the Arctics, etc. ; 3rd, in their dependence upon this or that kind of food for their sustenance; 4th, in the duration of their life; 5th, in the mode of their association with one another, whether living in flocks, small companies, or isolated; 6th, in the period of their reproduction ; 7th, in the changes they undergo during their growth, and the periodicity of these changes in their metamorphosis ; 8th, in their association with other beings, which is more or less close as it may only lead to a constant association in some, whilst in others it amounts to parasitism ; 9th, specific characteristics are further exhibited in the size to which animals attain, in the proportions of their parts to one another, in their ornamentation, etc., and ah1 the variations to which they are liable.

As soon as all the facts bearing upon these different points have been fully ascertained, there can remain no doubt respecting the natural limitation of species; and it is only the insatiable desire of describing new species from insufficient data which has led to the introduction in our systems of so many doubtful species, which add nothing to our real knowledge, and only go to swell the nomenclature of animals and plants, already so intricate.

Assuming, then, that species cannot always be identified at first sight, and that it may require a long time and patient investigation to ascertain their natural limits ; assuming further, that the features alluded to above are among the most prominent characteristics of species, we may say that species are based upon well determined

s 2

260 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

relations of individuals to the world around them, and to their kindred, and upon the proportions and relations of their parts to one another, as well as upon their ornamentation. Well digested descriptions of species ought, therefore, to be comparative ; they ought to assume the character of biographies, and attempt to trace the origin, and follow the development, of a species during its whole existence. Moreover, all the changes which species may undergo in the course of time, especially under the fostering care of man, in the state of domesticity and cultivation, belong to the history of the species ; even the anomalies and diseases to which they are subject, belong to their cycle, as well as their natural variations. Among some species variation of colour is frequent, others never change, and some change periodically, others accidentally ; some throw off certain ornamental appendages at regular times, the Deers their horns, some Birds the ornamental plumage which they wear in the breeding season, etc. All this should be ascertained for each, and no species can be considered as well denned and satisfactorily characterized, the whole history of which is not completed to the extent alluded to above. The practice, prevailing since Linneeus, of limiting the characteristics of species to mere diagnoses, has led to the present confusion of our nomenclature, and made it often impossible to ascertain what were the species which the authors of such condensed descriptions had before them. But for the tradition which has transmitted, generation after generation, the knowledge of these species among the cultivators of science in Europe, this confusion would be. still greater; but for the preservation of most original collections, it would be inextricable. In countries which, like America, do not enjoy these advantages, it is often hopeless to attempt critical investigations upon

OTHER NATURAL DIVISIONS. 2G1

doubtful cases of this kind. One of our ablest and most critical investigators, the lamented Dr. Harris, has very forcibly set forth the difficulties under which American naturalists labour in this respect, in the Preface to his Report upon the Insects Injurious to Vegetation.

Thus far I have considered only those kinds of divisions which are introduced in almost all our modern classifications, and attempted to show that these groups are founded in nature, and ought not to be considered as artificial devices, invented by man to facilitate his studies. Upon the closest scrutiny of the subject, I find that these divisions cover all the categories of relationship which exist among animals, as far as their structure is concerned.

Brandies or types are characterized by the plan of their structure ;

Classes, by the manner in which that plan is executed, as far as ways and means are concerned;

Orders, by the degrees of complication of that structure ;

Families, by their form, as far as determined by structure;

Genera, by the details of the execution in special parts; and

Species, by the relations of individuals to one another and to the world in which they live, as well as by the proportions of their parts, their ornamentation, etc.

And yet there are other natural divisions which must be acknowledged in a natural zoological system ; but

262 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

these are not to be traced so uniformly in all classes as the former, — they are in reality only limitations of the other kinds of divisions.

A class, in which one system of organs presents a peculiar development while all the other systems coincide, may be subdivided into sub-classes ; for instance, the Marsupialia when contrasted with the Placental Mammalia. The characters upon which such a subdivision is founded are of the kind upon which the class itself is based, but do not extend to the whole class. An order may embrace natural groups of a higher value than families, founded upon ordinal characters, which may yet not determine absolute superiority or inferiority, and therefore not constitute for themselves distinct orders; as the characters upon which they are founded, though of the kind which determines orders, may be so blended as to determine superiority in one respect, while with reference to some other features they may indicate inferiority. Such groups are called sub-orders. The order of Testudinata illustrates tins point best, as it contains two natural sub-orders.1 A natural family may exhibit such modifications of its characteristic form that upon these modifications subdivisions may be distinguished, which have been called sub-families by some authors, and tribes or legions by others. In a natural genus, a number of species may agree more closely than others in the particulars which constitute the genus and lead to the distinction of sub-genera, The individuals of a species, occupying distinct fields of its natural geographical area, may differ somewhat from one another, and constitute varieties, etc.

1 See my Contributions to the Natural History of the United States, vol. i, p. 308.

OTHER NATURAL DIVISIONS. 2 63

These distinctions have long ago been introduced into our systems ; and every practical naturalist, who has made a special study of any class of the animal kingdom, must have been impressed with the propriety of acknowledging a large number of subdivisions to express all the various degrees of affinity of the different members of any higher natural group. Now, while I maintain that the branches, the classes, the orders, the families, the genera, and the species are groups established in nature respectively upon different categories, and while I feel prepared to trace the natural limits of these groups by the characteristic features upon which they are founded, I must confess at the same time that I have not yet been able to discover the principle which obtains in the limitation of their respective subdivisions.1 All I can say is, that all the different categories considered above, upon which branches, classes, orders, families, genera, and species are founded, have then- degrees, and upon these degrees subclasses, sub-orders, sub-families, and sub-genera have been established. For the present, these subdivisions must be left to arbitrary estimations ; and we shall have to deal with them as well as we can, so long as the principles which regulate these degrees in the different kinds of groups are not ascertained. I hope, nevertheless, that such arbitrary estimations are for ever removed from our science, as far as the categories themselves are concerned. -

Thus far, inequality of weight seems to be the standard of the internal valuation of each kind of group ; and this inequality extends to all groups, for even within the branches there are some classes more closely related among

1 Professor James D. Dana has Sc. and Arts, 1858, vol. 25, p. 333.

thrown out some valuable suggestions See also WEIATLAND (D.), On Series

upon this point in his review of my in the Animal Kingdom, Proc. Brit,

"Contributions." See Amcr. Jourii. Nat. Hist. Soc., vol. vi, p. 112.

264 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

themselves than others : Polypi and Acalephs, for instance, stand nearer to one another than to Echinoderms ; Crustacea and Insects are more closely allied to one another than to Worms, etc. Upon such degrees of relationship between the classes, within their respective branches, the so-called sub-types or sub-branches have been founded, and these differences have occasionally been exaggerated so far as to give rise to the establishment of distinct 1 tranches. Upon similar relations between the branches, sub-kingdoms have also been distinguished, but I hardly think that such far-fetched combinations can be considered as natural groups ; they seem to me rather the expression of a relation arising from the weight of their whole organization as compared with that of other groups, than the expression of a definite relationship.

It has been repeated again and again, that the characters which distinguish the different types of the animal kingdom are developed in the embryo in the successive order of their importance : first, the structural features of their respective branches ; next, the characters of the class ; next, those of the order ; next, those of the family ; next, those of the genus ; and, finally, those of the species. This assertion has met with no direct opposition ; on the contrary, it seems to have been approved of almost without discussion, and now to be generally taken for granted. The importance of the subject requires, however, a closer scrutiny ; for if Embryology is to lead to great improvements in Zoology, it is necessary at the outset to deter-

SUCCESSION OF CHARACTERS. 2G5

mine well what kind of information we may expect it to furnish to its sister science. Now I would ask, if, at this day, zoologists know with sufficient precision wThat are typical, class, ordinal, family, generic, and specific characters, to Le justified in maintaining, that, in the progress of embryonic growth, the features which become successively prominent correspond to these characters, and occur in the order of their subordination 1 I doubt it. I will say more : I am sure there is no such understanding about it among them ; for, if there was, they would already have perceived that this assumed coincidence between the subordination of natural groups among full-grown animals, and the successive stages of growth during their embryonic period of life, does not exist in nature. It is true, there are certain features in the embryonic development which may suggest the idea of a progress from a more general typical organization to its ultimate specialization ; but it nowhere proceeds in that stereotyped order of succession, nor indeed even, in a general way, in the manner thus assumed.

Let us see whether it is not possible to introduce more precision into tin's matter. Taking it for granted that what I have said about the characteristics of natural groups in the animal kingdom is correct, that we have, 1st, four great typical branches of the animal kino-dom, character-

O »/ .L O

ized by different plans of structure ; 2nd, classes, characterized by the ways in which, and the means with which these plans of structure are executed ; 3rd, orders, characterized by the degrees of simplicity or complication of that structure ; 4th, families, characterized by differences of form, or by structural peculiarities determining form ; 5th, genera, characterized by ultimate peculiarities of structure in the parts of the body ; Gth, species,

2GG ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

characterized by relations and proportions of parts among themselves, and of the individuals to one another and to the surrounding mediums ; we finally reach individuals, which, for the time being, represent not only the species with all their varieties, and variations of age, sex, size, etc., but also the characteristic features of all the higher groups. We have thus, at one end of the series, the most comprehensive categories of the structure of animals, while at the other end we meet individual beings. Individuality on one side, the most extensive divisions of the animal kingdom on the other. Now, to begin our critical examination of the progress of life in its successive manifestations with the extremes, is it not plain, from all we know of Embryology, that individuahzation is the first requirement of all reproduction and multiplication ; and that an individual germ, (or a number of them,) an ovarian egg, or a bud, is first formed and becomes distinct as an individual from the body of the parent, before it assumes either the characters of its branch or those of its class, order, etc. \ This fact is of great significance as showing the importance of individuality in nature. Next, it is true we generally perceive the outlines of the plan of structure before it becomes apparent in what manner that plan is to be carried out ; and the character of the branch is marked out, in its most general features, before that of the class can be recognized with any degree of precision. Upon this fact, we may base one of the most important generalizations in Embryology.

It has been maintained, in the most general terms, that the higher animals pass during their development through all the phases characteristic of the inferior classes. Put in this form, no statement can be further from the truth ; and yet there are decided relations, within certain

limits, between the embryonic stages of growth of higher animals and the permanent characters of others of an inferior grade. Now, the fact mentioned above enables us to mark with precision the limits within which these relations may be traced. As eggs, in their primitive condition, animals do not differ one from the other ; but as soon as the embryo has begun to show any characteristic features, it presents such peculiarities as distinguish its branch. It cannot, therefore, be said that any animal passes through phases of development which are not included within the limits of its own branch. No Vertebrate is, or resembles at any time, an Articulate ; no Articulate a Mollusk ; no Mollusk a Radiate; and vice versa. Whatever correlations between the young of higher animals and the perfect condition of inferior ones may be traced, they are always limited to representatives of the same branch ; for instance, Mammalia and Birds, in their earlier development, exhibit certain features of the lower classes of Vertebrates, such as the Reptiles or Fishes ; Insects recall the Worms in some of their earlier stages of growth, etc., but even this statement requires qualifications, to which we shall have occasion to refer hereafter. However, this much is already evident, that no higher animal passes through phases of development recalling all the lower types of the animal kingdom, but only such as belong to its own branch. What has been said of the infusorial character of young embryos of Worms, Mollusks, and Radiates, can no longer stand before a serious criticism, because, in the first place, the animals generally called Infusoria cannot themselves be considered as a natural class; and in the second place, those to which a reference is made in this connexion are themselves freemoving embryos.1

1 See above, Chap. I, Sect. 18.

2G8 ESSAY 01ST CLASSIFICATION.

With the progress of growth, and in proportion as the type of an animal becomes more distinctly marked in its embryonic state, the plan of structure appears also more distinctly in the peculiarities of that structure, — that is to say, in the ways in which, and the means by which, the plan, only faintly indicated at first, is to be carried out and become prominent, — and by this the class character is pointed out. For instance, a wormlike insect-larva, will already show, by its trachea, that it is to be an Insect and not to remain a Worm, as it at first appears to be; but the complications of that special structure, upon which the orders of the class of Insects are based, do not yet appear; this is perfected only at a late period in the embryonic life. At this stage we frequently notice already a remarkable advance of the features characteristic of the families over those characteristic of the order ; for instance, young Hemiptera and young Orthoptera may safely be referred to their respective families, from the characteristics they exhibit before they show those peculiarities which characterize them as Hemiptera or as Orthoptera; young Fishes may be known as members of their respective families before the characters of their orders are apparent, etc.

It is very obvious why this should be so. With the progress of the development of the structure the general form is gradually sketched out, and it has already reached many of its most distinctive features before all the complications of the structure which characterize the orders have become apparent; and as form essentially characterizes the families, we see here the reason why the family type may be fully stamped upon an animal before its ordinal characters are developed. Even specific characters, as far as they depend upon the proportions of parts

and have on that ground an influence in modifying the form, may be recognized long before the ordinal characters are fully developed. The Snappiiig-Turtle, for instance, exhibits its small crosslike sternum, its long tail, its ferocious habits, even before it leaves the egg, before it breathes through lungs, before its derm is ossified to form a bony shield, etc. ; nay, it snaps with its gaping jaws at any thing brought near, when it is still surrounded by its amnios and allantois, and its yolk still exceeds in bulk its whole body.1 The calf assumes the form of the bull before it bears the characteristics of the hollow-horned Ruminants ; the fawn exhibits all the peculiarities of its species before those of its family are unfolded.

With reference to generic characters, it may be said that they are scarcely ever developed in any type of the animal kingdom before the specific features are for the most part fully sketched out, if not completely developed. Can there be any doubt that the human embryo belongs to the genus Homo, even before it has cut a tooth 1 Is not a kitten or a puppy distinguishable as a cat or a dog before the claws and teeth tell their genus \ Is not this true also of the Lamb, the Kid, the Colt, the Rabbits, and the Mice, of most Birds, most Reptiles, most Fishes, most Insects, Molmsks and Radiates1? And why should this be ? Simply because the proportions of parts, which constitute specific characters, are recognizable before their ultimate structural development, which characterizes genera, is completed.

1 PR. M. v. NEU-WIED quotes as a is still a pale, almost colourless

remarkable fact, that the Chelonura embryo, wrapped up in its foetal enserpentina bites as soon as it is velopes, with a yolk larger than itself

hatched. I have seen it snapping in hanging from its sternum, three

the same fierce manner as it does months before it is hatched, when full-grown, at a time when it

270 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

It seems to me that these facts are likely to influence the future progress of Zoology, in enabling us gradually to unravel more and more distinctly the features which characterize the different subordinate groups of the animal kingdom. The views I have expressed above, of the respective value and the prominent characteristics of these different groups, have stood so completely the test in this analysis of their successive appearance, that I consider this circumstance as adding to the probability of their correctness.

But this has another very important bearing, to which I have already alluded in the beginning of these remarks. Before Embryology can furnish the means of settling some of the most perplexing problems in Zoology, it is indispensable to ascertain first what are typical, class, ordinal, family, generic, and specific characters; and as long as it is supposed that these characters appear necessarily during the embryonic growth, in the order of their subordination, there is no possibility of deriving from embryological monographs that information upon this point so much needed in Zoology, and so seldom alluded to by embryologists. Again, without knowing what constitutes truly the characters of the groups named above, there is no possibility of finding out the true characters of a genus of which only one species is known, of a family which contains only one genus, etc.; and for the same reason no possibility of arriving at congruent results witli reference to the natural limitations of genera, families, orders, etc., without which we cannot even begin to builct up a permanent classification of the animal kingdom, and, still less, hope to establish a solid basis for a general comparison between the animals now living and those which have peopled the surface of our globe in past geological ages.

It is not accidentally that I have been led to these investigations, but by necessity. As often as I tried to compare higher or more limited groups of animals of the present period with those of former ages, or early stages of growth of higher living animals with full-grown ones of lower types, I was constantly stopped in my progress by doubts as to the equality of the standards I was applying, until I made the standards themselves the object of direct and very extensive investigations, covering indeed a much wider ground than would appear from these remarks ; for upon these principles I have already remodelled, for my own convenience, nearly the whole animal kingdom, and introduced into almost every class very unexpected changes in the classification.

I have already expressed above1 my conviction that the only true system is that which exists in nature; and as, therefore, no one should have the ambition of erecting a system of his own, I will not now even attempt to present these results in the shape of a diagram, but remain satisfied to express my belief that all we can really do is, at best, to offer imperfect translations, in human language, of the profound thoughts, the innumerable relations, the unfathomable meaning of the plan actually manifested in the natural objects themselves; and I should consider it as my highest reward, should I find, after a number of years, that I had helped others on in the right path.

Thus far we have Considered those relations only among animals, which are founded upon strictly homological

1 See Chap. I, Sect, 1, p. 13.

272 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

features of their structure. We now proceed to examine the more remote and less definite relations, which are called analogies.

It has already been stated in what way homologies differ from analogies.1 Homology is that kind of relationship which is founded upon identity of structure in different animals belonging to natural divisions of the same kind; while analogy is a resemblance arising from the combination of features characteristic of one natural group with those of another group.2 We have, indeed, seen that all the animals belonging to the same branch are homologous, as far as the plan of their structure is concerned; that all the members of the same class are homologous, as far as the mode of execution of that structure is concerned ; that all the members of the same order are homologous in the complication of their structure; that all the representatives of the same family are homologous in form; that the different genera of one and the same family exhibit homologous peculiarities in the details of their structure ; and that even within the narrow limits of species we may still trace homologous features, among the genera which have numerous representatives, even when such resemblances do not extend to the species of closely allied genera. It is plain from this that the categories of homology are as numerous and diversified as the essential kinds of differences which we may trace in the structure of animals; or, in other words, we have branch homologies, class homologies, ordinal homologies, family homologies, generic homologies, and specific homo-

1 See p. 26. based upon similarity of function,

" Houiulogy has also been defined without reference to structure. The

as (he relationship arising from definition given above is more preidentity of structure without refer- cise, as it embraces all the different

euce to function, while analogy is categories of analogy and homology.

logics. Examples of tlie more comprehensive kinds of these homologies will occur to every practical geologist. As to specific homologies, they are particularly traceable in those structural features which determine the proportions among the parts; as for instance, when all the species of one genus are either long-necked, short-tailed, long-legged, etc., while those of closely allied genera may present reverse proportions, etc.

Let us now see what are the categories of analogy, and how far it is possible, under all circumstances, to distinguish homological and analogical features. If analogy is a resemblance arising from a combination of features characteristic of one group, with those characteristic of another group (such as class characters of one class with those of another class, or those of families of another class), then the investigation will only require the recognition of the different categories of structure already considered (such as branches, classes, orders, etc.), and a correct appreciation of the mode of their combination with those of another group. It will, for instance, be sufficient to ascertain in what manner the features, resulting from a certain mode of execution of the homologies of one type, are combined with structures of another type; or, in other words, to recognize any feature wherever it appears, and not merely within the limits within which structures are strictly homologous. The study of analogies is therefore limited to the investigation of more or less distinct features that are naturally characteristic of one kind of group, in their combination with features of groups of another kind. For instance, the similarity between an insect wing and the wring of a bird is based upon analogy. The entire difference of structure between the organs of flight in these two classes of animals forbids our considering the resem-

T

274 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

blance which exists between them as homological, for they are not built upon homologous structures. But there is analogy between them, inasmuch as the peculiar structure characteristic of two different types is worked up into organs that appear the same because they perform similar functions.

Admitting these distinctions to be correct, the categories of analogy must be like those of homology; either analogies of branch, or of class, or of order, or of family, or of genus, or of species ; and these analogies may either be observed between different branches, classes, orders, families, genera, and species; or features characteristic of branch or of class may be limited to certain families, or even to genera of other branches and other classes; so that the study of analogies becomes very difficult and highly complicated; and these complications have, no doubt, been the source of most errors and inaccuracies in the attempts that have been made to classify the animal kingdom.

Branch analogies. The plan of structure characteristic of the four branches of the animal kingdom are so peculiar that we nowhere find analogies of this kind extending from one branch to all the representatives of another branch. On the contrary, they extend generally to minor divisions of some classes, and rarely to entire classes. Yet, among Mollusks, all the Cephalopods have some analogy with the Radiates in the arrangement of their arms around the mouth. All the Bryozoa have a striking analogy with the Polyps in the crown which spreads around their upper part; and so it is with the tentacles of a large number of the Dorsibranchiate Annelids. There is an unmistakable analogy between the structure of the solid frame of Echinoderms (especially in the star-fishes) and

the plan of structure of the Articulates ; so much so that Oken does not hesitate to refer the Echinoderms to the type of Articulates, mistaking their analogy for true homology.

Class analogies. The ways in which, and the means by which, the plan of structure of one class is carried out, as compared with another class, frequently produce striking analogies. For instance, among Vertebrates the whole class of birds is winged; and wings constructed like the wing of birds exists in no other class. Yet the bats are also winged; and many fishes which are capable of rising above the water are also described as winged. But the wing of a bat is homologous to the foreleg of the other mammalia, and only analogous to that of birds ; for it exhibits the special homologies of the class of mammalia, and not those of the class of birds.1 The same is true of the so-called wings of the flying fishes, in which the wing is a fin, homologous to the pectoral fin of other bony fishes, and not constructed in the same way as the wing of the bat or that of the bird. The wing of insects is entirely different, and its analogy with the wing of birds more remote, than that of the bat and of the flying fish, inasmuch as it is not an analogy between members of different classes of the same branch, but between two classes of different branches, differing therefrom in the plan of structure, and not only in the mode of execution of one and the same plan.

Ordinal analogies. As orders are founded upon the complications of the structure which characterizes the different classes, it is not likely that ordinal analogies will occur between the different orders of one and the same

1 As limbs of Vertebrates these homologous ; but as wings they are two kinds of wings are, nevertheless, only analogous.

276 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

class; we may rather expect them to be prominent between the orders of closely allied classes, or between the orders of a higher class and the lower classes of the same branch. We find, for instance, a remarkable correspondence between the orders of the class of Batrachians, and those of the class of true Reptiles.1 The same may be said of the order of Cetacea in the class of Mammalia, as compared to the whole class of Fishes, or of the lower order of the Insects (the Myriapods) as compared to the class of Worms, or of the lower order of Acalephs (the Hydroids) as compared to the class of Polyps.2 An accurate knowledge of this kind of analogies is of the utmost importance for the study of the true affinities of animals, since a misapprehension of the real value of their structural features has again and again misled zoologists into combining such groups as if they were truly related. In the beginning of the last century, for instance, the Cetacea were generally united with the Fishes, to which they are only analogous ; and even to this day we see the Hydroids, which are true Acalephs of a lower order, united into one class with the Polypi.

Family analogies. It requires little familiarity with the animal kingdom to know how strong may be the resemblance between the forms of animals, even when they belong to entirely different types; but, unless their pattern be determined by identical structural features, their form certainly cannot be considered as homologous; and however close the resemblance may be externally, an attempt to distinguish between analogical and homologi-

1 For further details upon this 2 For further details respecting

point, see the second part of the first the Hydroids, I must refer to the

volume of my Contributions to the third volume of my Contributions to

Nat. Hist, of the Un. St., Sect. Ill, the Nat. Hist, of the Un. St., now in

p. 252. the press.

cal forms cannot fail to add precision to our zoological investigations. When, for instance, the form of the Worms is compared with that of the Holothurians, it should be borne in mind that in the Worms, according to the plan of their structure and their homology to the other Articulates, their longer diameter is the longitudinal diameter; while the longer diameter of the Holothurians, when identified by then1 homologies with the other Radiates, is their vertical diameter. This shews at once, that however similar to one another, the form of the Holothurians is only analogous to that of the Worms.

The limits within which similar forms may be homologous appear to be very wide, and to extend beyond the limits of their respective classes. The form of the Salamanders and the Lizards, for instance, is certainly homological, though they are members of different classes ; yet similar forms within the same class are not necessarily homologous,—for instance, the long snout of Syngnathus, and that of Fistularia, or the flat heads of Lophius and of Scaphirhynchus, are only remotely analogous, their structure being entirely different. The forms of animals have been so imperfectly studied, and the structural elements which determine them so little considered, that the time has hardly come yet to determine with any degree of accuracy the analogies and homologies of the form of animals. Considered with reference to their position, the six pairs of articulated appendages which are placed upon the sides of the mouth of the horse-shoe crab (Limulus) are truly homologous to the jaws of the higher Crustacea ; but by their form they resemble the thoracic legs of the latter; and yet, as appendages to the normal rings of an Articulate, all these parts are homologous. Here, therefore, it becomes necessary to remember that while the

278 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

appendages of the mouth of Limulus are only analogous to the legs of the Decapods, as far as their form is concerned, these organs are yet homologous as parts of the body of an Articulate. This and similar cases may shew how wide a field of investigation lies before us in the study and discrimination of homological and analogical forms.

Generic Analogies. As the generic characters are based upon peculiarities of structure limited to some part or other of an animal, we may expect to find the generic analogies reduced to a resemblance of certain parts of the body and not extending to its general appearance. For while genera, as members of a family, must exhibit the same form, combined with the structural complication of their order, it is obvious that, if there is any generic analogy between animals of different families, their whole form may be widely different and the complication of their structure exhibit entirely different combinations, or be based upon different modes of execution, if they belong to different classes, and even be constructed upon different plans of structure, if they belong to different branches; and yet some of their parts should be similar in some way or other, in order to present a generic analogy.

Now such generic analogies are rather frequent, and may be traced between animals of widely different families, belonging to different orders, nay even to different classes and to different branches ; for instance, there is a marked generic analogy between the dentition of the Insectivora, of the class of Mammalia, and that of the Characini of the class of Fishes, so also between some genera of the family of Sparoids and those of the Chromids, between some genera of the family of Insectivora

and of the Eodentia, and between some of the family of Bombyces and of the Papiliones, etc.

Specific Analogies. If the characteristic features of species be truly found in the relations which animals bear to the surrounding world or to one another, and in the relative proportions of their parts, and their ornamentation, we cannot fail to find specific analogies resulting from these different aspects in animals belonging to different genera, to different families, to different orders, and even to different classes and branches. As far as they are aquatic, animals belonging to different genera which number terrestrial species also, have a certain analogy with one another. All animals living in pairs or in flocks, or isolated, may in this respect be considered as having an analogy to one another, especially if they belong to genera in which different species bear these different relations to one another. But it is in the proportions of the parts to one another in the species of different genera belonging to the same family or even to different families of the same class, and in the ornamentation of their surface, that we observe the most numerous specific analogies. Reference has already been made to the specific homologies resulting from the relative length of the head, the neck, the tail, etc. But there is a specific analogy only between the Zerda, a species of dog found in the interior of Africa, which is characterized by the extraordinary length of its ears, and those species of hare which live also in the desert, and have much larger and longer ears than those inhabiting the woods and marshes. This analogy is no doubt owing to the fact that under the conditions in which these animals are placed, they require a keener perception of sound, and yet they belong to different orders, though of the same class. This is therefore a spe-

'2SO ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

cific analogy. The pattern of colouration may also exhibit specific analogy, as, for instance, in the transverse bands of the tiger when compared to the Quagga, in the spots of the leopard and the Giraffe, which is so striking as to have suggested the name of the latter, Camelo-pardalis.

As it is not my intention here to trace all these analogies throughout the Animal Kingdom, these few examples may suffice to call attention to the subject, and to lead hereafter to a more careful investigation of the different categories of analogy. A few more remarks may, however, find a place here to show how to distinguish analogical from homological features. As homologies, whether extensive or limited, are strictly confined within groups of the same kind, it is evident that unless any feature observed in any animal be common to all the representatives of the group in which it occurs, we shall have good reason to suspect that it is not based upon strict homology, but rather belongs to some category of analogy. If, for instance, the dorsal cord is a fundamental feature of Vertebrates, any structure in the longitudinal axis of an animal which is not structurally identical with the dorsal cord* cannot be homologous with it, but must be something only analogous to it; for instance, the medial stripe which appears during the early development of the embryo of the earlier Crustacea. For the farther progress of the formation of the backbone, we trace the formation of arches below as well as above the dorsal cord, while in Crustacea, there is a similar development only on one side. We are therefore compelled to consider the solid arches of Crustacea only as analogous structures to Vertebrae and not as homologous with them, the more so, since these arches enclose not only the nervous system, a.s iii Vertebrates, but all the other viscera besides. The

system of Articulation in Articulates exhibits, therefore, a Branch analogy with the vertebral system of the Vertebrates, but there is no true homology between them. The class of Fishes is eminently characterized by the presence of gills, and so have Crustacea gills, and so also the Cephalopoda, a large number of Gasteropoda, and most Acephala. But the structure of these gills is widely different in these different classes, and their presence only constitutes class analogies, and is no indication of a real affinity ; while the so-called lungs of the land Gasteropods have the closest structural resemblance to the gills of the other Mollusks, thus showing a real affinity between them, while their air sacks, on account of their gill-like structure, constitute only an analogy between them and the other air-breathing animals. We may go on testing in this way the analogies and homologies in all their degrees and combinations throughout the animal kingdom, and be sure to arrive at satisfactory results, provided we remember that analogies are features of one group combined with the characteristic features of another group, and not, like homologies, circumscribed within one and the same group.

The importance of such an investigation as the preceding must be obvious to every philosophical investigator. As soon as it is understood that all the different groups introduced into a natural system may have a definite meaning; as soon as it can be shown that each exhibits a definite relation among living beings, founded in nature,

282 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

and no more subject to arbitrary modifications than any other law expressing natural phenomena; as soon as it is made plain that the natural limits of all these groups may be ascertained by careful investigations, the interest in the study of classification, or the systematic relationship existing among all organized beings, which has almost ceased to engage the attention of the more careful original investigators, will be revived ; and the manifold ties which link together all animals and plants as the living expression of a gigantic conception, carried out in the course of time, like a soul-breathing epos will be scrutinized anew, determined with greater precision, and expressed with increasing clearness and propriety. Fanciful and artificial classifications will gradually lose their hold upon a better informed community ; scientific men themselves will be restrained from bringing forward immature and premature investigations ; no characteristics of new species will have a claim upon the notice of the learned, which have not been fully investigated, and compared with those most closely allied to it; no genus will be admitted, the structural peculiarities of which are not clearly and distinctly illustrated ; no family will be considered as well founded, which shall not exhibit a distinct system of forms intimately combined and determined by structural relations ; no order will appear admissible, which shall not represent a well-marked degree of structural complication ; no class will deserve that name, which shall not appear as a distinct and independent expression of some general plan of structure, carried out in a peculiar way and with peculiar means; no type will be recognized as one of the fundamental groups of the animal kingdom, which shall not exhibit a plan of its own, not convertible into another. No naturalist will be justified

in introducing any one of these groups into our systems without showing : 1st, that it is a natural group; 2nd, that it is a group of this or that kind, so as to avoid henceforth calling groups that may be genera, families ; groups that may be orders, families; groups that may be orders or classes, classes or branches respectively; 3rd, that the characters by which these groups may be recognized are in fact respectively specific, generic, family, ordinal, classic, or typical characters, so that our works may no longer exhibit the annoying confusion, which is to be met almost everywhere, of generic characters in the diagnoses of species, or of family and ordinal characters in the characteristics of classes and branches.1

It may, perhaps, be said that all this will not render the study of Zoology more easy. I do not expect that it will; but if an attentive consideration of what I have stated in the preceding pages respecting classification should lead to a more accurate investigation of all the different relations existing among animals, and between them and the world in which they live, I shall consider myself as having fully succeeded in the object I have had in view from the beginning, in this inquiry. Moreover, it is high time that certain zoologists, who would call themselves investigators, should remember, that natural objects, to be fully understood, require more than a passing glance ;2 they should imitate the example of astrono-

1 As I do not wish to be personal, indiscriminately to distinguish all

I will refrain from quoting examples these groups.

to justify this assertion. I would 2 The mere indication of the existonly request those who care to be ence of a species is a poor addition accurate, to examine critically almost to our knowledge, when compared to any description of species, any cha- those monographs in which either racterization of genera, of families, the structure or the development of of orders, of classes, or of types, to a single animal is fully illustrated ; satisfy themselves that characters of such as Lyonnet's Anatomy of the the same kind are introduced almost Cossus, Bojauus' Anatomy of the

284 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

mers, who have not become tired of looking into the relations of the few members of our solar system and determining, with increased precision, their motions, their size, their physical constitution, and should keep in mind that every organized being, however simple in its structure, presents to our appreciation far more complicated phenomena, within our reach, than all the celestial bodies put together; they should remember, that, as the great literary productions of past ages attract ever anew the attention of scholars, who never feel that they have exhausted the inquiry into their depth and beauty, so the living works of God, which it is the proper sphere of Zoology to study, will never cease to present new attractions to them, if they proceed to the investigation of them with the right spirit. The study of them, indeed, ought to inspire every one with due reverence and admiration for such wonderful productions.

The subject of classification in particular, which seems to embrace apparently so limited a field in the science of animals, cannot be rightly and fully understood without a comprehensive knowledge of all the topics alluded to in the preceding pages.

Turtle, Strauss-Durckheim's Anato- years will be required, at the present

my of Melolontha, Owen's Anatomy rate of our progress, to investigate

of the Nautilus, Baer's, Bischoff% satisfactorily, and in all their rela-

Rathke's, J. Midler's, Kolliker's, He- tions, the hundred thousands of living

rold's, and so many other embryolo- and extinct animals now known to

gical works. And yet valuable as exist. It might afford some conthese investigations are, they cover solation to those impatient spirits

only a very small part of the field, who quarrel with their fellow-students

It may, indeed, be said that there about the discovery of a hair upon a

hardly appears one such work every stuffed skin, if they only knew what

other year, and that thousands of rich harvests remain to be gathered.

WITHOUT attempting to give an historical account of the leading features of all zoological systems, it is proper that I should here compare critically the practice of modern naturalists with the principles discussed above. With this view, it would hardly be necessary to go back beyond the publication of the "Animal Kingdom", by Cuvier, were it not that Cuvier is still represented by many naturalists, and especially by Ehrenberg1 and some other German zoologists, as favouring the division of the whole animal kingdom into two great groups, one containing the Vertebrates, and the other all the remaining classes, under the name of Invertebrates; while in reality it was he who, dismissing his own earlier views, first introduced into the classification of the animal kingdom that fourfold division which has been the basis of all improvements in modern Zoology. He first showed that animals differ, not only by modifications of one and the same organic structure, but are constructed upon four different plans of structure,

1 EHRENBERG (C. G.), Die Cerallenthiere des rothen Meercs ; Berlin, 1834, 4to., p. 30.

286 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

forming natural, distinct groups, which he called Eadiata, Articulata, Mollusca, and Vertebrata.

It is true that the further subdivisions of these leadingo

groups have undergone many changes since the publication of the " Kegne Animal." Many smaller groups, even entire classes, have been removed from one of his " embranchments" to another; but it is equally true that the characteristic idea winch lies at the bottom of these great divisions was first recognized by him, the greatest zoologist of all time.

The question which I would examine here in particular is, not whether the circumscription of these great groups was accurately denned by Cuvier, whether the minor groups referred to them truly belong there or elsewhere, nor how far these divisions may be improved within their respective limits ; but whether there are four great fundamental groups in the animal kingdom based upon four different plans of structure, and neither more nor less than four. This question is very seasonable, since modern zoologists, and especially Siebold, Leuckart, and Vogt, have proposed combinations of the classes of the animal kingdom into higher groups, differing essentially from those of Cuvier. It is but justice to Leuckart to say that he has exhibited, in the discussion of this subject, an acquaintance with the wdiole range of Invertebrata,1 which demands a careful consideration of the changes he proposes, as they are based upon a critical discrimination of differences of great value, though I think he overrates their importance. The modifications introduced by Vogt, on the contrary, appear to me to be based upon entirely unphysiological principles, though seemingly borrowed from that all important guide, Embryology.

1 LEUCKART (R.), Ueber die Mor- haltnisse der wirbellosen Thiere ; phologie uiid die Verwandtshaftsver- Braunschweig, 1848, 1 TO!. 8vo.

MODERN- SYSTEMS. 287

The divisions adopted by Leuckart are : Protozoa (though he does not enter upon an elaborate consideration of that group), Coelenterata, Echinodermata, Vernies, Arthropoda, Mollusca, and Vertebrata. The classification adopted, many years before, by Siebold, in his text-book of comparative anatomy, is nearly the same, except that the Mollusks follow the Worms, that the Coelenterata and Echinoderms are united into one group, and that the Bryozoa are left among the Polyps.

Here we have a real improvement upon the classification of Cuvier, inasmuch as the Worms are removed from among the Eadiates, and brought nearer the Arthropods, ah improvement, however, which, so far as it is correct, has already been anticipated by many naturalists, since Blainville and other zoologists long ago felt the impropriety of allowing them to remain among Eadiates, and have been induced to associate them, more or less closely with Articulates. But I believe the union of the Bryozoa and Kotifera with the Worms, proposed by Leuckart, to be a great mistake ; and as to the separation of the Coelenterata from the Echinoderms, I consider it as an exaggeration of the difference which exists between the Polyps and Acalephs on the one hand, and the Echinoderms on the other.1

1 The readiness with which the class, founded upon a special mode

German naturalists have acquiesced of execution of the plan which distinin the proposition of Leuckart to guishes the Radiata from the other

unite the Polyps and Acalephs into branches of the animal kingdom,

one class, seems to be owing to the Their investigations have truly shown,

circumstance that their opportunities what several French naturalists have

for studying the Polyps have been long maintained, that many families

chiefly limited to the Actinias. Had of Radiata, long referred to the class

they been able to extend their invcs- of Polyps, such as the Hydroids, cantigations to the Astrseans and Madre- not be separated from the Acalephs ,

pores, and to the many types of Haley- but they have been misled, by the

onoids which characterize the Faunas evidence thus obtained, to an exagof the tropics, they could not have geration of the affinities of the Acafailed to perceive that the Polyps lephs and Polyps. The Polyps, as a

constitute for themselves a distinct class, differ from the Acalephs in ex-

288 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

The fundamental groups adopted by Vogt1 are : Protozoa, Kadiata, Vermes, Mollusca, Cephalopoda, Articulata, and Vertebrata, an arrangement which is based solely upon the relations of the embryo to the yolk, or the absence of eggs. But, as I have already stated, this is an entirely unphysiological principle, inasmuch as it assumes a contrast between the yolk and the embryo within limits which do not exist in nature. The Mammalia, for instance, which are placed, like all other Vertebrata, in the category of the animals in which there is an opposition between the embryo and the yolk, are as much formed of the whole yolk as the Echinoderms or Mollusks. The yolk undergoes a complete segmentation in the Mammalia, as well as in the Kadiates, the Worms and most Mollusks ; and the embryo, when it makes its appearance, no more stands out from the yolk than the little Starfish stands out from its yolk. These simple facts, known since Sars and Bischoff published their first observations twenty years ago, is in itself sufficient to show that the whole principle of classification of Vogt is radically wrong. » Eespecting the assertion, that neither Infusoria nor

Minting radiating partitions, project- kind as those that project around the ing inward from the outer wall of upper margin of the main cavity, the body into the main cavity, and Again, the marginal tentacles of the in having a digestive cavity derived Acalephs are homologous to those of from the inversion of the upper part the Polyps, while their oral appendof that wall into the upper part of ages are characteristic of their class. the main cavity. In Acalephs there I may add also that the radiating are no radiating partitions, and the partitions of the Rugosa, which I redigestive cavity is hollowed out of fer to the Acalephs, as well as the the mass of the body ; the central Tabulata, are not homologous to the prolongation of the body rising above radiating partitions of the Actiuoids the digestive cavity in the shape of and Halcyonoids, but correspond to oral appendages, which are never the ridges of the stem of certain Halhollow as the tentacles of the Polyps cyouoids, and are, like them, a foot are. The mouth tentacles of Cerian- secretion. v thus, which are hollow, are not ho- l VOGT (CARL), ZoologischeBriefe. mologous to the oral appendages of Naturgeschichte der lebenden und the Acalephs, but constitute only an untergegangenen Thiere. Frankfurt inner row of tentacles, of the same a M., 1851 ; vol. i, p. 70.

Khizopoda produce any eggs, I shall have more to say presently. As to the arrangement of the leading groups, Vertebrata, Articulata, Cephalopoda, Mollusca, Venues, Eadiata, and Protozoa in Vogt's system, it must be apparent to every zoologist conversant with the natural affinities of animals, that a classification which interposes the whole series of Mollusks between the types of Articulata and Worms cannot be correct. A classification based, like this, solely upon the changes which the yolk undergoes, is not likely to be the natural expression of the manifold relations existing between all animals. Indeed, no system can be true to nature which is based upon the consideration of a single part or a single organ.

After these general remarks, I have only to show more in detail why I believe that there are only four great fundamental groups in the animal kingdom, neither more nor less.

With reference to Protozoa, first, it must be acknowledged, that, notwithstanding the extensive investigation of modern writers upon Infusoria and Ehizopoda, the true nature of these beings is still very little known. The Ehizopoda have been wandering from one end of the series of Invertebrata to the other, without finding a place generally acknowledged as expressing their true affinities. The attempt to separate them from all the classes with which they have been so long associated, and to place them with the Infusoria in one distinct branch, appears to me as mistaken as any of the former arrangements ; for I do not even consider that their animal nature is yet proved beyond a doubt, though I have myself once suggested the possibility of a definite relation between them and the lowest Gasteropoda.1 Since it

1 Comp. Chap. I, Sect. 18, p. 113.

U

290 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

has been satisfactorily ascertained that the Corallines and Nullipores are genuine Algae which contain more or less lime in their structure, and since there is hardly any group among the lower animals and lower plants which does not contain simple locomotive individuals, as well as compound communities, either free or adhering to the soil, I do not see that the facts known at present preclude the possibility of an association of the Ehizopods with the Algae. This would almost seem natural, when we consider that the vesicles of many Fuci contain a viscid, filamentous substance, so similar to that protruded from the body of the Rhizopods, that the most careful microscopic examination does not disclose the slightest difference in its structure from that which mainly forms the body of Rhizopods. The discovery by Schultze1 of what he considers as the germinal granules of these beings by no means settles this question, since we have similar ovoid masses in Algae, and since, among the latter, locomotive forms are also very numerous.2

"With reference to the Infusoria, I have long since expressed my conviction that they are an unnatural combination of the most heterogeneous beings. A large number of them, the Desmidieae and Volvocinae, are locomotive Algae. Indeed, recent investigations seem to have established beyond all question the fact, that all the Infusoria Anentera of Ehrenberg are Algae.3 The Enterodela, however, are true animals, but belong to two very distinct types, for the Vorticellidae differ entirely from all

1 ScnuLTZE(M.S.),Polythalamien, more I examine these enigmatical q. a., p. 24. bodies the more do they impress me

2 The recent investigations of Ehr- as being allied to the lower Alga; and enberg and J. Muller, q. a., p. 113, to the Sponges, rather than to any note 2, indicate a very close affinity type of the animal kingdom, between the Thalassicolne, the Poly- 3 Comp. the works, q. a., p. 113, cystinee and the Rhizopods; and the note 2.

others. Indeed, they are, in my opinion, the only independent animals of that group ; and, so far from having any natural affinity with the other Enterodela, I do not doubt that their true place is by the side of the Bryozoa, among the Mollusks, as I shall attempt to show presently. Isolated observations which I have been able to make upon Paramecium, Opalina, and the like, seem to me sufficient to justify the assumption that they disclose the true nature of the bulk of this group. I have seen, for instance, a Planaria lay eggs out of which Paramecia were born, which underwent all the changes these animals are known to undergo up to the time of their contraction into a chrysalis state ; while the Opalina is hatched from Distoma's eggs. I shall publish the details of these observations on another occasion. But if it can be shown that two such types as Paramecium and Opalina are the progeny of Worms, it seems to me to follow that all the Enterodela, with the exception of the Vorticellidse, must be considered as the embryonic condition of that host of Worms, both parasitic and free, the metamorphosis of which is still unstudied. In this connection I might further remark, that the time is not long past when Cercaria was also considered as belonging to the class of Infusoria, though at present no one doubts that it belongs to the cycle of Distoma ; and the only link in the metamorphosis of that genus which was not known is now supplied, since, as I have stated above, the embryo which is hatched from the egg laid by the perfect Distoma is found to be Opalina.

All this leads to the conclusion, that a division of the animal kingdom to be called Protozoa, differing from all other animals in producing no eggs, does not exist in nature, and that the beings which have been referred to

u 2

292 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

it have now to be divided, and scattered, partly among plants in the class of Algce, and partly among animals in the classes of Acephala, (Yorticelloe,) of Worms, (Pararnecium and Opalina,) and of Crustacea (Rotifera) ; the Vorticellse being genuine Bryozoa, and therefore Acephalous Mollusks ; while the beautiful investigations of Dana and Leydig have proved the Rotifera to be genuine Crustacea, and not Worms.

The great type of Radiata, taking its leading features only, was first recognized by Cuvier, though he associated with it many animals which do not properly belong to it. This arose partly from the imperfect knowledge of those animals at the time, but partly also from the fact that he allowed himself, in this instance, to deviate from his own principle of classification, according to which types are founded upon special plans of structure. With reference to Radiata, he departed, indeed, from this view, so far as to admit, besides the consideration of their peculiar plan, the element of simplicity of their structure as an essential feature in the typical character of these animals, in consequence of which he introduced five classes among Radiata : the Echinoderms, Intestinal Worms, Acalephs, Polypi, and Infusoria. In opposition to this unnatural association I need not repeat here what I have already stated of the Infusoria, when considering the case of Protozoa ; neither is it necessary to urge again the propriety of removing the Worms from among the Radiata and connecting them with the Articulata. There would thus remain only three classes among Radiates,— Polypi, Acalephs, and Echinoderms, — which, in my opinion, constitute really three natural classes in this great division, inasmuch as they exhibit the three different ways in which the characteristic plan of the type, radiation, is carried out, in distinct structures.

Since it can Le shown that Echinoderms arc, in a general way, homologous in their structure with Acalephs and Polypi, it must be admitted that these classes belongto one and the same great type, and that they are the only representatives of the branch of Kadiata, assuming of course that Bryozoa, Corallmse, Sponges, and all other foreign admixtures, have been removed from among Polyps. Now, it is this Cuvierian type of Eadiata, thus freed of all its heterogeneous elements, which Leuckart undertakes to divide into two branches, each of which he considers coequal with Worms, Articulates, Mollusks, and Vertebrates. He was undoubtedly led to this exaggeration of the difference existing between Echinoderms on one side, and Acalephs and Polypi on the other, by the apparently greater resemblance of Medusae and Polypi,1 and perhaps still more by the fact, that so many genuine Acalephs, such as the Hydroids, including Tubularia, Sertularia, Campanularia, etc., are still comprised by most zoologists in the class of Polypi.

But since the admirable investigations of J. Miiller have made us familiar with the extraordinary metamorphosis of Echinoderms, and since the Ctenophorse and the Siphonophorse have also been more carefully studied by Grube, Leuckart, Kolliker, Vogt, Gegenbaur, and myself, the distance which seemed to separate Echinoderms from Acalephs disappears entirely, for it is no exaggeration to say, that, were the Pluteus-like forms of Echinoderms not known to be an early stage in the transformation of Echinoderms, they would find as natural a place among Ctenophorse, as the larvae of Insects among Worms. I therefore maintain, that Polypi, Acalephs, and Echino-

1 We see here clearly how the con- den the primary feature of branches, sideration of anatomical differences their plan, and exalted a class to the Avhich characterize classes hasoverrid- rank of a branch.

294 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

derms constitute one indivisible primary group of the animal kingdom. The Polypoid character of young Medusae proves this as plainly as the Medusoid character of young Echinoderms.

Further, nothing can be more unnatural than the transfer of Ctenophorse to the type of Mollusks which Vogt has proposed, for Ctenophorse exhibit the closest homology with the other Medusoe, as I have shown in my paper on the Beroid Medusoe of Massachusetts. The Ctenophoroid character of young Echinoderms establishes a second connection between Ctenophorse and the other Radiata, of as great importance as the first. We have thus an anatomical link to connect the Ctenophorse with the genuine Medusoe, and an cmbryological link to connect them with the Echinoderms.

The classification of Radiata may therefore stand thus :

1st Class : Polypi; including two orders, the Actinioids and the Halcyonioids, as limited by Dana.

2nd Class : Accdephce; with the following orders : Hydroids, (including Siphonophorse,) Discophoree, and Ctenophoroe.

3rd Class : Echinoderms; with Crinoids, Asterioids, Echinoids, and Holothurioids, as orders.

The natural limits of the branch of Mollusks are easily determined. Since the Cirripeds have been removed to the branch of Articulata, naturalists have generally agreed to consider, with Cuvier, the Cephalopods, Pteropods, Gasteropoda, and Acephala as forming the bulk of this type, and the discrepancies between modern investigators have mainly resulted from the views they have taken respecting the Bryozoa, which some still consider as Polyps, while others would unite them with the Worms, though their affinity with the Mollusks seems to me to

have been clearly demonstrated by the investigations of Milne-Edwards. Vogt is the only naturalist who considers the Cephalopoda " as built upon a plan entirely peculiar";1 though he does not show in what this peculiarity of plan consists, but only mentions the well-known anatomical differences which distinguish them from, the other classes of the branch of Mollusks. These differences, however, constitute only class characters, and exhibit in no way a different plan. It is, indeed, by no means difficult to honiologize all the systems of organs of the Cephalopods with those of the other Mollusks,2 and with this evidence the proof is also furnished that the Cephalopods constitute only a class among the Mollusks. As to the differences in the development of the Cephalopods and the other Mollusks, the type of Vertebrata teaches us that partial and total segmentation of the yolk is not inconsistent with unity of type, as the eggs of Mammalia and Cyclostomata undergo a total segmentation, while the process of segmentation is more or less limited in the other classes. In Birds, Keptiles, and Selachians, the segmentation is only superficial ; in Batrachians, and most Fishes, it is much deeper ; and yet no one would venture to separate the Vertebrata into several distinct branches on that account. With reference to Bryozoa, there can be no doubt that their association with Polypi or with Worms is contrary to their natural affinities. The plan of their structure is in no way radiate ; it is, on the contrary, distinctly and essentially bilateral ; and as soon as their close affinities with

1 VOGT (C.), Zoologische Briefe, Cephalous Mollusca, Tr. Roy. Soc. ; q. a., vol. i, p. 361. London, 1853, p. 29. — V. CARUS,

2 See LEUCKART, Ueber die Mor- System der thierischeu Morphologic phologie, etc., q. a., p. 24, note 2. — q. a., p. 24, note 2.

EUXLEY, On the Morphology of the

296 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the Brachiopods, alluded to above,1 are fully understood, no doubt will remain of their true relation to Mollusks. As it is not within the limits of my plan to illustrate here the characters of all the classes of the animal kingdom, I will only state further, that the branch of Mollusks appears to me to contain only three classes, as follows :—

1st Class: Acepliala; with four orders, Bryozoa, (including the Vorticellse) Brachiopoda, Tunicata, and Lamellibranchiata.

2nd Class : Gasteropoda; with three orders, Pteropoda, Heteropoda, and Gasteropoda proper.

3rd Class : Cephalopoda ; with two orders, Tetrabranchiata and Dibranchiata.

The most objectionable modification introduced in the general classification of the animal kingdom, since the appearance of Cuvier's Kegne Animal, seems to me to be the establishment of a distinct branch, now very generally admitted under the name of VERMES, including the Annulata, the Helminths, the Eotifera, and, as Leuckardt would have it, the Bryozoa also. It was certainly an improvement upon Cuvier's system to remove the Helminths from the type of Eadiates ; but it was at the same time as truly a retrograde step to separate the Annelides from the branch of Articulata. The most minute comparison does not lead to the discovery of a distinct plan of structure, uniting all these animals into one natural primary group. What holds them together and keeps them at a distance2 from the other Articulate groups is not a different plan of structure, but a greater simplicity in their organization.3 In bringing these animals to-

1 Chap. I, Sect. 18, p. 108. 2 Chap. II, Sect. 7, pp. 261-263.

3 See above, Chap. I, Sect, 18, pp. 112, 113.

gi-ther, naturalists make again the same mistake which

O O

Cuvier committed, \vheii he associated the Helminths with the Kadiates, only in another way and upon a greater scale.1 The Bryozoa are as it were depauperated Mollusks, as Aphanes and Alchemilla are depauperated Eosaceee. Eotifera are in the same sense the lowest Crustacea ; while Helminths and Annelides constitute together the lowest class of Articulata. This class is

O

connected by the closest homology with the larval states of Insects ; the plan of their structure is identical, and there exists between them only such structural differences as constitute classes.2 Moreover, the Helminths are linked to the Annelides in the same manner as the apodal larvee of Insects are to the most highly organized caterpillars. It may truly be said that the class of Worms represents, in perfect animals, the embryonic states of the higher Articulata. The two other classes of this

O

branch are the Crustacea and the Insects, respecting the limits of which, as much has already been said above3 as it is necessary to state here.

The classification of the branch of Articulata may, therefore, stand thus :—

1st Class: Worms; with three orders, Trematods, (including Cestods, Planarise, and Leeches,) Nematoids, (including Acanthocephala and Gordiacei,) and Annelides.

2nd Class : Crustacea ; with four orders, Eotifera, Entomostraca, (including Cirripeds,) Tetradecapods, and Decapods.

3rd Class : Insects ; with three orders, Myriapods, Arachnids, and Insects proper.

1 Compare Chap. II, Sect. 1, p. 21 G. 3 Compare Chap. I, Sect. 18, p. '2 Compare Chap. II, Sect. 2, p. 219. 118-120.

LIBRARY

298 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

There is not a dissenting voice among anatomists respecting the natural limits of the Vertebrata as a branch of the animal kingdom. Their character, however, does not so much consist in the structure of their backbone or the presence of a dorsal cord, as in the general plan of that structure, which exhibits a cavity above and a cavity below a solid axis. These two cavities are circumscribed by complicated arches, arising from the axis, which are made up of different systems of organs, the skeleton, the muscles, vessels, and nerves, and include, the upper one the centres of the nervous system, the lower one the different systems of organs by which assimilation and reproduction are carried on.

The number and limits of the classes of this branch are not yet satisfactorily ascertained. At least, naturalists do not agree about them. For my part, I believe that the Marsupialia cannot be separated from the Placental Mammalia as a distinct class, since we observe, within the limits of another type of Vertebrata, the Selachians, which cannot be subdivided into classes, similar differences in the mode of development to those winch exist between the Marsupials and the other Mammalia. But I hold at the same time with other naturalists, that the Batrachia must be separated, as a class, from the true Eeptiles, as the characters which distinguish them are of the kind upon which classes are founded. I am also satisfied that the differences which exist between the Selachians (the Skates, Sharks, and Chimserse) and the Fishes, are of the same kind as those which distinguish the Amphibians from the Eeptiles proper, and justify, therefore, their separation, as a class, from the Fishes proper. I consider also the Cyclostomes as a distinct class, for similar reasons ; but I am still doubtful whether

the Ganoids should be also separated from the ordinary Fishes. This, however, cannot be decided until their embryological development has been thoroughly investigated, though I have already collected data which favour this view of the case. Should this expectation be realized, the branch of Vertebrata would contain the following classes :—

1st Class: Myzontes ; with two orders, Myxinoids and Cyclostomes.

2nd Class: Fishes proper; with two orders, Ctcnoids and Cycloids.1

3rd Class : Ganoids ; with three orders, Coelacanths, Acipenseroids, and Sauroids; and doubtful, the Siluroids, Plectognaths, and Lophobranches.2

4th Class: Selachians; with three orders, Chimaerse, Galeodes, and Batides.

5th Class : Amphibians ; with three orders, Ccecilke, Ichthyodi, and Anura.

6th Class: Reptiles-, with four orders, Serpentes, Saurii, Ehizodontes, and Testudinata.

7th Class: Birds; with four orders, Natatores, Grallae, Easores, and Insessores (including Scansores and Accipitres.)

8th Class: Mammalia; with three orders, Marsupialia, Herbivora, and Carnivora.3

1 I am satisfied that this subdivi- lumns, as other fishes do ; but chiefly

sion of the Fishes proper requires by an undulatory movement of their

modifications ; but I fear it would vertical fins, resembling very much

lead me too far, were I to discuss the mode of action of the vibratile

here the reasons for the changes I membranes. In this they resemble

propose to introduce into it. the young Lepidosteus; and I consia I have observed a very curious der this fact as a new argument in and peculiar mode of locomotion in favour of their association with the all the Lophobranches, Scleroderms true Ganoids. Comp. also the ream! Gymnodontes, which I have seen marks respecting the limits of the alive. They do not progre.ss by the Ganoids, p. 242. lateral motions of the vertebral co- 3 Since this chapter was written

300 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

I shall avail myself of an early opportunity to investigate more fully how far these groups of Vertebrata exhibit such characters as distinguish classes ; and I submit my present impressions upon this subject, rather as suggestions for further researches than as matured results.

Oo

So few naturalists have paid special attention to the foundation of the classification of the animal kingdom in general, that I deem it necessary to allude to the different principles, which, at different times, have guided zoologists in their attempts to group animals according to their natural affinities. This, I hope, will appear the more acceptable, in a work at first published with special reference to the wants of naturalists in America, since few of the libraries of this continent contain even the leading works of our science, and many zealous students are thus prevented from even attempting to make themselves familiar with what has thus far been done in this direction.

Science began, in the introduction of names, to designate natural groups of different value with the same vagueness which still prevails in ordinary language in the use of class, order, genus, family, species ; taking them either as synonyms or substituting one for the other at random. Linnseus was the first to urge upon naturalists

Owen has published his invaluable themselves. See OWEN (R.), On the

paper upon the classification of Mam- Characters, Principles of Division,

malia, which furnishes most import- and Primary Groups of the Class

ant new data for a discussion of the Mammalia ; Proceed. Linn. Society,

true affinities of Mammalia, amouy lfc)57.

precision in four kinds of groups in natural history, which he calls classes, orders, genera, and species.

Aristotle, and the ancient philosophers generally, distinguish only two kinds of groups among animals, 761/09 and elSo? (genus and species). But the term genus had a most unequal meaning, applying at times indiscriminately to any extensive group of species, and designating even what we now call classes as well as any other minor group. In the sense of class it is taken in the following case :

Xeyw Be 761/09, olov opvt,6a, real lyQvv (Arist., Hist. Anim., Lib.

I, Chap. I), while eISo9 is generally used for species, as the

following sentence shows : Kal ea-riv e/iBi] Tfh-eiw l-^dvwv teal

opviOwv, though it has occasionally also a wider meaning. The sixth chapter of the same book is the most important in the whole work of Aristotle upon this subject, as it shows to how many different kinds of groups the term 76^09 is applied. Here he distinguishes between

jiara and yew) fjieyciXa and 761/09 shortly. Tevrj Be

TWV £fjL>u)v, 6t9 a Biatpeirai raX\a £,u>a, raS' ea-rtv ev fiev opvidwv,

ev B1 l-^Qvwv, aAAo Be KIJTOVS. "AXXo Be 761/09 ecrrl TO rwv ocrrpa-

Ko8ep/j,cov Twv Be XoiTrcoy faatv ov/c eart ra <yevr) /j,6<yd\a'

ov jap Trepie^ei 7ro\\a eiBr) ev elBos, . . . . ra B' ey^ei pev, a

This is further insisted upon anew : rov Be

TeTpcnroBwv fyJacov teal 'CfAWTOKutv e'lBrj fjiev elcn 7r6\\a, avcavv/^a

Be. Here ^809 has evidently a wider meaning than our term species ; and the accurate Scaliger translates it by genus medium, in contradistinction to 76^09, which he renders by genus summum. EISo9, however, is generally used for species, in the same sense as we now distinguish them ; and Aristotle already considers fecundity as a specific character, when he says, of the Hemionos, that it is called so from its likeness to the Ass, and not because it is of the same species; for, he adds, they copulate and propa-

302 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

gate among themselves : at KO\OVVTGU, rj/Aiovot, Si 6/

OVK ovcrat aTrXw? TO avrb eZSo9* Kal jap 6-^evovrac /cal <yevva)vrai

1% d\\t]~\,wv. In another passage 76^09 applies, however, to a group exactly identical with our modern genus Equus :

eVel e&Tiv ev TI 761/09 KOI CTTL Tot9 e^ovcri ^aiTriv, \o(f)ovpo(,<; tca- \ovjj,evois} oiov 'ITTTTW Kal ova> Kal opel Kal <ytvva) Kal ivvu> Kal rot9 ev 'Zvpta Ka\ovfAevai<; rj/j,(,6vot,$.

Aristotle cannot be said to have proposed any regular classification. He speaks constantly of more or less extensive groups tinder a common appellation, evidently considering them as natural divisions; but he nowhere expresses a conviction that these groups may be arranged methodically, so as to exhibit the natural affinities of animals. Yet he frequently introduces Ms remarks respecting different animals in such an order and in such connexions as clearly to indicate that he knew their relations. When speaking of Fishes, for instance, he never includes the Selachians.

After Aristotle, the systematic classification of animals makes no progress for two thousand years, until Linnaeus introduces new distinctions and assigns a more precise meaning to the term class (genus summum), order (genus intermedium), genus (genus proximum), and species, the two first of winch are introduced by him for the first time as distinct groups, under these names, into the system of Zoology.

PERIOD OF LINN^tTS.

AVhen looking over the "Systema Naturoe" of Linnaeus, taking as the standard of our appreciation even the twelfth edition, which is the last he edited himself, it is hardly

possible, in our day, to realize how great was the influence of that work upon the progress of Zoology.1 And yet it acted like magic upon the age, and stimulated it to exertions far surpassing any thing that had been done in preceding centuries. Such a result must be ascribed partly to the circumstance that he was the first man who ever conceived distinctly the idea of expressing in a definite form what he considered to be a system of nature, and partly also to the great comprehensiveness, simplicity, and clearness of his method. Discarding in his system everything that could not easily be ascertained, he for the first time divided the animal kingdom into distinct classes, characterized by definite features; he also for the first time introduced orders into the system of Zoology besides genera and species, which had been vaguely distinguished before.2 And, though he did not even attempt to define the characteristics of these different kinds of groups, it is plain, from his numerous writings, that he considered them all as subdivisions of a successively more limited value, embracing a larger or smaller number of animals, agreeing in more or less comprehensive attributes. He expresses his views of these relations between classes, orders, genera, species, and varieties, by comparisons, in the following manner:—

1 To appreciate correctly the sue- eighth, and ninth, are reprints of the cessive improvements of the classifi- sixth ; the eleventh is a reprint of cation of Linnseus, we need only the tenth ; and the thirteenth, pubcompare the first edition of the Sys- lishecl after his death, by Gmelin, is tenia Naturae, published in 1735; a mere compilation, deserving of little with the second, published in 1740; confidence.

the sixth, published in 1748; the 3 See above, Sect. II, p. 301. The

tenth, published in 1758 ; and the ytv-n neyirrra of Aristotle correspond,

twelfth, published in 1 766, as they however, to the classes of Linnaaus ;

are the only editions he revised him-- the *y4vn fj.tyd\a to his orders, self. The third is only a reprint of 3 See Systeina Naturte, 12th edit.,

the first, the fourth and fifth are re- p. 13. prints of the second ; the seventh,

304 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Classis. Genus summum.

Ordo.

Genus iutermedium.

Genus. Genus proximum.

/Species. Species.

Varietas. Individuum.

Provincise. Legiones.

Territoria. Cohortes.

Paroecise. Manipuli.

Pagi. Coutubernia.

Domicilium. Miles.

His arrangement of the animal kingdom is presented in the following diagram, compiled from the twelfth edition, published in 1766.

CL. 1 . MAMMALIA. Ord. Primates, Bruta, Fera:, Glires, Pecora, Belluae,

Cete.

CL. 2. AVES. Ord. Accipitres, Picas, Anseres, Grallas, Gallinse, Passeres. CL. 3. AMPHIBIA. Ord. Reptiles, Serpentes, Nantes. CL. 4. PISCES. Ord. Apodes, Jugulares, Thoracici, Abdomiuales. CL. 5. INSECTA. Ord. Coleoptera, Hemiptera, Lepidoptera, Neuroptera,

Hymenoptera, Diptera, Aptera. CL. 6. VERMES. Ord. Intestina, Mollusca, Testacea, Lithophyta, Zoophyta.

Iii the earlier editions, up to the tenth, the class of Mammalia was called Quadrupedia, and did not contain the Cetaceans, which were still included among the Fishes. There seems never to have existed any discrepancy among naturalists respecting the natural limits of the class of Birds, since it was first characterized by Linnseus, in a manner which excluded the Bats and referred them to the class of Mammalia. In the early editions of the " Systeina Naturae," the class of Eeptiles embraces the same animals as in the systems of the most recent investigators; but since the tenth edition, it has been encumbered with the addition of the cartilaginous and semicartilaginous Fishes, a retrograde movement suggested by some inaccurate observations of Dr. Garden. The class of Fishes is very well limited in the early editions of the Systema, with the exception of the admission of the Cetaceans (Plagiuri), which were correctly referred to the

class of Mammalia, in the tenth edition. In the later editions, however, the Cyclostoms, Plagiostoms, Chimrerae, Sturgeons, Lophioids, Discoboli, Gymnodonts, Scleroderms, and Lophobranch.es are excluded from it, and referred to the class of Eeptiles. The class of Insects,1 as limited by Linnaeus, embraces not only what are now considered as Insects proper, but also the Myriapods, the Arachnids, and the Crustacea; it corresponds more accurately to the division of Arthropoda of modern systernatists. The class of Worms, the most heterogeneous of all, includes besides all the Radiata or Zoophytes and Mollusks of modern writers, also the Worms, intestinal and free, the Cirripeds, and one Fish (Myxine). It was left for Cuvier2 to introduce order into this chaos.

Such, with its excellences and short-comings, is the classification which gave a most unexpected and unprecented impulse to the study of Zoology. It is useful to remember how lately a performance, even so imperfect, has so greatly influenced the progress of science, in order to understand why it is still possible that so much may remain to be done in systematic Zoology. Nothing, indeed, can be more instructive to the student of Natural History than a careful and minute comparison of the different editions of the " Systema Naturae" of Linnaeus, and of the works of Cuvier and other prominent

1 Aristotle divides this group more 3 It would be injustice to Aristotle

correctly than Linnaeus, as he admits not to mention that he already uuderalready two classes (yivii ntyuna) stood the relations of the animals

among them, the Malacostraca (Crus- unitedintooneclassbyLinna3us,under

tacea), and the Entoma (Insects), the name of Worms, better than the

Hist. Anim., Chap. vi. He seems great Swedish naturalist. Speaking,

also to have understood correctly the for instance, of the great genera or

natural limits of the classes of Mam- classes, he separates correctly the

malia and Reptiles, for he distin- Cephalopods from the other Mollusks,

guishes the Viviparous and Ovipa- under the name of Malakia. Hist,

rous Quadrupeds, and nowhere con- Aiiim., Lib. I, Chap. vi. founds Fishes with Reptiles. Ibid.

X

306 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

zoologists, in order to detect the methods by which real progress is made in our science.

Since the publication of the " Systema Natures," up to the time when Cuvier published the results of his anatomical investigations, all the attempts at new classifications were, after all, only modifications of the principles introduced by Linnseus in the systematic arrangement of animals. Even his opponents laboured under the influence of his master spirit, and a critical comparison of the various systems which were proposed for the arrangement of single classes, or of the whole animal kingdom, shows that they were framed according to the same principles, namely, under the impression that animals were to be arranged together into classes, orders, genera, and species, according; to their more or less close external resemblance.

o

No sooner, however, had Cuvier presented to the scientific world his extensive researches into the internal structure of the whole animal kingdom, than naturalists vied with one another in their attempts to remodel the whole classification of animals, establishing new classes, new orders, new genera, describing new species, and introducing all manner of intermediate divisions and subdivisions, under the name of families, tribes, sections, etc. Foremost in these attempts was Cuvier himself, and next to him Lamarck. It has, however, often happened that the divisions introduced by the latter under new names were only translations into a more systematic form of the results Cuvier had himself obtained from Ins dissections, and pointed out in his " Leyons sur 1'anatomie comparee" as natural divisions, but without giving them distinct names. Cuvier himself beautifully expresses the influence which his anatomical investigations had upon Zoology, and how the improvements in classification have contri-

butecl to advance comparative anatomy, when he says, in the preface to the Regne Animal, page vi: " Je clus done, et cette obligation me prit un temps considerable, je dus faire marcher de front Tauatomie et la zoologie, les dissections et le classement; chercher dans mes premieres remarques sur I'organisation, des distributions meilleures ; m'eii servir pour arriver a des remarques nouvelles; employer encore ces remarques a perfectionner les distributions ; faire sortir enfin de cette fecondation mutuelle des deux sciences l'ime par 1'autre, un systeme zoologique propre a servir d'introducteur et de guide dans le champ de 1'anatomie, et un corps de doctrine anatomique propre a servir de developpement et d'explication au systeme zoologique."

Without entering into a detailed account of all that was done in this period towards improving the system of Zoology, it may suffice to say, that, before the first decade of this century had passed, more than twice as many classes as Linnaeus adopted had been characterized in this manner. These classes are : the Mollusks, Cirripeds, Crustacea, Arachnids, Annelids, Entozoa (Intestinal Worms), Zoophytes, Eadiata, Polyps, and Infusoria. Cuvier1 admitted at first only eight classes, Dumeril2 nine, Lamarck3 eleven and afterwards fourteen. The Cephalopoda, Gasteropoda, and Acephala, first so named by Cuvier, are in the beginning considered by him as orders only in the class of Mollusks; the Echinoderms also, though for the first time circumscribed by him within their natural limits, constitute only an order of the class of Zoophytes,

1 CUVIER (G.), Tableau elementaire 3 LAMARCK (J. B. DE), Systeme

de 1'Histoire naturelle des Aniuiaux; des Animaux sans Vertebres, ou Ta-

Paris, 1 798, 1 vol. 8vo. bleau general, etc.; Paris, 1801, 1

3 DUMERIL (A. M. C.), Zoologie vol. 8vo. — Histoire naturelle des Anianalytique, etc. ; Paris, 1806, 1 vol. maux sans Vertebres, etc. ; Paris,

8vo. 1815-1822, 7 vols. 8vo.

x 2

308 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

not to speak of the lowest animals, which, from want of knowledge of their internal structure, still remain in great confusion. In this rapid sketch of the farther subdivisions which the Classes Insecta and Worms of Linnaeus have undergone under the influence of Cuvier, I have not, of course, alluded to the important contributions made to our knowledge of isolated classes by special writers, but limited my remarks to the works of those naturalists who have considered the subject upon the most extensive scale.

Thus far no attempt had been made to combine the classes among themselves into more comprehensive divisions, under a higher point of view, beyond that of dividing the whole animal kingdom into Vertebrata and Invertebrata, a division which corresponds to that of Aristotle, into tya Ivaipa and &a avaijjia. All efforts were rather directed towards establishing a natural series, from the lowest Infusoria up to Man; which, with many, soon became a favourite tendency, and ended in being presented as a scientific doctrine by Blainville.

The most important period in the history of Zoology begins, however, with the year 1812, when Cuvier laid before the Academy of Sciences in Paris the results of his investigations upon the more intimate relations of certain classes of the animal kingdom to one another,1 which had satisfied him that all animals are constructed upon four different plans, or, as it were, cast in four dif-

1 Ann. clu Museum d'Histoire Naturelle, vol. xix; Paris, 1812.

ferent moulds. A more suggestive view of the subject never was presented before to the appreciation of investigators ; and, though it has as yet by no means produced all the results which certainly must flow from its further consideration, it has already led to the most unquestionable improvements which classification in general has made since the days of Aristotle ; and, if I am not greatly mistaken, it is only so far as that fundamental principle has been adhered to that the changes proposed in our systems by later writers have proved a real progress, and not so many retrograde steps.

This great principle, introduced into our science by Cuvier, is expressed by him in these memorable words: " Si Ton considere le regne animal d'apres les principes que nous venons de poser, en se debarrassant des prejuges etablis sur les divisions anciennenient admises, en n'ayant egard qu'a reorganisation et a la nature des animaux, et non pas a leur grandeur, a leur utilite, au plus ou moins de connaissance que nous en avons, ni a toutes les autres circonstances accessoires, on trouvera qu'il existe quatre formes principales, quatre plans generaux, si Ton peut s'exprimer ainsi, d'apres lesquels tous les animaux semblent avoir ete modeles et dont les divisions ulterieures, de quelque titre que les naturalistes les aient decorees, ne sont que des modifications assez legeres, fondees sur le developpement ou I'addition de quelques parties, qui ne changent rien a 1'essence du plan."

It is therefore incredible to me how, in presence of such explicit expressions, Cuvier can be represented, as he still is occasionally, as favouring a division of the animal kingdom into Vertebrata and Invertebrata.1 Cuvier,

1 EHRENBERG (C. G.), Die Corallenthiere des rothen Meeres ; Berlin, 1834, 4to., p. 30, note.

310 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

moreover, was the first to recognize practically the inequality of all the divisions he adopts in his system ; and this constitutes further a great and important step, even though he may not have found the correct measure for all his groups. For we must remember that at the time he wrote, naturalists were bent upon establishing one continual uniform series to embrace all animals, between the links of which it was supposed there were no unequal intervals. The watchword of their school was: Natura, nonfacit saltum. They called their system la chaine des tires.

The views of Cuvier led him to the following arrangement of the animal kingdom : —

First Branch. ANIMALIA VERTEBRATA.

CL. 1. MAMMALIA. Orders: Bimana, Quadrumana, Carnivora, Marsupialia, Rodentia, Edentata, Pachyderniata, Rurniuantia, Cetacea. CL. 2. BIRDS. Ord. Accipitres, Passeres, Scansores, Galliuje, Grallse,

Palmipedes.

CL. 3. REPTILIA. Ord. Chelonia, Sauria, Ophidia, Batrachia. CL. 4. FISHES. 1st Series: FISHES PROPER. Ord. Acanthopterygii ; —

Abdoininales, Subbrachii, Apodes ; — Lophobranchii, Plectognathi; 2nd Series: CHONDROPTERYGII. Ord. Sturiones, Selackii, Cyclostonii.2

Second Branch. ANIMALIA MOLLUSCA.

CL. 1. CEPHALOPODA. No subdivisions into orders or families.

CL. 2. PTEROPODA. No subdivisions into orders or families.

CL. 3. GASTEROPODA. Ord. Pulmonata, Nudibranchia, Inferobranchia,

Tectibranchia, Heteropoda, Pectinibranchia, Tubulibranchia,

Scutibranchia, Cyclobranchia.

1 LeRegne animal distribue d'apres gone, compare his " Tableau elemenson organisation; Paris, 1829, 2de taire," q. a., p. 307 ; his paper, q. a.,

edit., 5 vols., 8vo. The classes of p. 308 ; and the first edition of the

Crustacea, Arachnids, and Insects, " R£gne Animal," published in 1817,

have been elaborated by Latreille. in 4 vols. 8vo.

For the successive modifications the 2 Comp. Regne Anim., 2de edit.,

classification of Cuvier has under- 2nd vol., pp. 128 and 383.

CL. 4. ACEPHALA. Ord. Testacea, Tunicata.

CL. 5. BRACHIOPODA. No subdivisions into orders or families.

CL. 6. CIRRHOPODA. No subdivisions into orders or families.

Third Branch. ANIMALIA ARTICULATA.

CL. 1. ANNELIDES. Ord. Tubicolae, Dorsibranchiae, Abranchiac.

CL. 2. CRUSTACEA. 1st Section: Malacostraca. Ord. Decapoda, Stomapoda, Amphipoda, Laemodipoda, Isopoda. 2nd Section: ENTOMOSTRACA. Ord. Branchiopoda, Poecilopoda, TrilobitEe.

CL. 3. ARACHNIDES. Ord. Pulnionariao, Trachearise.

CL. 4. INSECTS. Ord. Myriapoda, Thysanura, Parasita, Suctoria, Coleoptera, Orthoptera, Hemiptera, Neuroptera, Ilyrncnoptera,

Lepidoptera, Rhipiptera, Diptera.

Fourth Branch. ANIMALIA RADIATA.

CL. 1. ECHINODERMS. Ord. Pedicellata, Apoda.

CL. 2. INTESTINAL WORMS. Ord. Nematoidea (incl. Epizoa and Entozoa), Parenchymatosa.

CL. 3. ACALEPH.S. Ord. Simplices, Hydrostatics}. CL. 4. POLYPI. (Including Anthozoa, Hydroids, Bryozoa, Corallinae,

and Spongiee.) Ord. Carnosi, Gelatinosi, Polypiarii.

CL. 5. INFUSORIA. Ord. Rotifera and Homogenea (including Polygastrica and some Algae).

When we consider the zoological systems of the past century, that of Linnaeus, for instance, and compare them with more recent ones, that of Cuvier, for example, we cannot overlook the fact, that, even when discoveries have added little to our knowledge, the subject is treated in a different manner; not merely in consequence of the more extensive information respecting the internal structure of animals, but also respecting the gradation of the higher groups.

Linnaeus had no divisions of a higher order than classes. Cuvier introduced, for the first time, four great divisions, which he called " embranchemens" or branches, under which he arranged his classes, of which he admitted three

312 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

times as many as Linnaeus had done. Again, Linnaeus divides his classes into orders ; next, he introduces genera, and finally, species; and this he does systematically in the same gradation through all classes, so that each of his six classes is subdivided into orders, and these into genera with their species. Of families, as now understood, Linnaeus knows nothing.

The classification of Cuvier presents no such regularity in its framework. In some classes he proceeds, immediately after presenting their characteristics, to the enumeration of the genera they contain, without grouping them either into orders or families. In other classes, he admits orders under the head of the class, and then proceeds to the characteristics of the genera, while in others again he admits under the class not only orders and families, placing always the family in a subordinate position to the order, but also a number of secondary divisions, which he calls sections, divisions, tribes, etc., before he reaches the genera and species. With reference to the genera again, we find marked discrepancies in different classes. Sometimes a genus is with him an extensive group of species, widely differing one from the other, and of such genera he speaks as "grands genres;" others are limited in their extent, and contain homogeneous species without farther subdivisions, while others again are subdivided into what he calls sub-genera, and this is usually the case with his " great genera."

The gradation of divisions with Cuvier, then, varies with his classes, some classes containing only genera and species, and neither orders nor families nor any other subdivision. Others contain orders, families, and genera, and besides these a variety of subdivisions, of the most diversified extent and significance. This remarkable in-

equality between all the divisions of Cuvier is, no doubt, partly owing to the state of Zoology and of zoological museums at the time he wrote, and to his determination to admit into his work only such representatives of the animal kingdom as he could, to a greater or less extent, examine anatomically for himself ; but it is also partly to be ascribed to Iris conviction, often expressed, that there is no such uniformity or regular serial gradation among animals as many naturalists have attempted to introduce into their classifications.

Histoire naturelle des Animaux sans vcrtebres, etc.; Paris, 1815-1822, 7 vols. 8vo. — A second edition with notes has been published by Messrs. Des Hayes and Milne-Edwards ; Paris, 1835-1843, 10 vols. 8vo.— For the successive modifications this classification has undergone, see also : Systeme des animaux sans vertebres, etc.; Paris, 1801, 8vo. — Philosophic zoologique, etc.; Paris, 1809, 2 vols. 8vo. — Extrait du Cours de Zoologie du Museum d'Histoire naturelle, etc.; Paris, 1812, 8vo.

CL. 1. INFUSORIA. Ord. Nuda, Appendiculata. CL. 2. POLYPI. Ord. Ciliati (Rotifera), Deuudati (Hydroids), Vaginati (Anthozoa and Bryozoa), and Natantes

(Crinoids, and some Halcyonoids). CL. 3. RADIARIA. Ord, Mollia (Acale-

Do not feel, and move only by their excited irritability. No brain,

phas), Echinoderms (including Ho- f nor elongated medullothurire and Actinia}).

CL. 4. TUNICATA. Ord. Bothryllaria (Compound Ascidians), Ascidia (Simple Ascidians).

CL. 5. VERMES. Ord. Molles and Rigiduli (Intestinal Worms and Gordius), Hispiduli (Nais), Epizoarias (Epizoa, Lorna3ans).

lary mass ; no senses ; forms varied; rarely articulations.

Feel, but obtain from their sensations only perceptions of objects, a sort of simple ideas, which they are unable to combine to obtain complex ones. No ver- > tebral column ; a brain and mostly an elongated medullary mass ; some distinct senses; muscles attached under the skin ; form symmetrical, the parts being in pairs.

CL. 6. INSECTS. (Hexapods). Ord. Aptera, Diptera, Hemiptera, Lepidoptera, Hymenoptera, Neuroptera, Orthoptera, Coleoptera.

CL. 7. ARACHNIDS. Ord. Antennato-tracheales (Thysanura and Myriapoda), Exantenuato-tracheales and Exantennato-branchiales (Arachnids proper).

CL. 8. CRCSTACEA. Ord. Heterobranchia (Branchiopoda, Isopoda, Amphipoda, Stomapoda), and Homobranchia (Decapoda).

CL. 9. ANNELIDS. Ord. Apoda, Antennata, Sedentaria.

CL. 10. CIRRIPEDS. Ord. Sessilia and Pedunculata.

CL. 11. CONCHIFERA. Ord. Dimyaria, Monomyaria.

CL. 12. MOLLUSKS. Ord. Pteropoda, Gasteropoda, Trachelipoda, Cephalopoda, Heteropoda.

VERTEBRATA.

III. INTELLIGENT ANIMALS. ^ Feel; acquire preservable ideas; perform with them operations by which they obtain others; are intelligent in different degrees. A vertebral column ; a brain and a spinal marrow ; distinct senses ; the muscles attached to the internal skeleton ; form symmetrical, the parts being in pairs.

It is not easy to appreciate correctly the system of Lamarck, as it combines abstract conceptions with structural considerations, and an artificial endeavour to arrange all animals in continuous series. The primary subdivision of the animal kingdom into Invertebrata and Vertebrata1 corresponds, as I have stated above, to that of Anaima and Enaima of Aristotle. The three leading groups designated under the name of Apathetic, Sensi-

1 See above, Chap. 2, Sect. 1.

CL. 13. FISHES. CL. 14. REPTILES. CL. 15. BIRDS. CL. 16. MAMMALIA.

tive, and Intelligent animals, are an imitation of the four branches of Cuvier; but, far from resting upon such a definite idea as the divisions of Cuvier, which involve a special plan of structure, they are founded upon the assumption that the psychical faculties of animals present a serial gradation, which, when applied as a principle of classification, is certainly not admissible. To say that neither Infusoria, nor Polypi, nor Kadiata, nor Tunicata, nor Worms feel, is certainly a very erroneous assertion. They manifest sensations quite as distinctly as many of the animals included in the second type, which are called Sensitive. And as to the other assertion, that they move only by their excited irritability, we need only watch the Starfishes to be satisfied that their motions are determined by internal impulses, and not by external excitation. Modern investigations have shown that most of them have a nervous system, and many even organs of the senses.

The Sensitive animals are distinguished from the third type, the Intelligent animals, by the character of their sensations. It is stated, in respect to the Sensitive animals, that they obtain from their sensations only perceptions of objects, a sort of simple ideas which they are unable to combine so as to derive from them complex ones, while the Intelligent animals are said to obtain ideas which they may preserve, and to perform with them, operations by which they arrive at new ideas. They are said to be Intelligent. Even now, fifty years after Lamarck made those assertions, I doubt whether it is possible to distinguish in that way between the sensations of the Fishes, for instance, and those of the Cephalopods. It is true, the structures of the animals called Sensitive and Intelligent by Lamarck differ greatly, but

316 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

a large number of his Sensitive animals are constructed upon tlie same plan as many of those he includes among the Apathetic. They embrace, moreover, two different plans of structure, and animal psychology is certainly not so far advanced as to afford the least foundation for the distinctions here introduced.

Even from his own point of view, his arrangement of the classes is less perfect than he might have made it, as the Annelids stand nearer to the Worms than the Insects, and are very inferior to them. Having failed to perceive the value of the idea of plan, and having substituted for it that of a more or less complicated structure, Lamarck unites, among his Apathetic animals, Radiates (the Polypi and Radiaria) with Mollusks (the Tunicata) and with Articulates (the Worms). Among the Sensitive animals, he unites Articulates (the Insects, Arachnids, Crustacea, Annelids, and Cirripeds) with Mollusks (the Conchifera, and the Mollusks proper). Among the Intelligent animals, he includes the ancient four classes of Vertebrates, — the Fishes, Reptiles, Birds, and Mammalia.

1. Sub-Kingdom. Artiomorpha or Artiozoaria. Form bilateral. First Type : OSTEOZOARIA. (Vertebrata.) Sub-Type : Vivipara.

CL. 1. PILIFERA, or Mammifera. 1st. Monadelphya. 2nd.

Didelphya. Sub-Type: Ovipara.

CL. 2. PENNIFERA, or Aves. CL. 3. SQUAMIFERA, or Reptilia. CL. 4. NUDIPELLIFERA, or Amphibia. CL. 5. PINXIFERA, or Pisces.

A nosteozoaria. Second Type: ENTOMOZOARIA. (Articulata.)

CL. 6. HEXAPODA. (Insecta proprie sic dicta.)

1 De reorganisation des Animaux ; Paris, 1822, 1 vol. 8vo.

CL. 7. OCTOPODA. (Arachnida.)

CL. 8. DECAPODA. (Crustacea, Decapoda, and Limulus.)

CL. 9. HETEROPODA. (Squilla, Entoiuostraca, and Epizoa.)

CL. 10. TETRADECAPODA. (Amphipoda and Isopoda.)

CL. 11. MYRIAPODA.

CL. 12. CHJETOPODA. (Annelides.)

CL. 13. APODA. (Hirudo, Cestoidea, Ascaris.)

Third Type: MALENTOZOARIA.

CL. 14. NEMATOPODA. (Cirripedia.) CL. 15. POLYPLAXIPHORA. (Chiton.)

Fourth Type : MALACOZOARIA. (Mollusca.)

CL. 16. CEPHALOPHORA. Dioi'ca (Cephalopoda and Gasteropoda, p. p.), Hermaphrodita and Monoica (Gasteropoda reliqua).

CL. 17. ACEPHALOPHORA. Palliobranchia (Brachiopoda), Lamellibranchia (Acephala), Heterobranchia (Ascidiae.)

2. Sub- Kingdom. Actinomorpha or Actinozoaria . Form radiate.

CL. 18. ANNELIDARIA, or Gastrophysaria (Sipunculus, etc.)

CL. 19. CERATODERMIA. (Echinodermata.)

CL. 20. ARACHNODERMARIA. (Acalepha;.)

CL. 21. ZOANTHARIA. (Actiniae.)

CL. 22. POLYPIARIA. (Polypi tentaculis sknplicibus), (Anthozoa and Bryozoa.) CL. 23. ZOOPHYTARIA. (Polypi tentaculis compositis), Halcyonoidea.)

3. Sub-Kingdom. Heteromorpha or Heterozoaria. Form irregular.

CL. 24. SPONGIARIA. (Spongias.)

CL. 25. MoriADARiA. (Infusoria.)

CL. 26. DENDROLITIIARIA. (Corallinse.)

The classification of De Blainville resembles those of Lamarck and Cuvier much more than a diagram of the three would lead us to suppose. The first of these systems is founded upon the idea that the animal kingdom forms one graduated series ; only that De Blainville inverts the order of Lamarck, beginning with the highest animals and ending with the lowest. With that idea is blended, to some extent, the view of Cuvier, that animals are framed upon different plans of structure; but so imperfectly has this view taken hold of De Blainville, that,

318 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

instead of recognizing at the outset these great plans, he allows the external form to be the leading idea upon which his primary divisions are founded, and thus he divides the animal kingdom into three sub-kingdoms : the first including his Artiozoaria, with a bilateral form ; the second his Actinozoaria, with a radiated form; and the third his Heterozoaria, with an irregular form (the Sponges, Infusoria, and Corallines). The plan of structure is only introduced as a secondary consideration, upon which he establishes four types among the Artiozoaria: 1st. The Osteozoaria, corresponding to Cuvier's Vertebrata; 2nd. The Entomozoaria, corresponding to Cuvier's Articulata ; 3rd. The Malentozoaria, which are a very artificial group, suggested only by the necessity of establishing a transition between the Articulata and Mollusca; 4th. The Malacozoaria, corresponding to Cuvier's Mollusca. The second sub-kingdom, Actinozoaria, corresponds to Cuvier's Radiata, while the third sub-kingdom, Heterozoaria, contains organized beings which for the most part do not belong to the animal kingdom. Such at least are his Spongiaria and Dendrolitharia, whilst his Monadaria answer to the old class of Infusoria, about which enough has already been said above. It is evident, that what is correct in this general arrangement is borrowed from Cuvier; but it is only justice to De Blainville to say, that, in the limitation and arrangement of the classes, he has introduced some valuable improvements. Among Vertebrata, for instance, he has distinguished, for the first time, the class of Amphibia from the true Reptiles. He was also the first to remove the Intestinal Worms from among the Radiata to the Articulata ; but the establishment of a distinct type for the Cirripedia and Chitons was a very mistaken conception. Notwithstand-

ing some structural peculiarities, the Chitons are built essentially upon the same plan as the Mollusks of the class Gasteropoda, and the investigations made not long after the publication of De Blaiiiville's system have left no doubt that Cirripedia are genuine Crustacea. The supposed transition between the Articulata and Mollusks, which De Blainville attempted to establish with his type of Malentozoaria, certainly does not exist in nature.

If we apply to the classes of De Blainville the test introduced in the preceding chapter, it will be obvious that his Decapoda, Heteropoda, and Tetradecapoda partake more of the character of orders than of that of classes, whilst among Mollusks, his class Cephalophora certainly includes two classes, as he has himself acknowledged in his later works. Among Eadiata his classes Zoantharia, Polypiaria, and Zoophytaria partake again of the character of orders and not of that of classes. One great objection to the system of De Blainville is the useless introduction of so many new names for groups which had already been correctly limited and well named by his predecessors. He had, no doubt, a desirable object in view in doing this, — he wished to remove some incorrect names ; but he extended his reform too far when he undertook to change those also which did not suit his system.

The characteristics of the following twenty-eight classes of animals, with a twenty-ninth for Man alone, are given more fully in the Transactions of the Academy of Berlin for 1836, in the paper q. a., p. 208.

1st Cycle : NATIONS. Mankind, constituting one distinct class, is characterized by the equable development of all systems of organs, in contradistinction of the

2nd Cycle: ANIMALS, which are considered as characterized by the prominence of single systems. These are divided into :

I. NUTRIENTIA. Warm-blooded Vertebrata, taking care of their young.

CL. 1. MAMMALIA.

CL. 2. BIRDS.

A. Myeloncura. II

ORPIIANOZOA. Cold- blooded Vertebrata, taking no care of their young.

CL. 3. AMPHIBIA.

CL. 4. PISCES.

B. Ganglioneura.

A. Bphygmozoa, Cordata.

Circulation marked by a heart or pulsating vessels.

III. ARTICULATA. Real articulation,

marked by rows of ganglia and their ramifications.

CL. 5. INSECTS.

CL. 6. ARACHNOIDEA.

CL. 7. CRUSTACEA (including Entomostraca, Cirripedia, and Lernsea).

CL. 8. ANNULATA. (The genuine Annelids, exclusive of Nais.)

CL. 9. SOMATOTOMA. (Naidina.)

IV. MOLLUSCA. No articulation.

Ganglia dispersed.

CL. 10. CEPHALOPODA.

CL. 11. PTEROPODA.

CL. 12. GASTEROPODA.

CL. 13. ACEPHALA.

CL. 14. BRACHIOPODA.

CL. 15. TDNiCATA.(Ascidi0esimplices.) CL. 16. AGGREGATA. (Ascidue

compositas.)

B. Asphycta Vasculosa. Vessels without pulsation.

V. TUBULATA. No real articulation.

Intestine, a simple sac or tube.

CL. 17. BRYOZOA.

CL. 18. DIMORPH^EA. (Hydroids.)

CL. 19. TURBELLARIA. (Rhabdoccela : Derostoma, Turbella, Vortex.)

CL. 20. NEMATOIDEA. (Entozoa, with simple intestine ; also Gordius and Anguillula.)

CL. 21. ROTATORIA.

CL. 22. ECHINOIDEA. (Echinus, Holothuria, Sipunculus.)

VI. RACEMIFERA. Intestine divided,

or forked, radiating, dendritic, or racemose. CL. 23. ASTEROIDEA. CL. 24. ACALEPH^;. CL. 25. ANTHOZOA. CL. 26. TREMATODEA. (Entozoa with ramified intestine, also Cercaria.) CL. 27. COMPLANATA. (Dendrocoela, Planaria, etc.)

CL. 28. POLYGASTRICA.

The system of Zoology published by Ehrenberg in 1836 presents many new views in almost all its pecu-

liarities. The most striking of its features is the principle laid down that the type of development of animals is one and the same from Man to the Monad, implying a complete negation of the principle advocated by Cuvier, that the four primary divisions of the animal kingdom are characterized by different plans of structure. It is very natural that Ehrenberg, after having illustrated so fully and so beautifully as he did the natural history of many organized beings, which, up to the publication of his investigations, were generally considered as entirely homogeneous ; after having shown how highly organized and complicated the internal structure of many of them is ; after having proved the fallacy of the prevailing opinions respecting their origin, — should have been led to the conviction that there is, after all, no essential difference between these animals, which were then regarded as the lowest, and those which were placed at the head of the animal creation. The investigator who had just revealed to the astonished scientific world the complicated systems of organs which can be traced in the body of microscopically small Rotifera must have been led irresistibly to the conclusion that all animals are equally perfect, and have assumed, as a natural consequence of the evidence he had obtained, that they stand on the same level with one another, as far as the complication of their structure is concerned. Yet the diagram of his own system shows that he himself could not resist the internal evidence of their unequal structural endowment. Like all other naturalists, he places Mankind at one end of the animal kingdom, and such types as have always been considered as low at the other end.

Man constitutes, in his opinion, an independent cycle, that of nations, in contra-distinction to the cycle of

Y

322 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

animals, which he divides into MYELONEURA, those with nervous marrow (the Vertebrata,) and GTANGLIONEURA, those with ganglia (the Invertebrata.) The Vertebrata he subdivides into Nutrientia, those which take care of their young, and Orphanozoa, those which take no care of their young ; though this is not strictly true, as there are many Fishes and Eeptiles which provide as carefully for their young as some of the Birds and Mammalia, though they do it in another way. The Invertebrata are subdivided into Spliyymozoa, those which have a heart or pulsating vessels, and Aspliycta., those in which the vessels do not pulsate. These two sections are further subdivided : the first, into Articulata with real articulations, and rows of ganglia, and Mollusks without articulation and with dispersed ganglia ; the second, into Tubulata with a simple intestine, and Racemifera with a branching intestine. These characters, which Ehrenberg assigns to his leading divisions, imply necessarily the admission of a gradation among animals. He thus negatives, in the form in which he expresses the results of his investigations, the very principle which he intends to illustrate by his diagram. The peculiar view of Ehrenberg, that all animals are equal in the perfection of their organization, might be justified, if it was qualified so as to imply a relative perfection, adapted in all to the end of their special mode of existence. As no one observer has contributed more extensively than Ehrenberg to make known the complicated structure of a host of living beings, which before him were almost universally believed to consist of a simple mass of homogeneous jelly, such a view would naturally be expected of him. But this qualified perfection is not what he means. He does not wish to convey the idea that all animals are equally perfect in their way, for he states distinctly that " Infusoria have

the same sum of systems of organs as Man," and the whole of his system is intended to impress emphatically this view. The separation of Man from the animals, not merely as a class but as a still higher division, is especially maintained upon that ground.

The principle of classification adopted by Ehrenberg is purely anatomical ; the idea of type is entirely set aside, as is shown by the respective position of his classes. The Myeloneura, it is true, correspond to the branch of Vertebrata, and the Sphygmozoa to the Articulata and Mollusca ; but they are not brought together on the ground of the typical plan of their structure, but because the first have a spinal marrow, and the other a heart or pulsating vessels with or without articulations of the body. In the division of Tubulata it is still more evident how the plan of their structure is disregarded, as that section embraces Eadiata, (the Echinoidea and the Dimorphsea,) Mollusca, (the Bryozoa,) and Articulata, (the Turbellaria, the Nematoidea, and the Eotatoria,) which are thus combined simply on the ground that they have vessels which do not pulsate, and that their intestine is a simple sac or tube. The Eacemifera contain also animals constructed upon different plans, united on account of the peculiar structure of the intestine, which is either forked or radiating, dendritic or racemose.

The limitation of many of the classes proposed by Ehrenberg is quite objectionable, when tested by the principles discussed above. A large proportion of them are, indeed, founded upon ordinal characters only, and not upon class characters. This is particularly evident with the Eotatoria, the Soniatotoma, the Turbellaria, the Nematoidea, the Trematodea, and the Complanata, all of

which belong to the branch of Articulata. The Tunicata,

Y 2

324 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the Aggregata, the Brachiopoda, and the Bryozoa are also only orders of the class Acephala. Before Echiuoderms had been so extensively studied as of late, the separation of the Echinoidea from Asteroidea might have seemed justifiable ; at the present day it is totally inadmissible. Even Leuckart, who considers the Echinoderms as a distinct branch of the animal kingdom, insists upon the necessity of uniting them as a natural group. As to the Dimorphsea, they constitute a natural order of the class Acalephse, which is generally known by the name of Hydroids.

The following diagram is compiled from the author's Geschichte der Schopfung ; Leipzig, 1843, 1 vol. 8vo.

Type I. IRREGULAR ANIMALS.

1st Sub- Type. CL. 1. INFUSORIA. Type II. REGULAR ANIMALS.

2nd Sub-Type. CL. 2. POLYPINA. Orel. Bryozoa, Anthozoa.

3rd Sub-Type. CL. 3. RADIATA. Ord. Acalephae, Echinodermata,

Scytodermata. Type III. SYMMETRICAL ANIMALS.

4th Sub-Type. CL. 4. MOLLUSCA. Ord. Perigymna (Tunicata); Cormopoda (Acephala) ; Brachiopoda, Cephalophora (Pteropoda and Gasteropoda); Cephalopoda. 5th Sub-type. ARTHROZOA.

CL. 5. VERMES. Ord. Helminthes, Trematodes, and

Annulati.

CL. 6. CRUSTACEA. 1°. OSTRACODERMA. Ord. Prothesmia (Cirripedia, Siphonostoma, and Rotatoria) ; Aspidostraca (Entomostraca : Lophyropoda, Phyllopoda, Precilopoda, Trilobitee). 2°. MALACOSTRACA. Ord. Thoracostraca (Podophthalma) ; and Arthrostraca (Edriophthaluia).

CL. 7. ARACHNODA. Ord. Myriapoda, Arachnidse. CL. 8. INSECTA. Ord. Rhynchota, Synistata, Antliata,

Piezata, Glossata, Eleutherata. 6th Sub-type. OSTEOZOA. (Vertebrata.) CL. 9. PISCES. CL. 10. AMPHIBIA. CL. 11. AYES. CL. 12. MAMMALIA.

The general arrangement of the classification of Burmeister recalls that of de Blainville ; only that the order is inverted. His three types correspond to the three subkingdoms of de Blainville : the Irregular Animals to the Heterozoaria, the Eegular Animals to the Actinozoaria, and the Symmetrical Animals to the Artiozoaria ; while his subtypes of the Symmetrical Animals correspond to the types de Blainville admits among Ins Artiozoaria, with this important improvement, however, that the Malentozoaria are suppressed. Burmeister reduces, unhappily, the whole branch of Mollusks to one single class. The Arthrozoa, on the contrary, in the investigation of which Burmeister has rendered eminent service to science, are presented in their true light. In his special works,1 his classification of the Articulata is presented with more details. I have no doubt that the correct views he entertains respecting the standing of the Worms in the branch of Articulata are owing to his extensive acquaintance with the Crustacea and Insects, and their metamorphoses.

The following diagram is compiled from R. OWEN'S Lectures on the Comparative Anatomy and Physiology of the Invertebrate Animals; 2nd edit., London, 1855, 1 vol. 8vo.

Province. VERTEBRATA. Myelencephala. (Owen.)

\jli. MAMMALIA. ~\ The classes Mammalia, Aves, and Reptilia, are not yet included CL. AvES. > in the second volume of the "Lectures," the only one relating to

Cli REPTILIA J Vertebrata thus far published.

1 These works are: Beitriige zur lebenden Verwandten entwickelt;

Naturgeschichte der Rankenfiisser Berlin, 1843, 1 vol. 4to.; Engl. by the

(Cirripedia); Berlin, 1834, 1 vol. 4to. Ray Society, London, 1847, 1 vol.

— Handbuch der Entomologie ; Ber- fol. Compare also his recent work,

lin, 1832-47, 5 vols. 8vo.; Engl. by Zoonomische Briefe, allgemeine Dar-

W. E. Shuckard, London, 1836. — Die stellungder thierischen Organisation;

Organisation der Trilobiten,aus ihren Leipzig, 1856, 2 vols. 8vo.

32(j ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

CL. PISCES. Orel. Dermopteri, Malacopteri, Pharyngognathi, Anacanthini, Acanthopteri, Plectognathi, Lophobranchii, Ganoidei, Protopteri, Holocephali, Plagiostomi. Province. ARTICULATA. Hornogangliata. (Owen.)

CL. ARACHNIDA. Ord. Derinophysa, Trachearia, Pulinotrachearia, and

Pulmonaria.

CL. INSECTA. Sub-class: MTRIAPODA. Ord. Chilognatha and Chilopoda. Sub-class: HEXAPODA. Ord. Aptera, Diptera, Lepidoptera, Hymenoptera, Homoptera, Strepsiptera, Neuroptera, Orthoptera, and Coleoptera.

CL. CRUSTACEA. Sub-class : ENTOMOSTRACA. Ord. Trilobites, Xiphosura, Phyllopoda, Cladocera, Ostracopoda, Copepoda. Sub-class: MALACOSTRACA. 1°. Edriophthalma. Ord. Lsemodipoda, Isopoda, Amphipoda. 2°. Podophthalma. Ord. Stomapoda, Decapoda.

CL. EPIZOA. Ord. Cephaluna, Brachiuna, and Onchuna. CL. ANNELLATA. Ord. Suctoria, Terricola, Errantia, Tubicola. CL. CIRRIPEDIA. Ord. Thoracica, Abdominalia, and Apoda. Province. MOLLUSCA. Heterogangliata. (Owen.)

CL. CEPHALOPODA. Ord. Tetrabranchiata and Dibranchiata. CL. GASTEROPODA. A. MONCECIA : Ord. Apneusta (Roll.), Nudibranchiata, Inferobranchiata, Tectibranchiata, Pulmonata. B. DKE- CIA. Ord. Nucleobranchiata, Tubulibranchiata, Cyclobranchiata, Scutibranchiata, and Pectinibrauchiata. CL. PTEROPODA. Ord. Thecosomata and Gymnosomata. CL. LAMELLIBRANCHIATA. Ord. Monomyaria and Dimyaria. CL. BRACHIOPODA. Only subdivided into families. CL. TUNICATA. Ord. Saccobranchiata and Taeniobranchiata. Sub-province. RADIARIA.1

CL. ECHINODERMATA. Ord. Crinoidea, Asteroidea, Echinoidea, Holothurioidea, and Sipunculoidea. CL. BRYOZOA. Only subdivided into families. CL. ANTHOZOA. Only subdivided into families. CL. ACALEPHJB. Ord. Pulmograda, Ciliograda, and Physograda. CL. HYDROZOA. Only subdivided into families. Sub-province. ENTOZOA.

CL. CCELELMINTHA. Ord. Gordiacea, Nematoidea, and Onchophora. CL. STERELMINTHA. Ord. Tamioidea, Trematoda, Acanthocephala. —

Turbellaria. Sub-province. INFUSORIA.

CL. ROTIFERA. Only subdivided into families.

CL. POLYGASTRIA. Ord. Astoma, Stoinatoda. — Rhizopoda.

1 In the first edition of the work three sub-provinces, Radiaria, Entoquoted above, published in 1843, the zoa, and Infusoria, are considered as

The classification with which Owen1 introduces his " Lectures on Comparative Anatomy" is very instructive, as showing, more distinctly than other modern systems, the unfortunate ascendancy which the consideration of the complication of structure has gained of late over the idea of plan. His provinces, it is true, correspond in the main to the branches of Cuvier, with this marked difference, however, that he does not recognize a distinct province of Radiata coequal with those of Mollusca, Articulata, and Vertebrata, but only admits Radiaria as a subprovince on a level with Entozoa and Infusoria. Here the idea of simplicity of structure evidently prevails over that of plan, as the subprovinces Radiaria, Entozoa, and Infusoria embrace, besides true Radiata, the lowest types of two other branches, Mollusks and Articulates. On the other hand, his three subprovinces correspond to the first three types of von Siebold ; the Infusoria2 of Owen embracing the same animals as the Protozoa of Siebold, his Entozoa3 the same as the Vermes, and his Radiaria the same as the Zoophyta, with the single exception that Owen refers the Annellata to the province of Articulata, whilst Siebold includes them among his Vermes. Beyond

one sub-kingdom called Radiata, in orders and families were only added

contradistinction of the sub-kingdoms, to the second edition in 1855. I

Mollusca, Articulata, and Vertebrata, mention this simply to prevent the

and that sub-kingdom is subdivided possibility of being understood as

into two groups, Nematoneura and ascribing to Owen all those subdivi-

Acrita. sions of the classes which he admits,

1 I have given precedence to the and which do not appear in the sysclassification of Owen over those of terns considered before his. von Siebold and Stannius, Milne- 2 The Rhizopoda are considered as

Edwards, Leuckart, etc., because the a group coequal to Rotifera and Pofirst edition of the "Lectures on Com- lygastria, on p. 16 of the "Lectures";

parative Anatomy" was published in but on p. 59 they stand as a sub-

1843 ; but in estimating its features, order of Polygastria. as expressed in the preceding dia- 3 The Turbellaria are represented

gram, it should be borne in mind, as an independent group on p. 16,

that, in the first edition, the classes and referred as a sub-order to the

alone are considered, and that the Trematoda on p. 118.

328 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

tliis, the types of Mollusca and Articulata (Artliropoda) of the two distinguished anatomists entirely agree. The position assigned by Owen to the provinces Articulata and Mollusca, not one above the other, but side by side of one another,1 is no doubt meant to express his conviction that the complication of structure of these two types does not justify the idea that either of them stands higher or lower than the other ; and this is perfectly correct.

Several groups, established by previous writers as families or orders, are here admitted as classes. His class EPIZOA, which is not to be confounded with that established by Nitzsch under the same name, corresponds exactly to the family called LERNEES by Cuvier. His class HYDROZOA answers to the order HYDROIDA of Johnston, and is identical with the class called DIMORPH^EA by Ehrenberg. His class CCELELMINTHA corresponds to the order of INTESTINAUX CAVITAIKES established by Cuvier, with the addition of Gordius ; while his class STEREL- MINTHA has the same circumscription as the order IN- TESTINAUX PARENCHYMATEUX of Cuvier. Generally speaking, it should not be understood that the secondary divisions mentioned by the different authors, whose systems I have analyzed here, were established by them. They are frequently borrowed from the results obtained by special investigators of isolated classes. But it would lead me too far to enter here into a discussion of all these details.

This growing resemblance of the modern systems of Zoology is a very favourable sign of our times. It would,

1 From want of space, I have l>een culata and Mollusca one below the

compelled, in reproducing the classi- other upon my page; according to

fication of Owen in the preceding his views they should stand on a

diagram, to place his provinces Arti- level, side )»y side with one another.

indeed, be a great mistake to assume that it is solely owing to the influence of different authors upon one another ; it is, on the contrary, to a very great extent, the result of our better acquaintance with Nature. When investigators at all conversant with the present state of our science must possess nearly the same amount of knowledge, it is self-evident that their views can no longer differ so widely as they did when each was familiar with a part only of the subject. A deeper insight into the animal kingdom must, in the end, lead to the conviction that it is not the task of zoologists to introduce order among animals, but that their highest aim should be simply to read the natural affinities which exist among them, so that the more nearly our knowledge embraces the whole field of investigation, the more closely will our opinions coincide.

As to the value of the classes adopted by Owen, I may further remark, that recent investigations, of which he might have availed himself, have shown that the Cirripedia and his Epizoa are genuine Crustacea, and that the Entozoa can no longer be so widely separated from the Annellata as in his system. With reference to the other classes, I refer the reader to my criticism of older systems, and to the first section of this Chapter.

It is a great satisfaction to me to find that the views I

o

have advocated in the preceding sections, respecting the natural relations of the leading groups of the animal kingdom, coincide so closely with' the classification of that distinguished zoologist, Milne-Edwards, lately presented by him as the expression of his present views of the natural affinities of animals. He is the only original investigator who has recently given Ins unqualified approbation to the primary divisions first proposed by

330 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

Cuvier, admitting, of course, the rectifications among the groups of secondary rank, rendered necessary by the progress of science, to which he has himself so largely contributed.

As to the classes adopted by Milne-Edwards, I have little to add to what I have already stated before with reference to other classifications. Though no longer overruling the idea of plan, that of complication of structure has still too much influence with Milne-Edwards, inasmuch as it leads him to consider as classes, groups of animals which differ only in degree, and are therefore only orders. Such are, no doubt, his classes of Molluscoids and those of Worms, besides the Myriapods and Arachnids. Respecting the Fishes, I refer to my remarks in the first section (p. 298) of this Chapter.

CLASSIFICATION OF MILNE-EDWARDS.

The following diagram is drawn from the author's " Cours elemeutaire d'Histoire naturelle"; Paris, 1855, 1 vol. 12ino., 7th edit.; in which he has presented the results of his latest investigations upon the classification of the Vertebrata and Articulata; the minor sub-divisions of the Worms, Mollusks, and Zoophytes, however, are not considered in this work.1

Sub-branch. Allantoidians. Sub-branch. Anallantoidians.

CL. MAMMALIA. 1°. Monodelphya. a. Propria. Ord. Bhnana, Quadruniana, Cheiroptera,

Insectivora, Rodentia, Edentata, Carnivora, Am- rennibranchiaj

phibia, Pachyderniata, Rumiuantia. b. Pisciforinia. Ord. Cetacea. 2°. Didelphya. Ord. Marsupialia, Monotremata.

CL. BIRDS. Ord. Rapaces, Passeres, Scansores, Gallinaj, Grallte, and Palmipedes.

CL. REPTILES. Ord. Chelonia, Sauria, Ophidia.

Ord. Anura, Urodela, Pe-

CL. FISHES. 1°. Ossei. Ord. Acanthopterygii, Abdominales, Subbrachii, Apodes, Lophobranchii, and Plectognathi. 2°. Chondropterygii. Ord. Sturiones, Selachii, and Cyclostomi.

1 Consult, for these, his recent papers upon Polyps, Mollusks, and Crustacea, iu the Ann. des Sc. Nat.

Sub-braiich. Arthropoda.

CL. INSECTA. Orel. Coleoptera, Orthoptera, Neuroptera, Hymenoptera, Lepidoptera, Herniptera, Diptera, Rhipiptera, Anopleura, and Thysanura.

CL. MYRIAPODA. Ord. Chilognatha and Chilopoda.

CL. ARACHNIDS. Ord. Pulmonaria and Trachearia.

CL. CRUSTACEA. 1°. Podophthalmia. Ord. . Decapoda and Stomopoda. 2°. Edriophthalma. Ord. Amphipoda, Lsemodipoda, and Isopoda. 3°. Brauchiopoda. Ord. Ostrapoda, Phyllopoda, and Trilobitre. 4°. Entomostraca. Ord. Copepoda, Cladocera, Siphonostoina, Lernaeida, Cirripedia. 5°. Xiphosura.

Sub-branch. Ver~

ines.

Sub-branch. Mollusks proper.

Sub-branch. Molluscoids.

Sub-branch. Radiaria, or Radiata.

CL. CORALLARIA, Or POLYPI.

Sub-branch. Sarcodaria.

This classification is adopted in the following work : SIEBOLD (C. TH. v.) and STANNIUS (H.), Lehrbuch der vergleichenden Auatomie; Berlin, 1845, 2 vols. 8vo. A second edition is now in press.

CL. 1. INFUSORIA. Ord. Astoma and Somatoda. CL. 2. RHIZOPODA. Ord. Monosoniatia and Polysomatia. II. ZOOPHYTA.

CL. 3. POLYPI. Ord. Anthozoa and Bryozoa.

CL. 4. ACALEPH.E. Ord. Siphonophora, Discophora, Ctenophora.

CL. 5. ECHINODERMATA. Ord. Crinoidea, Asterioidea, Echinoidea,

Holothurioidea, and Sipunculoidea. III. VERMES.

CL. 6. HELMINTHES. Ord. Cystici, , ^5^fSS?t^S

Cestodes, Trematodes, Acan- [ duced most important improvethocephali, Gordiacei. Neum- f ments iu the classification of the

I Worms, and greatly increased our tOClCS. knowledge of these animals.

332 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

CL. 7. TURBELLARII. Onl. Rhabdocoeli, Dendrocoeli. CL. 8. ROTATORII. Not subdivided into orders. CL. 9. ANNTJLATI. Ord. Apodes and Cheetopodes.

CL. 10. ACEPHALA. Ord. Tunicata, Brachiopoda, Lamellibranchia. CL. 11. CEPHALOPHORA, Meek (Gasteropoda). Ord. Pteropoda, Heteropoda, Gasteropoda. CL. 12. CEPHALOPODA. Not subdivided into orders.

V. AllTIIHOPOPA.

CL. 13. CRUSTACEA. Ord. Cirripedia, Siphonostoma, Lophyropoda,

Phyllopoda, Poecilopoda, Lteniodipoda, Isopoda, Auiphipoda,

Stomapoda, Decapoda, Myriapoda. CL. 14. ARACHNIDA. Orders without names. CL. 15. INSECTA. a. AMETABOLA. Ord. Aptera. b. HEMIMETABOLA.

Ord. Hemiptera, Orthoptera. c. HOLOMETABOLA. Ord.

Diptera, Lepidoptera, Llymenoptera, Strepsiptera, Neuroptera, aud Coleoptera.

CL. 16. PISCES. Sub-classes: 1st. LEPTOC.ARDII. 2nd. MARSIPO- BRANCUII. 3rd. ELASMOBRANCHII ; Ord. Holocephali, Plagiostomi. 4th. GANOIDEI ; Ord. Chrondrostei, Holostei. 5th. TELEOSTEI ; Ord. Acauthopteri, Anacanthini, Pharyngognathi, Physostomi, Plectoguathi, Lophobranchii. 6th. * DIPNOI.

CL. 17. REPTILIA. Sub-classes: 1st. DIPNOA; Ord. Urodela, Batrachia, Gyrunophiona. 2nd. MONOPNOA : a. Streptostylica ; Ord. Ophidia, Sauria. b. Monimostylica ; Ord. Che- Ionia CrOCOdila. ^^e sub-divisions of the classes Pisces aud Rep- I tilia are taken from the second edition, published in

Pi 1ft AVES ^> 1^5'*"{>G' in which J. Miiller's arrangement of the

| Fishes is adopted; that of the Reptiles is partly Stan-

J nius' own The classes Aves and Mammalia, and

CL. 19. MAMMALIA. the tirst volume of the second edition, are not yet out.

The most original feature of the classification of von Siebold is the adoption of the types Protozoa and Vermes, in the sense in which they are limited here. The type of Worms has grown out of the investigations of the helminthologists, who, too exclusively engaged with the parasitic Worms, have overlooked their relations to the other Articulata. On the other hand, the isolation in which most entomologists have remained from the zoologists in

general, has no doubt had its share in preventing an earlier thorough comparison of the Worms and the larval conditions of Insects, without which the identity of type of the Worms, Crustacea, and Insects can hardly be correctly appreciated. Concerning the classes1 adopted by von Siebold and Stannius, I have nothing to remark that has not already been said.

The classification of Leuckart is compiled from the following work : LEOCK- ART (R.), Ueber die Morphologic und die Verwandtschaftsverhiiltnisse der wirbellosen Thiere ; Braunschweig, 1848, 1 vol. 8vo.

I. COELENTERATA, Lkt.

CL. 1. POLYPI. Ord. Anthozoa and Cylicozoa (Lucernaria). CL. 2. ACALEPH.E. Ord. Discophorse and Ctenophorae.

II. ECHINODERMATA, Lkt.

CL. 3. PELMATOZOA, Lkt. Ord. Cystidea and Crinoidea. CL. 4. ACTINOZOA, Latr. Ord. Echinida and Asterida. CL. 5. SCYTODERMATA, Brmst. Ord. Holothurise and Sipunclida. III. VERMES.

CL. 6. ANENTERATI, Lkt. Ord. Cestodes and Acanthocephali. (Helminthes, Barm.) CL. 7. APOPES, Lkt. Ord. Nemertini, Turbellarii, Trematodes, and

Hirudinei. (Trematodes, Jjurm.) CL. 8. CILIATI, Lkt. Ord. Bryozoa and Rotiferi. CL. 9. ANKELIDES. Ord. Nematocles, Lumbricini, aud Branchiati.

(Annulati, Burm., excl. Nemertinis et Hirudineis.)

CL. 10. CRUSTACEA. Ord. Entoinostraca (Neusticopoda Car.) and

Malacostraca. CL. 1 1. INSECTA. Orel. Myriapoda, Arachnida (Accra, Latr.) and

Hexapoda. V. MOLLUSCA, Cuv. (Palliata, Nitzsch.)

_ , . .,. -\ Leuckart is somewhat inclined to

CL. 12. TUNICATA. Ord. AsCldiae consider the Tuuicata, not simply as (Tethyes Sav.) and Salpae ', aclass,buteven as another great type fThalides Sav ^ or branch, intermediate between Echi?

J noderms and Worms.

1 The names of the types, Proto- various ways for nearly half a cenzoa and Vermes, are older than their tury ; while that of Worms was first

limitation in the classification of Sie- adopted by Linnseus, as a great divibold. That of Protozoa, first intro- siou of the animal kingdom, but in a

duced by Goklt'uss, has been used in totally different sense.

334 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

CL. 13. ACEPIIALA. Ord. Lamellibranchiata (Cormopoda Nitzsch,

Pelecypoda Car.) and Brachiopoda. CL. 14. GASTEROPODA. Ord. Heterobranchia (Pteropoda, Inferobranchia, aad Tectibranchia), Dermatobranchia (Gymnobranchia aud Phlebeuterata), Heteropoda, Cteuobranchia,

Pulmonata, and Cyclobrauchia. CL. 15. CEPHALOPODA. VI. VEKTEBBATA. (Not considered.)

I need not repeat here what I have already stated, in the first section, respecting the primary divisions adopted by Siehold and Leuckart. As to the classes, I may add that his three classes of Echinoderms exhibit only ordinal characters. Besides Birds and Cephalopods, there is not another class so well defined, and so little susceptible of being subdivided into minor divisions presenting anything like class characters, as that of Echinoderms. Their systems of organs are so closely homological, (compare p. 293,) that the attempt here made by Leuckart, to subdivide them into three classes, can readily be shown to rest only upon the admission, as classes, of groups which exhibit only ordinal characters, namely, different degrees of complication of structure. With reference to the classes of Worms, the same is equally true, as shown above. The arrangement of these animals proposed by Burnieister is certainly more correct than those of von Siebold and of Leuckart, inasmuch as he already rightly refers the Rotifera to the class of Crustacea, and does not, like Leuckart, associate the Bryozoa with the Worms. I agree, however, with Leuckart, respecting the propriety of removing the Nemertini and Hirudinei from among the true Annelides. Again, Burmeister appreciates also more correctly the position of the whole type of Worms, in referring them, with De Blainville, to the branch of Articulata.

The common fault of all the anatomical classifications

which have been proposed since Cuvier consists, firstly, in having given up, to a greater or less extent, the fundamental idea of the plan of structure, so beautifully brought forward by Cuvier, and upon which he has insisted with increased confidence, and more and more distinct consciousness, ever since 1812; and, secondly, in having frequently allowed that of complication of structure to take the precedence over the more general features of plan, to. correctly appreciate which recjuires, it is true, a deeper insight into the structure of the whole animal kingdom

O ' O

than is needed merely for the investigation of anatomical characters in single types.

Yet, if we take a retrospective glance at these systems, and especially consider the most recent ones, it must be apparent to those who are conversant with the views now obtaining in our science, that, after a test of half a century, the idea of the existence of branches characterized by different plans of structure, as expressing the true relations among animals, has prevailed over the idea of a graduated scale including all animals in one progressive series. When it is considered that this has taken place amidst the most conflicting views respecting Classification, and even in the absence of any ruling principle, it must be acknowledged that this can be only owing to the internal truth of the views first propounded by Cuvier. We recognize in the classifications of Siebold, Leuckart, and others, the triumph of the great conception of the French naturalist, even though their systems differ greatly from his ; for the question, whether there are four or more great plans, limited in this or any other way, is not a question of principle, but one involving only accuracy and penetration in the investigation ; and I maintain that the first sketch of Cuvier, with all its imperfections of details,

336 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

presents a picture of the essential relations existing among animals more true to nature than the seemingly more correct classifications of recent writers.

About the time that Cuvier and the French naturalists were tracing the structure of the animal kingdom, and attempting to erect a natural system of Zoology upon this foundation, there arose in Germany a school of philosophy, under the lead of Schelling, which extended its powerful influence to all the departments of physical science. Oken, Kieser, Bojanus, Spix, Huschke, and Carus, are the most eminent naturalists who applied the new philosophy to the study of Zoology. But no one identified his philosophical views so completely with his studies in natural history as Oken.

Now that the current is setting so strongly against everything which recalls the German physiophilosophers and their doings, and it has become fashionable to speak ill of them, it is an imperative duty for the impartial reviewer of the history of science to show how great and how beneficial the influence of Oken has been upon the progress of science in general and of Zoology in particular. It is, moreover, easier, while borrowing his ideas, to sneer at his style and his nomenclature, than to discover the true meaning of what is left unexplained in his mostly paradoxical, sententious, or aphoristical expressions. But the man who has changed the whole method of illustrat-

O

ing comparative Osteology ; who has carefully investigated the embryology of the higher animals at a time when few physiologists were paying any attention to the subject;

who has classified the three kingdoms of nature upon principles wholly his own ; who has perceived thousands of homologies and analogies among organized beings entirely overlooked before; who has published an extensive treatise of natural history, containing a condensed account of all that was known at the time of its publication; who has conducted, for twenty-five years, the most extensive and most complete periodical review of the natural sciences ever published, in which every discovery made during a quarter of a century is faithfully recorded ; the man who inspired every student who knew him with an ardent love for science, and with admiration for his teacher, — that man will never be forgotten, nor can the services he has rendered to science be overlooked so longr

o

as thinking is connected with investigation.

The following diagram of Oken's classification is compiled from his Allgemeine Naturgeschichte fur alle Stande ; Stuttgardt, 1833-1842, 14 vols. Svo., vol. 1, p. 5. The changes this system has undergone may be ascertained by comparing his Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie ; Jena, 1809-1811, 3 vols. 8vo.; 2nd edit., Jena, 1831; 3rd edit., Zurich, 1843; Engl., Ray Society, London, 1847, 1 vol. 8vo. — Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte; Leipzig, 1813; Weimar, 1815 and 1825, 8vo. — Handbuch der Naturgeschichte zum Gebrauch bei Vorlesuugen ; Niirnberg, 1816-1820, 8vo. — Naturgeschichte fiir Schulen ; Leipzig, 1820, 1 vol. 8vo.; and various papers in the Isis.

1st Grade. INTESTINAL ANIMALS ; also called .Cody-animals and Touchanimals. Only one cavity ; no head with a brain ; only the lowest sense perfect ; intestines and skin organs, but no flesh ; that is, no bones, muscles, or nervous marrow — Invertebrata. Characterized by the development of the vegetative systems of organs, which are those of digestion, circulation, and respiration. Hence —

Cycle I. Digestive Animals. = Radiata. Essential character : no development beyond an intestine.

CL. 1. INFUSORIA (Stomach animals). Mouth with cilia only, to vibrate.

Z

338 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

CL. 2. POLYPI (Intestine animals). Mouth with lips and tentacles, to seize.

CL. 3. ACALEPH.E (Lacteal animals.) Body traversed by tubes similar to the lymphatic vessels.

Cycle II. Circulative Animals.=: Mollusks. Essential character: intestine and vessels.

CL. 4. ACEPHALA (Biauriculate animals). Membranous heart with two auricles.

CL. 5. GASTEROPODA (Uniauriculate animals). Membranous heart with one auricle.

CL. 6. CEPHALOPODA (Bicardial animals). Two hearts.

Cycle III. Respirative Animals. = Articulata. Essential character: intestine, vessels, and spiracles.

CL. 7. WORMS (Skin animals). Respire with the skin itself, or part of it ; no articulated feet.

CL. 8. CRUSTACEA (Branchial animals). Gills or air tubes arising from the horny skin.

CL. 9. INSECTS (Tracheal animals). Tracheas internally; gills externally as wings.

2nd Grade. FLESII ANIMALS ; also called 7/effcZ-aniinals = Vertebrata. Two cavities of the body, surrounded by fleshy walls (bones and muscles) enclosing nervous marrow and intestines. Head with brain ; higher senses developed. Characterized by the development of the animal systems, namely, the skeleton, the muscles, the nerves, and the senses.

Cycle IV. Carnal Animals proper. Senses not perfected.

CL. 10. FISHES (7?o?ze-animals). Skeleton predominating, very much

broken up ; muscles white, brain without gyri, tongue without

bone, nose not perforated, ear concealed, eyes without lids. CL. 11. REPTILES (3/wsc/e-aniuials). Muscles red, brain without

convolutions, nose perforated, ear without external orifice, eyes

immovable, with imperfect lids. CL. 12. BIRDS (^Verye-animals). Brain with convolutions, ears open,

eyes immovable, lids imperfect.

Cycle V. Sensual Animals. All anatomical systems, and the senses perfected.

CL. 13. MAMMALIA (*Sfe?ise-anirnals). Tongue and nose fleshy,ears open, mostly with a conch, eyes movable, with two distinct lids.

The principles laid down by Oken, of which this classification is the practical result for Zoology, may be summed up in the following manner : The grades or great types

of Animals are determined by their anatomical systems, such as the body and head; or the intestines, and the flesh and senses. Hence two grades in the animal kingdom. Animals are, as it were, the dismembered body of man made alive. The classes of animals are the special representation in living forms of the anatomical systems of the highest beino- in creation.

O o

Man is considered, in this system, not only as the key of the whole animal kingdom, but also as the standard measure of the organization of animals. There exists nothing in the animal kingdom which is not represented in higher combinations in Man. The existence of several distinct plans of structure among animals is virtually denied. They are all built after the pattern of Man ; the differences among them consist only in their exhibiting either one system only or a larger or smaller number of systems of organs of higher or lower physiological importance, developed either singly or in connexion with one another, in their body. The principles of classification of both Cuvier and Ehrenberg are here entirely negatived. The principle of Cuvier, who admits four different plans of structure in the animal kingdom, is, indeed, incompatible with the idea that all animals represent only the organs of Man. The principle of Ehrenberg, who considers all animals as equally perfect, is as completely irreconcileable with the assumption that all animals represent an unequal sum. of organs ; for, according to Oken, the body of animals is, as it were, the analyzed body of Man, the organs of which live singly, or in various combinations as independent animals. Each such combination constitutes a distinct class. The principle upon which the orders are founded has already been explained above. (Chap. II, Sect, iii, p. 235.)

z 2

340 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

There is something very taking in the idea that Man is the standard of appreciation of all animal structures. But all the attempts which have thus far been made to apply it to the animal kingdom as it exists must be considered as complete failures. In his different works, Oken has successively identified the systems of organs of Man with different groups of animals; and different authors, who have adopted the same principle of classification, have identified them in different ways again. The impracticability of such a scheme must be obvious to any one who has satisfied himself practically of the existence of different plans of structure in the organization of animals. Yet the unsoundness of the general principle of the classifications of the physiophilosophers should not render us blind to all that is valuable in their special writings. The works of Oken, in particular, teem with original suggestions respecting the natural affinities of animals ; and his thorough acquaintance with every investigation of his predecessors and contemporaries shows him to have been one of the most learned zoologists of this century.

This diagram is extracted from Fitzinger's Systema Reptilium ; Vindobonze, 1843, 1 vol. 8vo.

I. Provincia. EVERTEBRATA.

Animalia systematum anatomicorum vegetativorum gradum evolutionis exhibentia.

A. Gradus evolutionis systematum physiologicorum vegetativorum. I. Circulus. GASTROZOA.

Evolutio systematis nutritionis.

a. Evolutio praevalens 1. Evolutio prsevalens c. Evolutio przevalens systematis digestionis. systematis circulationis. systematis rcspirationis.

CL. 1. INFUSORIA. CL. 2. ZOOPHTTA. CL. 3.

II. Circulus. PHTSIOZOA.

Evolutio systematis generationis. CL. 4. VERMES. CL. 5. RADIATA. CL. 6. ANNULATA.

B. Gradus evolutionis systematuin physiologicorum aniinalium.

III. Circulus. DERMATOZOA.

Evolutio systematis sensibilitatis. CL. 7. ACEPHALA. CL. 8. CEPHALOPODA. CL. 9. MOLLUSCA.

IV. Circulus. ARTHROZOA.

Evolutio systematis motus. CL. 10. CRUSTACEA. CL. 11. ARACHNOIDEA. CL. 12. INSECXA.

II. Provincia. VERTEBRATA.

Animalia systematuin anatoraicorum aniinalium gradum evolutiouis exhibeutia.

A. Gradus evolutionis systeinatum physiologicorum vegetativoruni.

a. Evolutio systematis nutritiouis, simulque ossium .... CL. 13. PISCES.

b. Evolutio systematis generationis, simulque musculoruui . . . CL. 14. REPTILIA.

B. Gradus evolutionis systematum physiologicorum animalium.

c. Evolutio systematis sensibilitatis, simulque nervorum . . . CL. 15. AVES.

d. Evolutio systematis motus, simulque

sensuum .... CL. 16. MAMMALIA.

The fundamental idea of the classification of Fitzinger is the same as that upon which Oken has based his system. The higher divisions, called by him provinces, grades, and cycles, as well as the classes and orders, are considered as representing either some combination of different systems of organs, or some particular system of organs, or some special organ. His two highest groups (provinces) are the Evertebrata and Vertebrata. The Evertebrata represent the systems of the vegetative organs, and the Vertebrata those of the animal organs, as the Gutanimals and the Flesh -animals of Oken. Instead, however, of adopting, like Oken, anatomical names for his

divisions, Fitzinger employs those most generally in use. His subdivisions or grades of these two primary groups are based upon a repetition of the same differences within their respective limits. The Invertebrata, in which the vegetative organs prevail, are contrasted with those in which the animal organs prevail; and the same distinction is again drawn among the Vertebrata. Each of these embraces two circles, founded upon the development of one particular system of organs, etc. It cannot be expected that the systems founded upon such principles should present a closer agreement with one another than those which are based upon anatomical differences; yet I would ask, what becomes of the principle itself, if its advocates cannot even agree upon what anatomical systems of organs their classes are founded 1 According to Oken, the Mollusks (Acephala, Gasteropoda, and Cephalopoda) represent the system of circulation ; at least, in the last edition of his system, he views them, in that light, whilst Fitzinger considers them as representing the system of sensibility. Oken identifies the Articulata (Worms, Crustacea, and Insects) with the system of respiration ; Fitzinger with that of motion, with the exception of the Worms, including Radiata, which he parallelizes with the system of reproduction, etc. Such discrepancies must shake all confidence in these systems, though they should not prevent us from noticing the happy comparisons and suggestions to which the various attempts to classify the animal kingdom in this way have led their authors. It is almost superfluous to add, that, great as the disagreement is between the systems of different physiophilosophers, we find quite as striking discrepancies between the different editions of the system of the same author.

The principle of the subdivision of the classes among Invertebrata is here exemplified from the Radiata (Echiuoderrnata). Each series contains three orders.

1st Series. 2nd Series. 3rd Series.

Evolutio prievalens Evolutio prtevalens Evolutio pnevalens

systematic digestiouis. systematis circulatiouis. systeinatis respirationis.

ASTEROIDEA. EcHINODEA. SCYTOBEEMATA (Holothurioids).

1. Eucrinoidea. 1. Aprocta. 1. Syuaptoidea.

2. Comatulina. 2. Echinina. 2. Holothurioidea.

3. Asteriua. 3. Spatangoidea. 3. Pentactoidea.

In Vertebrata each class has five series, and each series three orders ; so in Mammalia, for example :

1st Series. 2nd Series 3rd Series.

Evolutio prtevalens Evolutio prxvalens Evolutio prsevalens

sensus tactus. sensus gustus. sensus olfactus,

1. Balanodea. 1. Phocina. 1. Monotrernata.

2. Delphinodea. 2. Obcsa. 2. Lipodonta.

3. Sirenia. 3. Ruminantia. 3. Tardigrada.

4th Series. 5th Series.

Evolutio prtevalens Evolutio prajvalens sensus auditus, sensus visus.

1. Glires. 1. Chiropteri.

2. Bruta. 2. Heinipitheci."

3. Ferae. 3. Anthropomorphi.

Instead of considering the orders as founded upon a repetition of the characters of higher groups, as Oken would have it, Fitzinger adopts series as founded upon that idea, and subdivides them further into orders as above. These series, however, have still less reference to the systems of organs which they are said to represent, than either the classes or the higher divisions of the animal kingdom. In these attempts to arrange minor groups of animals into natural series, no one can fail to perceive an effort to adapt the frames of our systems to the impression we receive from a careful examination of the natural

344 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

relations of organized beings. Everywhere we notice such series; sometimes extending only over groups of species, at other times embracing many genera, entire families, — • nay, extending frequently to several families. Even the classes of the same branch may exhibit, more or less distinctly, such a serial gradation. But I have failed, thus far, to discover the principle to which such relations may be referred, as far as they do not rest upon complication of structure,1 or upon the degree of superiority or inferiority of the features upon which the different kinds of groups are themselves founded. Analogy plays also into the series; but before the categories of analogy have been as carefully scrutinized as those of affinity, it is impossible to say within what limits this takes place.

CLASSIFICATION OF M'LEAY.

The great merit of the system of M'Leay2 — and in my opinion it has no other claim to our consideration — consists in having called prominently the attention of naturalists to the difference between two kinds of relationship almost universally confounded before, — affinity and analogy. Analogy is shown to consist in the repetition of similar features in groups otherwise remote, as far as their anatomical characters are concerned, whilst affinity is based upon similarity in the structural relations. On account of the similarity of their locomotion, Bats, for instance, may be considered as analogous to Birds ; Whales are analogous to Fishes on account of the similarity of their form and their aquatic mode of life; whilst both

1 Compare Chap. II, Sect. 3, p. 233. of the German physiophilosophers,

2 1 have introduced the classifica- but on account of its general charaction of M'Leay into this section, not ter, and because it is based upon an because of any resemblance to those ideal view of the affinities of animals.

Bats and Whales are allied to one another and to other Mammalia on account of the identity of the most characteristic features of their structure. This important distinction cannot fail to lead to interesting results. Thus far, however, it has only produced fanciful comparisons from those who first traced it out. It is assumed, for instance, by M'Leay, that all animals of one group must be analogous to those of every other group, besides forming a circle in themselves ; and in order to carry out this idea all animals are arranged in circular groups, in such a manner as to bring out these analogies, whilst the most obvious affinities are set aside to favour a preconceived view. But, that I may not appear to underrate the merits of this system, I will present it in the very words of its most zealous admirer and self-complacent expounder, the learned William Swainson.1

"The 'Horse Entomologicae,'2 unluckily for students, can only be thoroughly understood by the adept, since the results and observations are explained in different parts; the style is somewhat desultory, and the groups, for the most part, are rather indicated than defined. The whole, in short, is what it professes to be, — more a rough sketch of the leading peculiarities of the great divisions of animals, and the manner in which they are probably connected, than an accurate determination of the groups themselves, or a demonstration of their real affinities. More than this, perhaps, could not have been expected, considering the then state of science, and the Herculean difficulties which the author had to surmount. The work in question has now become exceedingly scarce; and this

1 SWAINSON (W.), A Treatise of the 2 M'LEAY (W. S.), Horae Entomo-

Geography and Classification of Ani- logicas ; or Essays on the Annulose

mals ; London, 1835, 1 vol. 12mo., Animals; London, 1819-21, 2 vols.,

p. 201-205. 8vo.

346 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

will be an additional reason with us for communicating occasional extracts from it to the reader. Mr. M'Leay's theory will be best understood by consulting his diagram ; for he has not, as we have already remarked, defined any of the vertebrated groups. Condensing, however, the result of his remarks, we shall state them as resolvable into the following propositions: 1, that the natural series of animals is continuous, forming, as it were, a circle, so that upon commencing at any one given point, and thence tracing all the modifications of structure, we shall be imperceptibly led, after passing through numerous forms, again to the point from which we started; 2, that no groups arc natural which do not exhibit such a circular series ; 3, that the primary divisions of every large group are ten, five of which are composed of comparatively large circles, and five of smaller, — these latter being termed osculant, and being intermediate between the former, which they serve to connect; 4, that there is a tendency, in such groups as are placed at the opposite points of a circle of affinity, 'to meet each other'; 5, that one of the five larger groups into which every natural circle is divided, 'bears a resemblance to all the rest, — or, more strictly speaking, consists of types which represent those of each of the four other groups, together with a type peculiar to itself.' These are the chief and leading principles which Mr. M'Leay considers as belonging to the natural system. We shall now copy his diagram, or table of the animal kingdom, and then endeavour, with this help, to explain the system more in detail."

Pteropoda. Acephala. P. Rudes. \^ Brachiopoda.

P. Vaginati. ACRITA. Agastria.

P. Natantes. / \ Amphibia.

Intestm; / ANIMALIA \ Pisces.

Reptilia.

Aves. VERTEBRATA.

Mammalia.

Fistuuda. Acalephidaa.

RADIATA.

Eclainidrc. Medusidse.

Stelleridse.

Ametabola.

Mandibulata- ANNULOSA. Crustacea.

Haustellata. Arachnids.

"We must, in the first instance, look to the above tabular disposition of all animals, as forming themselves collectively into one great circle, which circle touches or blends into another, composed of plants, by means of the ' least organized beings of the vegetable kingdom'. Next we are to look to the larger component parts of this great circular assemblage. We find it, in accordance with the third proposition, to exhibit five great circles composed of the MOLLUSCA, or shell-fish ; ACRITA, or polyps ; RADIATA, or star-fish; ANNULOSA, or insects; and VERTEBRATA, or vertebrated animals; each passing or blending into each other by means of five other groups of animals, much smaller, indeed, in their extent, but forming so many con-

348 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

necting or osculant circles.1 The number, therefore, as many erroneously suppose, is not five, but ten. This is quite obvious ; and our opinion on this point is confirmed by the author himself in the following passage, when alluding to his remarks upon the whole : ' The foregoing observations, I am well aware, are far from accurate, but they are sufficient to prove that there are five great circular groups in the animal kingdom, each of which possesses a peculiar structure; and that these, when connected by means of five smaller osculant groups, compose the whole province of Zoology.' Now these smaller osculant groups are to be viewed as circles; for, as it is elsewhere stated, 'every natural group is a circle more or less complete/ This, in fact, is the third general principle of Mr. M'Leay's system ; and he has exemplified his meaning of a natural group in the above diagram, where all animals are arranged under five large groups or circles, and five smaller ones. Let us take one of these groups, the Vertebrata. Does that form a circle of itself ? Yes ; because it is intimated that the Eeptiles (R&ptilia) pass into the Birds (Aves); these, again, into the Quadrupeds (Mammalia}; Quadrupeds unite with the Fishes (Pisces); these latter with the amphibious Eeptiles; and the Frogs bring us back again to the Reptiles, the point from whence we starred. Thus the series of the vertebrated group is marked out, and shown to be circular; therefore it is a natural group. This is an instance where the circular series can be traced. We now turn to one where the series is imperfect, but where there is a decided tendency to a circle. This is the Mollusca. Upon this group our author says : ' I have by no means determined the circular disposition to hold good

1 In the original diagram, as in merely indicated by the names arthat above, these five smaller circles ranged like rays between the five are not represented graphically, but large circles.

among the Mollusca; still, as it is equally certain that this group of animals is as yet the least known, it may be improper at present to conclude that it forms any exception to the rule : it would even seem unquestionable that the Gasteropoda of Cuvier return into themselves, so as to form a circular group ; but whether the Acephala form one or two such, is by no means accurately ascertained, though enough is known of the Mollusca to incline us to suspect that they are no less subjected, in general, to a circular disposition than the four other great groups.' This, therefore, our author considers as one of those groups which, without actually forming a circle, yet evinces a disposition to do so; and it is therefore presumed to be a natural group. But, to illustrate this principle farther, let us return to the circle of Vertebrata. This, as we see by the diagram, contains five minor groups or circles, each of which is again resolvable into five others regulated precisely in the same way. The class Aves, for example, is first divided into rapacious birds (Raptor es), perching birds (Insessores), gallinaceous birds (Rasores), wading birds (Gr allator es), and swimming birds (Natatores); and the proof of this class being a natural group is in all these divisions blending into each other at their confines and forming a circle. In this manner we proceed, beginning with the higher groups and descending to the lower, until at length we descend to genera properly so called, and reach at last the species; every group, whether large or small, forming a circle of its own. Thus there are circles within circles, ' wheels within wheels' — an infinite number of complicated relations ; but all regulated by one simple and uniform principle, — that is, the circularity of every group."

The writer who can see that the Quadrupeds unite with

350 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

the Fishes, and the like, and yet says that Cuvier "was totally unacquainted with the very first principles of the natural system," hardly deserves to be studied in our days.

The attempt at representing graphically the complicated relations which exist among animals has, however, had one good result, — it has checked, more and more, the confidence in the uniserial arrangement of animals, and led to the construction of many valuable maps exhibiting the multifarious relations which natural groups, of any rank, bear to one another.

Embryology, in the form it has assumed within the last fifty years, is as completely a German science as the " Naturphilosophie." It awoke to this new activity contemporaneously with the development of the Philosophy of Nature. It would hardly be possible to recognize the leading spirit in this new development, from his published works; but the man whom Pander and K. E. von Baer acknowledge as their master must be considered as the soul of this movement, and this man is Ignatius Dollinger. It is with deep gratitude I remember, for my own part, the influence which that learned and benevolent man had upon my studies and early scientific application during the four years I spent in his house, in Munich, from 1827 to 1831. To him I am indebted for an acquaintance with what was then known of the development of animals prior to the publication of the great work of Baer; and from his lectures I first learned to appreciate the importance of Embryology to Physiology and Zoology. The investigations

of Pander1 upon the development of the chicken in the egg, which have opened the series of those truly original researches in Embryology of which Germany may justly be proud, were made under the direction and with the cooperation of Dollinger, and were soon followed by the more extensive works of Rathke and Baer, whom the civilized world acknowledges as the founders of modern Embryology.

The principles of classification propounded by K. E. von Baer seem never to have been noticed by systematic writers ; and yet they not only deserve the most careful consideration, but it may fairly be said that no naturalist, besides Cuvier, has exhibited so deep an insight into the true character of a natural system, supported by such an extensive acquaintance with the subject, as this great embryologist has in his " Scholien und Corallarien zu der Entwickelungsgeschichte des Hiilinchens in Eie."2 These principles are presented in the form of general proportions rather than in the shape of a diagram with definite systematic names ; and this may explain the neglect which it has experienced on the part of those who are better satisfied with words than with thoughts. A few abstracts, however, may show how richly the perusal of his work is likely to reward the reader.

The results at which K. E. von Baer had arrived by his embryological investigations, respecting the fundamental relations existing among animals, differed considerably from the ideas then prevailing. In order, therefore, to be correctly understood, he begins, with his accustomed ac-

1 PANDER, Beitrage zur Entwicke-- flexion von Dr. Karl Ernst von Baer; lungsgeschichte des Hiihnchens im Konigsberg, 1828, 4to. — See also Acta Eie; Wiirzburg, 1817, 1 vol. fol. Nova Acad. Leop. Caesar, vol. 13, and

2 Ueber Eutwickelungsgeschichte Meckel's Arch., 1826. der Thiere, Beobachtung und Re-

352 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION,

curacy and clearness, to present a condensed account of those opinions with which he disagreed, in these words:

"Few views of the relations existing in the organic world have received so much approbation as this: that the higher animal forms, in the several stages of the development of the individual, from the beginning of its existence to its complete formation, correspond to the permanent forms in the animal series, and that the development of the several animals follows the same laws as those of the entire animal series; that consequently the more highly organized animal, in its individual development, passes, in all that is essential, through the stages that are permanent below it, so that the periodical differences of the individual may be reduced to the differences of the permanent animal forms."

Next, in order to have some standard of comparison with his embryological results, he discusses the relative position of the different permanent types of animals as follows :

" It is especially important that we should distinguish between the degree of perfection in the animal structure and the type of organization. The degree of perfection of the animal structure consists in the greater or less heterogeneousness of the elementary parts, and the separate divisions of a complicated apparatus, — in one word, in the greater histological and morphological differentiation. The more uniform the whole mass of the body is, the lower the degree of perfection: it is a stage higher when nerve and muscle, blood and cellular tissue, are sharply distinguished. In proportion to the difference between these parts is the development of the animal life in its different tendencies; or, to express it more accurately, the more the animal life is developed in its several

tendencies, the more heterogeneous are the elementary parts which this life brings into action. The same is true of the single parts of any apparatus. That organization is higher in which the separate parts of an entire system differ more among themselves, and each part has greater individuality, than that in which the whole is more uniform. I call type the relations of organic elements and organs, as far as their position is concerned. This relation of position is the expression of certain fundamental connexions in the tendency of the individual relations of life ; as, for instance, of the receiving and discharging poles of the body. The type is altogether distinct from the degree of perfection; so that the same type may include many degrees of perfection, and, vice versa, the same degree of perfection may be reached in several types. The degree of perfection, combined with the type, first determines those great animal groups which have been called classes.1 The confounding of the degree of perfection with the type of organization seems the cause of much mistaken classification; and in the evident distinction between these two relations we have sufficient proof that the different animal forms do not present one uniserial development from the Monad up to Man."

The types he has recognized are :

I. The Peripherie Type. The essential contrasts in this type are between the centre and the periphery.2 The

1 From this statement it is plain complication of structure as deterthat Baer has a very definite idea of mining the relative rank of the orders, the plan of structure, and that he and the different ways in which, and has reached it by a very different the different means by which, the road from that of Cuvier. It is clear plans are executed, as characteristic also that he understands the distinc- of the classes.

tion between a plan and its execu- 2 Without translating verbatim

tion. But his ideas respecting the the descriptions Baer gives of his

different features of structure are not types, which are greatly abridged

quite so precise. He does not dis- here, they are reproduced as nearly

tinguish, for instance, between the as possible in his own words.

AA

354 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

organic functions of life are carried on in antagonistic relations, from the centre to the circumference. Corresponding to this, the whole organization radiates around a common centre. There exists, besides, only the contrast between above and below, but in a weaker degree ; that between right and left, or before and behind, is not at all noticeable, and the motion is therefore undetermined in its direction. As the whole organization radiates from one focus, so are the centres of all the organic systems arranged, ring-like, around it; as, for instance, the stomach, the nerves and the vessels (if these parts are developed), and the branches extending from them into the rays. What we find in one ray is repeated in every other, the radiation being always from the centre outwards, and every ray bearing the same relation to it.

II. The Longitudinal Type, as observed in the Vibrio, the Filaria, the Gordius, the Nais, and throughout the whole series of articulated animals. The contrast between the receiving and the discharging organs, which are placed at the two ends of the body, controls the whole organization. The mouth and the anus are always at opposite ends, and usually also the sexual organs, though their opening is sometimes farther forward : this occurs, however, more frequently in the females, in which these organs have a double function, than in the males. When both sexual organs are removed from the posterior extremity, the opening in the female usually lies farther forward than in the male. So is it in the Myriapods and the Crabs. The Leeches and Earthworms present a rare exception. The receptive pole being thus definitely fixed, the organs of senses, as instrumental to the reception of the nervous system, early reach an important degree of perfection. The intestinal canal, as well as the vascular stems

and the nervous system, extends through the whole length of the body, and all organic motion in these animals has the same prevailing direction. Only subordinate branches of these organs arise laterally, and chiefly wherever the general contrast, manifested in the whole length, is repeated in such a manner, that, for each separate segment, the same contrast arises anew in connexion with the essential elements of the whole organism. Hence the tendency in these animals to divide into many segments, in the direction of the longitudinal axis of the body. In the true Insects undergoing metamorphosis, these segments unite again into three principal regions, in the first of which the life of the nerves prevails; in the second, motion ; in the third, digestion ; though neither of the three regions is wholly deprived of any one of these functions. Besides the opposition between before and behind, a less marked contrast is observed in a higher stage of development between above and below. A difference between right and left forms a rare exception, and is generally wanting. Sensibility and irritability are particularly developed in this series. Motion is active, and directed more decidedly forward in proportion as the longitudinal axis prevails. When the body is contracted, as in spiders and crabs, its direction is less decided. The plastic organs are little developed; glands, especially, are rare, and mostly replaced by simple tubes.

III. The Massive Type. We may thus call the type of Mollusks, for neither length nor surface prevails in them; but the whole body and its separate parts are formed rather in round masses, which may be either hollow or solid. As the chief contrast of their structure is not between the opposite ends of the body, nor between the centre and periphery, there is almost throughout this

AA 2

356 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

type an absence of symmetry. Generally the discharging pole is to the right of the receptive one, The discharging pole, however, is either near the receptive one, or removed from it, and approximated to the posterior extremity of the body. As the tract of the digestive apparatus is always determined by these two poles, it is more or less arched; in its simplest form it is only a single arch, as in PlumateUa, When that canal is long, it is curled up in a spiral in the centre, and the spiral probably has its definite laws. For instance, the anterior part of the alimentary canal appears to be always placed under the posterior. The principal currents of blood are also in arches, which do not coincide with the medial hue of the body. The nervous system consists of diffused ganglia, united by threads, the larger ones being around the oesophagus. The nervous system and the organs of sense appear late; the motions are slow and powerless.

IV. The Vertebrate Type. This is, as it were, composed of the preceding types, as we distinguish an animal and a vegetative system of the body, which, though influencing one another in their development, have singly a peculiar typical organization. In the animal system the articulation reminds us of the second type, and the discharging and receiving organs are also placed at opposite ends. There is, however, a marked difference between the Articulates and the Vertebrates, for the animal system of the Vertebrates is not only doubled along the two sides, but at the same time upwards and downwards, in such a way that the two lateral walls which unite below circumscribe the vegetative system, while the two tending upward surround a central organ of the animal life, — the brain and spinal marrow, which are wanting in Invertebrates. The solid frame represents this type most completely, as from

its medial axis, the backbone, there arise upward, arches which close in an upper crest; and downward, arches which unite, more or less, in a lower crest. Corresponding to this we see four rows of nervous threads alono; the

O

spinal marrow, which itself contains four strings, and a quadripartite gray mass. The muscles of the trunk form also four principal masses, which are particularly distinct in the Fishes. The animal system is therefore doubly symmetrical in its arrangement. It might easily be sho\vn how the vegetative systems of the body correspond to the type of Mollusks, though influenced by the animal system.

From the illustrations accompanying this discussion of the great types or branches of the animal kingdom, and still more from the paper published by K. E. von Baer in the " Nova Acta,"1 it is evident that he perceived more clearly and earlier than any other naturalist the true relations of the lowest animals to their respective branches. He includes neither Bryozoa nor Intestinal Worms among Eadiata, as Cuvier, and after him so many modern writers, did, but correctly refers the former to the Mollusks, and the latter to the Articulates.

Comparing these four types with the embryonic development, von Baer shows that there is only a general similarity between the lower animals and the embryonic stages of the higher ones, arising mainly from the absence of differentiation in the body, and not from a typical resemblance. The embryo does not pass from one type to the other; on the contrary, the type of each animal is

1 Beitrjige zur Kenntniss der nie- animals. These " Beitriige" and the

dern Thiere, Nova Acta Academic papers in which Cuvier characterized

Naturae Curiosuni, vol. 13, Part 2, for the first time the four great types

1827, containing seven papers, upon of the animal kingdom, are amon°-

Aspidogaster, Distoma, and others, the most important contributions to

Cercaria, Nitzschia, Polystoma, Pla- general Zoology ever published. iiaria, and the general affinities of all

358 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

defined from the beginning, and controls the whole development. The embryo of the Vertebrate is a Vertebrate from the beginning, and does not exhibit at any time a correspondence with the Invertebrates. The embryos of Vertebrates do not pass, in their development, through other permanent types of animals. The fundamental type is first developed, and afterwards more and more subordinate characters appear. From a more general type the more special is manifested; and the more two forms of animals differ, the earlier must their development be traced back to discern an agreement between them. It is barely possible that, in their first beginning, all animals are alike, and present only hollow spheres ; but the individual development of the higher animals certainly does not pass through the permanent forms of lower ones. What is common in a higher group of animals is always sooner developed in their embryos than what is special : out of that which is most general arises that which is less general, until that which is most special appears. Each embryo of a given type of animals, instead of passing through other definite types, becomes, on the contrary, more and more unlike them. An embryo of a higher type is therefore never identical with another animal type, but only with an embryo.

Thus far do the statements of von Baer extend.1 It is

1 The account which Huxley gives protests against an identification of

of Baer's views (see Baden Powell's his views with those of Cuvier. (Ba-

Essays, Appendix 7, p. 495) is incor- er's Entwick. p. 7.) Nor has Baer

rect." Baer did not "demonstrate demonstrated the "doctrine of the

that the classification of Cuvier was, unity of organization of all animals,"

in the main, simply the expression and placed it " upon a footing as

of the fact, that there are certain secure as the law of gravitation,"

common plans of development in the and arrived at "the grandest law,"

animal kingdom," etc.; for Cuvier that, up to a certain point, the deverecognized these plans in the struc- lopmeut "folio-wed a plan common to

ture of the animals before Baer traced all animals." On the contrary, Baer

their development ; and Baer himself admits four distinct types of animals,

evident from this that he has clearly perceived the limitation of the different modes of embryonic development within the respective branches of the animal kingdom; but it is equally certain that Ins assertions are too general to furnish a key for the comparison of the successive changes which the different types undergo within their respective limits, and that he is still vaguely under the impression that the development corresponds, in its individualization, to the degrees of complication of structure. This could hardly be otherwise as long as the different categories of the structure of animals had not been clearly distinguished.1

In conformity with his embryological investigations, K. E. von Baer proposes the following classification :

I. Peripherie Type. (RADIATA.) Evolutio radiata. The development proceeds from a centre, producing identical parts in a radiating order.

II. Massive Type. (MOLLUSCA.) Evolutio contorta. The development produces identical parts curved around a conical or other space.

III. Longitudinal Type. (ARTICULATA.) Evolutio gemina. The development produces identical parts arising on both sides of an axis, and closing up along a line opposite the axis.

and four modes of development. He trary, Cuvier's special object for

only adds : " It is barely possible, many years was to point out these

that, in their first beginning, all aui- plans, and to show that they are

mals are alike." Huxley must also characterized by peculiar struchave overlooked Cuvier's introduc- tures ; while Baer's merit consists in

tion to the " Regne Animal" (2nd having discovered four modes of deedit., vol. 1, p. 48, quoted verbatim velopment, which coincide with the

above, p. 309), when he stated that branches of the animal kingdom, in

Cuvier " did not attempt to discover which Cuvier recognized four differupon what plans animals are con- ent plans of structure. Huxley is

structed, but to ascertain in what equally mistaken when he says that

manner the facts of animal organiza- Cuvier adopted the nervous system

tions could be thrown into the fewest " as the base of his great divisions."

possible propositions." On the con- 1 Compare Chap. II, Sect. 1 to 9.

360 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

V. Doubly Symmetrical type. (VERTEBBATA.) Evolutio Mgemina. The development produces identical parts arising on both sides of an axis, growing upwards and downwards, and shutting up along two lines, so that the inner layer of the germ is inclosed below, and the upper layer above. The embryos of these animals have a dorsal cord, dorsal plates, and ventral plates, a nervous tube and branchial fissures. 1°. They acquire branchial fringes ;

a. But no genuine lungs are developed.

a. The skeleton is not ossified. CARTILAGINOUS FISIIES.

$. The skeleton is ossified. FISHES PROPER. I. Lungs are formed. AMPHIBIA.

«. The branchial fringes remain. SIRENS.

/3. The branchial fringes disappear. UIIODELA and ANUIIA. 2°. They acquire an allantois, but «. Have no umbilical cord ;

a. Nor wings and air sacs. REPTILES.

/8. But wings and air sacs. BIRDS.

b. Have an umbilical cord. MAMMALIA.

a. Which disappears early ;

1°. Without connection with the mother. MONOTREMATA. 2°. After a short connection with the mother. MARSU-

PIALIA.

0. AVhich is longer persistent ;

1°. The yolk sac continues to grow for a long time. The allantois grows little. RODENTIA. The allantois grows moderately. INSECTIVORA. The allantois grows much. CARNIVORA. 2°. The yolk sac increases slightly.

The allantois grows little. Umbilical cord very long.

MONKEYS and MAN.

The allantois continues to grow for a long time. Placenta in simple masses. RUMINANTS. The allantois continues to grow for a long time. Placenta spreading. PACHYDERMS and CETACEA.

Van Beneden has also proposed a classification based upon Embryology, which was first sketched in his paper upon the Embryology of the Bryozoa: Recherches sur 1'anatomie, la physiologic, et 1'embryogenie des Bryozoaires; Bruxelles, 1845, 4to. ; and afterwards extended in his Comparative Anatomy : Anatomic comparee (Bruxelles, without date, but probably of the your 1855), 1 vol. 12mo.

EMBRYO-LOGICAL SYSTEMS. 361

I. HYPOCOTYLEDONES, or HYPOVITELLIANS. (Vertebrata.) The vitcllus

enters the body from the ventral side. CL. 1. MAMMALIA. (Primates, Cheiroptera, Insectivora, Rodeutia,

Carnivora, Edentata, Proboscidea, Ungulata, Siienoidea, Cetacea.) CL. 2. BIRDS. (Psittacete, Rapaces, Passeres, ColumbEe, Gallinae, Struthiones, Grallac, Palmipedes.) CL. 3. REPTILES. (Crocodili, Chelonii, Ophidii, Saurii, Pterodactyli,

Simosauri, Plesiosauri, Ichthyosauri.) CL. 4. BATEACHIANS. (Labyrinthodontes, Peromelia, Anura, Urodela,

Lepidosirenia.) CL. 5. FISHES. (Plagiostomi, Ganoidei, Teleostei, Cyclostomi, Leptocardii.)

II. EPICOTYLEDONES, or EPIVITELLIANS. (Articnlata.) The vitellus enters

the body from the dorsal side. CL. C. INSECTS. (Coleoptera, Neuroptera, Strepsiptera, Hymenoptera

Lepidoptera, Diptera, Orthoptera, Heuiiptera, Thysanura, Parasita.)

CL. 7. MYRIAPODES. (Diplopoda, Chilopoda.) CL. 8. ARACHNIDES. (Scorpiones, Araueae, Acari, Tardigrada.) CL. 9. CRUSTACEA. (Decapoda, Stomapoda, Amphipoda, Isopoda, La3modipoda, Phyllopoda, Lophyropoda, Xiphosura, Siphonostoma, Myzostoma, and Cirripedia.)

III. ALLOCOTYLEDONES or ALLOVITELLIAXS. (Mollusco-Radiaria.) The vitellus enters the body neither from the ventral nor from the dorsal side.

CL. 10. MOLLUSCA. Including Cephalopoda, Gasteropoda, Poccilopoda, and Brachiopoda. (Acephala, Tunicata, and Bryozoa.)

CL. 11. WORMS. (Malacopoda, Aunelides, Sipouculides, Netnertini, Nematodes, Acanthocephali, Scoleides, Hirudinei, Treuiatodes Cestodes, Rotiferi, Planarise.)

CL. 12. ECHINODERMS. (Holothurise, Echiuides, Stellerides, Crinoides.)

CL. 13. POLYPS. Including Tuuicata, Bryozoa, Anthozoa, Alcyonaria, and Medusae, as orders. (Ctenophorse, Siphonophorse, Discophorse, Hydroids, Anthophoridee.)

CL. 14. RHIZOPODS. Only the genera mentioned.

CL. 15. INFUSORIA. Only genera and families mentioned.

Van Beneden thinks the classification of Linnaeus truer to nature than either that of Cuvier or of De Blainville, as the class of Worms of the Swedish naturalist corresponds to his Allocotylcdones, that of Insects to his Hypo-

362 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

cotyleclones, and the four classes of Pisces, Amphibia, Aves, and Mammalia, to his Hypocotyledones. He compares his primary divisions to the Dicotyledones, Monocotyledones, and Acotyledones of the vegetable kingdom. But he overlooks that the Cephalopoda are not Allocotyledones, and that any group of animals which unites Mollusks, Worms, and Radiates in one great mass, cannot be founded upon correct principles. As to his classes, I can only say, that, if there are natural classes among animals, there never was a combination of animals proposed since Linnseus less likely to answer to a philosophical idea of what a class may be, than that which unites the Tunicata with the Polyps and Acalephs. In his latest work, Van Beneden has introduced in this classification many important improvements and additions. Among the additions, the indication of the orders (which are introduced in brackets in the diagram above) deserves to be particularly noticed. The changes relate chiefly to the Mollusks and Polyps, the Tunicata and Bryozoa being removed from the Polyps to the Mollusks. The Acalephs and Polypi, however, are still considered as forming together one single class.

The comparison instituted by Van Beneden between his classification of the animal kingdom and that of plants, as now most generally adopted, leads me again to call attention to the necessity of carefully scrutinizing anew the vegetable kingdom, with the view of ascertaining how far the results at which I have arrived concerning the value of the different kinds of natural groups existing among animals,1 apply also to plants. It would certainly be premature to assume that, because the branches of the animal kingdom are founded upon different plans of structure, the vegetable kingdom must necessarily be built also

1 See Chap. II.

upon different plans. There are probably not so many different modes of development among plants as among animals; unless the reproduction by spores, by naked polyembryonic seeds, by angiospermous rnonocotyledonous seeds, and by angiospermous dicotyledonous seeds, connected with the structural differences exhibited by the Acotyledones, Gymnospermese, Monocotyledones, and Dicotyledones, be considered as amounting to an indication of different plans of structure. But, even then, these differences would not be so marked as those which distinguish the four branches of the animal kingdom. The limitation of classes and orders, which presents comparatively little difficulty in the animal kingdom, is less advanced among plants; whilst botanists have thus far been much more accurate than zoologists in characterizing families. This is, no doubt, chiefly owing to the peculiarities of the two organic kingdoms.

It must be further remarked that, in the classification of Van Beneden, the animals united under the name of Allocotyledones are built upon such entirely different plans of structure, that their combination must of itself satisfy any unprejudiced observer that any principle which unites them in that way cannot be true to nature.

KOLLIKER (A.), in his Entwickelungsgeschichte der Cephalopoden (Zurich, 1844, 1 vol., 4to , p. 175), has submitted the following diagram of the development of the animal kingdom.

A. The embryo arises from a primitive part. (Evolutio ex una parte.}

1°. It grows in two directions, with bilateral symmetry. (Evolutio ligemina.)

a. The dorsal plates close up. VERTEBKATA. I. The dorsal plates remain open and are transformed into limbs.

AUTICULATA.

364 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

2°. It grows uniformly in every direction. (Evolutio radiata.) And

a. Incloses the embryonal vesicle entirely.

«. This takes place very early. GASTEROPODA and ACEPHALA. /8. This takes place late. (Temporary vitelliue sac.) LIMAX.

b. Contracts above the embryonal vesicle. (Genuine vitelline

sac.) CEPHALOPODA.

B. The whole body of the embryo arises simultaneously. (Eoolutio ex omnibus partibus.) 1°. It grows in the direction of its transverse axis,

a. With its hind body. RADIATA. (Echiuoderms.)

b. With the fore body, and

a. The hind body does not grow. ACALEPHS. /3. The hind body grows longitudinally. POLYPI. 2°. It grows in the direction of its longitudinal axis. WOKMS.

I have already shown how unnatural a zoological system must be which is based upon a distinction between total or partial segmentation of the yolk.1 No more can a diagram of the development of animals which adopts this difference as fundamental be true to nature, even though it is based upon real facts. We ought never to single out isolated features, by which animals may be united or separated, as most anatomists do ; our aim should rather be to ascertain their general relations, as Cuvier and K. E. von Baer have so beautifully shown.2 I think, also, that the homology of the limbs of Articulata and the dorsal plates of Vertebrata is more than questionable, The distinction, introduced between Polyps and Acalephs and these and the other Radiates, is not at all better founded. It seems also quite inappropriate to call

1 Chap. III., Sect. 1, p. 288. die gegenseitige Verwandtschaft der

1 The principles of classification Thiere zu erlangen, die verschiedenen

advocated by Baer are so clearly ex- Organisationstypen von den verschipressed by him that I cannot resist edenen Stufen der Ausbildung stets

the temptation of quoting some pas- imterscheiclen. Das man diesen Unsages from the paper already men- terschied gewohnlich nicht ira Auge

tioiied above (p. 351), especially now, behalten hat, scheint uns zu den sonwhenlfeel called upon to oppose the derbarsten Zusammenstellungen geviews of one of his most distinguished fiihrt zu haben." Beitrag'e, etc.

colleagues. " Vor alien Dingen muss Acta Nova, vol. 13, p. 739. man, uni cine richtige Eiusicht in

the development of Mollusks evolutio radiata, especially after Baer had designated, under that same name, the mode of formation of the branch of Eadiates, for which it is far better adapted.

Contrast between the Embryo and the Yolk,

I. VERTEBRATA. Yolk ventral.

CL. 1. MAMMALIA. 1°. APLACENTARIA ; Orel. Monotremata, Marsupialia. 2°. PL A CENT ARIA. Ser. 1. Orel. Cetacea, Pachyderrnata, Solidungula, Ruiniuantia, and Edentata; Ser. 2.

Pinnipedia, Carnivora; Ser. 3. Insectivora, Volitantia, Glires, Quadrumana, Biruana. CL. 2. AVES. Ser. 1. Insessores; Ord. Coluinb£e,Oscines,Clainatores,

Scansores, Raptatores ; Ser. 2. Autophagi ; Ord. Natatores,

Grallatores, Gallinaceae, Cursores. CL. 3. REPTILIA. Ord. Ophidia, Sauria, Pterodactylia, Hydrosauria,

and Chelonia.

CL. 4. AMPHIBIA. Ord. Lepidota, Apoda, Caudata, Anura. CL. 5. PISCES. Ord. Leptocardia, Cyclostomata, Selachia, Ganoidea,

Teleostia.

II. ARTICULATA. Yolk dorsal.

CL. 6. INSECTA. Subcl. \. AMETABOLA; Ord. Aptera. Siibcl.2. Hemimetabola ; Ord. Hemiptera and Orthoptera. Subcl. 3.

Holometabola ; Ord. Diptera, Lepidoptera, Strepsiptera,

Neuroptera, Coleoptera, Hymenoptera. CL. 7. MYRIAPODA. Only divided into families. CL. 8. ARACHNIDA. Ser. 1. Pycnogouida and Tardigrada ; Ord. Acarina, Araneida. Ser. 2. With three families. CL. 9. CRUSTACEA. Subcl.l. ENTOMOSTRACA; Ord. Cirripedia, Parasita, Copepoda, Phyllopoda, Trilobita, Ostracoda. Subcl. 2.

XIPHOSURA. Subcl. 3. PODOPHTHALMA; Ord. Stomapoda,

Decapoda. Subcl. 4. EDRIOPHTHALIA; Ord. Leemipoda,

Amphipoda, Isopoda.

Transformation of the ivhole Yolk into the Embryo.

III. CEPHALOPODA. Yolk cephalic.

CL. 10. CEPHALOPODA. Ord. Tetrabranchiata and Dibranchiata.

IV. MOLLUSCA. Irregular disposition of organs.

CL. 11. CEPHALOPHORA. Subcl. 1. PTEROPODA. Subcl. 2. HETERO- PODA. Subcl. 3. GASTEROPODA ; Ord. Branchiata and Pulmonata. — Chitonida.

366 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

CL. 12. ACEPHALA. Sulcl. 1. BRACHIOPODA ; Ord. Rudista, Brachiopoda. Sulcl. 2. LAMELLIBRANCHIA ; Ord. Pleurochoncha, Orthoconcha, Inclusa.

CL. 13. TUNICATA. Ord. Ascidirc, Biphora. 'i

CL. 14. CTENOPHORA. Ord. Only subdivided into familes. •> CL. 15. BRYOZOA. Ord. Stelrnatopoda, Lophopoda.

V. VERMES. Organs bilateral.

CL. 16. ANNELIDA. Ord. Hirudinea, Gephyrea, Scoleina, Tubicola,

Errantia.

CL. 1 7. ROTATORIA. Ord. Sessilia, Natantia. CL. 18. PLATYELMIA. 1°. Ord. Cestoidea, Trematoda. 2°. Ord. Planarida, Nemertina. CL. 19. NEMATELMIA. Ord. Gregarinea, Acanthocephala, Gordiacei,

Nematoidei.

VI. RADIATA. Organs radiate.

CL. 20. ECHINODERMATA. Ofd. Crinoidca, Stellerida, Echinida, Holothurida.

CL. 21. SIPHONOFIIORA. Only subdivided into families. CL. 22. HYDROMEDUSYE. Not clearly subdivided into orders. CL. 23. POLYPI. Ord. Hexactinia, Pentactinia, Octactinia.

No ECJCJ.

CL. 24. INFUSORIA. Ord. Astoma and Stomatoda.

CL. 25. RUIZOPDA. Ord. Monosomatia and Polythalamia.

The classification of Vogt (Zoologisclie Briefe, q. a., p. 288) presents several new features, one of which is particularly objectionable. I mean the separation of the Cephalopoda from the other Mollusks, as a distinct primary division of the animal kingdom. Having adopted the fundamental distinction introduced by Kolliker between the animals in which the embryo is developed from the whole yolk, and those in which it arises from a distinct part of it, Vogt was no doubt led to this step in consequence of his interesting investigations upon Acteeon, in which he found a relation of the embryo to the yolk differing greatly from that observed by Kolliker in the Cephalopods. But, as I have already shown above, this can no more justify their separation as branches, than the total

segmentation of the yolk of the Mammalia could justify the separation of the latter from the other Vertebrates. Had the distinction made by Vogt between theCephalopods and the other Mollusks the value he assigns to it, Limax should also be separated from the other Gasteropods. The assertion, that the Protozoa produce no eggs, deserves no special consideration after what has already been said in the preceding sections respecting the animals themselves. As to the transfer of the Ctenophora to the type of Mollusks, it can in no way be maintained.

Before closing this sketch of the systems of Zoology, I cannot forego the opportunity of adding one general remark. When we remember how completely independent the investigations of K. E. von Baer were from those of Cuvier, how different the points of view were from which they treated their subject, — the one considering chiefly the mode of development of animals, while the other looked mainly to their structure; when we further consider how closely the general results at which they have arrived agree throughout, — it is impossible not to be deeply impressed with confidence in the opinion they both advocate, that the animal kingdom, exhibits four primary divisions, the representatives of which are organized upon four different plans of structure, and grow up according to four different modes of development. This confidence is further increased when we perceive that the new primary groups which have been since proposed are neither characterized by such different plans, nor developed according to such different modes of development, but exhibit simply minor differences. It is, indeed, a, very unfortunate tendency, which prevails now almost universally among naturalists with reference to all kinds of groups, of whatever value they may be, from the branches down

368 ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION.

to the species, to separate at once from one another any types which exhibit marked differences, without even inquiring first whether these differences are of a kind that justifies such separations. In our systems, the quantitative element of differentiation prevails too exclusively over the qualitative. If such distinctions are introduced under well-sounding names, they are almost certain to be adopted; as if science gained any thing by concealing a difficulty under a Latin or Greek name, or was advanced by the additional burden of a new nomenclature! Another objectionable practice, prevailing quite as extensively also, consists in the change of names, or the modification of the extent and meaning of old ones, without the addition of new information or of new views. If this practice is not abandoned, it will necessarily end in making Natural History a mere matter of nomenclature, instead of fostering its higher philosophical character. Nowhere is this abuse of a useless multiplication of names so keenly felt as in the nomenclature of the fruits of plants, which exhibits neither insight into vegetable morphology, nor even accurate observation of the material facts.

May we not rather return to the methods of such men as Cuvier and Baer, who were never ashamed of expressing their doubts in difficult cases, and were always ready to call the attention of other observers to questionable points, instead of covering up the deficiency of their information by high-sounding words ?

In this rapid review of the history of Zoology, I have omitted several classifications, such as those of Kaup and Van der Hoeven, which might have afforded an opportunity for other remarks ; but I have already extended this digression far enough to show how the standards Avhich I have proposed in my second chapter may assist us in

3G9

testing the value of the different kinds of groups generally adopted in our classifications, and this was, from the beginning, my principal object in this inquiry.1 The

1 In this edition of the Essay on Classification, which is intended as an Introduction to the study of Natural History in general, Van der Hoeven's Text-book deserves more than a passing notice, especially since its translation by Professor Clark is likely to be in the hands of every English student of Natural History.

The manner in which the characteristics of the minor groups are presented in this work is so admirable, the reference to the proper authorities so full, the evidence of a personal acquaintance with the objects described so general, and the freedom from mere compilation so praiseworthy, that it is not only to be considered as a text-book for beginners, but truly as a compendium of the present state of Zoology, that may be useful even to the professional naturalist.

Although taking the views of Cuvier respecting the primary divisions of the Animal Kingdom as a guide, the author does not seem to hold them of such importance, or sufficiently defined, to deserve a special consideration. He has thus deprived himself, in a great measure, of the opportunity of presenting in a connected manner, those broader generalizations respecting the affinities and homologies of the different classes of animals, which, however, constitute the most important progress of modern Zoology, and have secured for our science so important a place among the philosophical studies of our age. It seems to me also that, though not entirely neglected, the history of the fossil remains is not sufficiently prominent, and the manner in which they are frequently presented, without connexion with the living types, is particularly unfavourable to a true appreciation of their natural relation to their living

representatives. The time has truly come when the whole Animal Kingdom should be represented in its development through all geological periods as fully as the mode of growth of the living is, in our days, connected with their general history.

Respecting the classes, I believe, for reasons already stated (see p. 289), that the Infusoria ought to be divided off according to their natural affinity, partly among the Algfe, partly among the Worms, and partly among the Bryozoa. The relation of the Rhizopods to the lower Algte, and especially to the Corallines, seems to me daily more probable, and I consider the evidence thus adduced of the vegetable character of the Anentera as amounting almost to a demonstration.

In the class of Acalephs, the Ctenophorte occupy a position inferior to the Discophorae. It seems to me hardly questionable that they should occupy the highest position in that class. The Sipunculidsa, which I am inclined to refer to the class of worms, are included among the Echinoderms. The ambulacral system, with or without external suckers, constitutes the essential character of the Echinoderms. Sipunculus has none. The distinction of the intestinal worms and the Annulata as two distinct classes, separated by the Rotatoria, seems to me unnatural. The Turbellaria and Suctoria unite the Annulata with the Trematodes and other worms as one class, and the most recent investigations show unquestionably that the Rotatoria are Crustacea. It seems to me also unnatural to separate the insects and spiders as two classes. The Tardigrada and Acarina form the transition to the PoduraandEpizoa. The class of Crustacea, though well defined, if we add the Rotatoria to it, should be placed

next step should now be to apply these standards also to the minor divisions of the animal kingdom, down to the genera and species, and to do this for every class singly, with special reference to the works of monographers. But this is such an herculean task, that it can only be accomplished by the combined eiforts of all naturalists, during many years to come.

below the insects. The general classification of the branch of Mollusks appears the least satisfactory in this work, for while the Tunicata are considered as a distinct class, and the Conchifera as another, including the Brachiopods, the class of Mollusca proper includes not only the Pteropoda and Gasteropoda, but also the Cephalopoda. Evidently, the Cephalopoda are brought here into too close connexion with the Gasteropoda. A fuller consideration of the fossil

Cephalopoda would easily have satisfied the author that these animals constitute for themselves an independent class.

Since the publication of the Animal Kingdom of Cuvier, Van der Hoeven's Text-book is the only general work on Zoology, in which the class of fishes is presented in a manner indicating a thorough acquaintance with this class of animals. The treatment of the other Classes of Vertebrata is equally deserving of praise.

Acalephs, their occurrence in past ages, 33, n. 1; their standing, 40; their characteristics, 222; their limits as a class, 287, n.

Acari, 121

Acephala, their standing, 40

Acrita, as a primary division of the animal kingdom, 347

Actinaria, their standing, 161, 223

Actinozoaria, 217

ADAMS, his work, 52, n.

AGASSIZ, his works, 14, n.; 19, n.; 24, n. 2; 28, n. 1; 35, n. 1 and 2; 37, n. 2; 39, n. 1 and 2; 44, n. 1; 45, n. 1; 46, n. 1; 48, n. 1; 58, n.; 80, n. 2; 92, n. 3; 113, n. 2; 116, n.l; 122, n. 1; 134, n. 3; 145, n. 1; 161, n. 1; 180, n. 9; 196, n. 2; on Protozoa, 113; Rhizopoda, 113, 289; Infusoria, 113

ALBERTI, his work, 142, n. 4

ALLMAN, his papers, 105, n.; 108, n. 1

Allocotyledones or Allovitellians, as a primary division of the animal kingdom, 361

Alternate generation, 135-140; differs from metamorphosis, 138

ALTON (D'), his work, 145, n. 1

AmUyopsis spelceus, 19

Amorphozoaria, 217

Amphibians, a distinct class^of Vertebrata, 124

Amphloxus, 122, n. 1

Anaima, correspond to the Invertebrata, 208

Analogy, first distinguished from homology by Swainson, 26, 130; categories of analogy, 271-281

Anentera, Infusoria belonging to the vegetable kingdom, 290

Animals, their multiplication and origin, 15, n.; difference between them and man, 97, n. 2

Anmdata, 114, 116-118

Aquatic animals, their geographical limitation, 43; their size, 73

Arachnoids, 120

ARCHIAC (I)'), his works, 113, n. 2; 141, n. 1; 142, n. 4

ARISTOTELES, homological structures known to him, 25 ; his work, 25, n.; his distinction of man and monkeys, 97, n. 2; his views of the affinities of animals, 301, 305; his division of Articulata, 305, n. 1; his malakia, 305, n. 2

Arthropoda, as a primary group of the animal kingdom, 237

Articulata, a primary division of the animal kingdom, 40; their classes,

Arfiozoaria, 217

Association of animals, 43

Asterioids, their standing and succession, 162

AUBERT, his papers, 115, n. 1; 116, n. 1; 123, n.

AUDUBON, his work, 85, n. 2; 214

AUERBACH, his paper, 113, n. 2

AUSTIN (Th. and Th. jr.), their work, 145, n. 1

Average size of animals, 70

Aves, see Birds

BABBAGE, Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, 12, n.

BAER, his works, 24, n. 2; 101, n. 2; 116, n. 1; 122, n. 1; 124, n. 1 and 2 ; his embryological researches, 130; his principles of classification, 350-360

BAGGE, his paper, 114, n. 2

BAIRD, his paper, 68 n.

BARRAUDE, his work, 32, n. 1

BARRY, his paper, 125, n. 3

BATE, his papers, 119, n. 1 and 2

BATRACHIA, their succession, 173

BE 2

INDEX.

BAUDiMENT/his work, 125, n. 1

BEAUMONT (Elie de), his works, 155, n. 2; 157, n. 1; his investigations upon the changes in the physical conditions of the earth's surface and the systems of mountains, 157

BELL (Ch.), Bridgwater Treatise, 11 n.

BELL (Th.), his paper with Owen, 145, n. 1

BELLARDI, his work, 145, n. 1

BENEDEN, see Van Beneden

BERENDT, his work, 142, n. 4

BERGHAUS, his work, 90, n.

BERGMAN, his work, 38, n.

BERNHARDT, his work, 125, n. 3

BEWICK, 214

BEYRICH, his papers, 142, n. 4; 145, n. 1

BEZOLD, his paper, 73, n.

BIBRON, his work with Dumeril, 45, n. 2

BILLHARZ, his paper, 116, n. 1

BINGLEY, his work, 97, n. 1

Birds, their standing, 40; their development, 125

BISCHOFF (Th. L. W.), his works, 101, n. 1; 114, n. 2; 125, n. 3

BLAINVILLE (DE), his works, 31, n. 1; 37, n. 1; 145, n. 1; his classification, 316

BLANCHARD (E.), his works, 92, n. 3; 114, n. 1; 121, n. 1; 163, n. 2

Blind fish of the Mammoth Cave, 19

BLUMENBACH, his work, 37, n. 2

BOJANUS, his works, 11G, n.l; 125, n. 3

BONAPARTE, his works, 46, n.

BONNET, his works, 36, n. 2; 139, n. 2

BOSSET (De), his paper, ] 10, n. 1

BOSQUET, his papers, 145, n. 1

Brachio2)ods, their affinity to Bryozoa, 108; their standing and succession,

Branch Analogies, 274

Branches of the animal kingdom, 5, 207-219

BRAUN (Al.), his works, 24, n. 3; 103, ' n; 113, n. 2

Breathing, 20

BREMSER, his work, 186

Bridgewater Treatises, 1 1

BRODIE, his paper, 145, n. ]

BROCCHI, his work, 142, n. 4

BUONGNIART (Ad.), his works, 141, n. 1

BRONGNIART (Al.), his works, 145, n.

BRONN, his works, 141, n. 1; 142, n. 4; 144, n. 1; 145, n. 1

BROWN (R.), his work, 19, n.

BRUCH, his paper, 116, n. 2; 122, n. 1

Bryozoa, their standing and succession, 162

BUCH (L. Von), his works on fossils,

144, n. 1; 145, n. 1; 157, n. 1 BUCKLAND, Bridgwater Treatise, 12,

n.; his works on fossils, 142, n. 3;

145, n. 1; 150, n. 3

BUFFON, his views of classification, 2; his works, 85, n. 1; 99, n. 1; his descriptions of species, 213

BURDACH, Ms work, 101, n. 1

BURMEISTER, his works, 118, n. 2; 119, n. 1; 134, n. 4; 145, n. 1; 248, n. 1 ; his classification, 324

BURNETT, his work, 120, n. 1

Btrscn, his work, 104, n.

BUSK (Gr.), his paper, 163, n. 1

CANINO, see BONAPARTE

CARPENTER, his works, 111, n.; 113, n. 2

CARTER (H. T.), his paper, 113, n. 2

CARUS (C. G.), his works, 24, n.; 37, n. 2; 109, n.l; 110, n.l; 116, n.l; 121, n. 1

CARUS ( J. V.), his works, 24, n. 2; 38, n.; 116, n. 1; 136, n. 3

Categories of Analogy, 271-281

CAUTLEY, his work with Falconer, 145, n. 1

Centres of distribution of animals, 57

Cephalopoda, their standing, 40; cannot be considered as a primary division of the animal kingdom, 288, 366; a class of rnollusks, 294; partial segmentation of their yolk, 295

Cestoids, 114

CHALMERS, Bridgewater Treatise, 11, n.

CHAMISSO, his work, 109, n.; on alternate generation, 136

CHEMNITZ, see MARTINI

CIENKOWSKY, his paper, 113, n. 2

Cirripeds, 118, 129

CLAPAREDE, his papers, 110, n. 2; 113, n. 2; 114, n. 2; 116, n. 4

CLARK (Br.), his paper, 188

Classes of animals, 6, 219-228; classanalogies, 275; class-identity, 22

Classification, of Aristotle, 301 ; of Bauer, 359; of Blainville, 316; of Burmeister, 324; of Cuvier, 310; of

INDEX.

Ehrenberg, 319; of Fitzinger, 340; of Kolliker, 363; of Lamarck, 313; of Leuckart, 333; of Lhmscus, 302; of M'Leay, 344; of Milne-Edwards, 330; of Oken, 337; of Owen, 325; of Van Beneden, 360; of Vogt, 365; importance of special classifications for the animals of each geological period, 7, u.; a natural classification might be based upon reproduction, 210, n.

Climate, 21

COCTEATJ, his paper, 64, n.

Coelelmintha, as a class, 328

Ccelenterata, a primary division of the animal kingdom, 287

COHN, his papers, 113, n. 2; 118, n. 2

COLDSTREAM, his papers, 111, u. 1; 119, n. 1

Comatula, 128

Combinations in time and space of various kinds of relations among animals, 192-199

Community of structure among animals living in the same region, 60-64

Complication of structure characterizes the orders of animals, 228

Conclusions, 281-284

CONRAD, his works, 142, n. 4

Corallines are genuine algse, 290

CORNUEL, his paper, 145, n. 1

CORDA, his work, 145, n. 1

Cosmic influences, 21

COSTE, his works, 122, n. 1; 125, n. 3

Crinoids, 129 ; their standing and succession, 162

Crustacea, 40, 118, 128; their geological succession, 149; the standing and succession of their orders, 164; their development, 172; their structural gradation, 180

CROIZET, his work, 145, n. 1

Ctenophorce, an order of Acalephs, 294; cannot be referred to Mollusks. 367

Cultivated plants, 81

CCVIER (G.), his works, 24, n. 2; 31, n. 1; 37, n. 2; 45, n. 2; 75, n.; 141, n. 1; 163, n. 1; 163, n. 2; his four types or branches of the animal kingdom based upon the plan of their structure, 214; his departure from his own principles, 216; his orders, 230; does not divide the

animal kingdom into Vertebrata

and Invertebrata, 285; his classification, 308

CUVIEK (Fr.), his work, 88, n. 1 ; 97, n. Cyst id, 114 Ci/clostomes, 123, n. 1 DALMAN, his work, 145, n. 1 DALRYMPLE, his paper, 118, n. 2 DALZELL, his work, 104, u. DANA (J. D.), his works, 44, n. 1; 45,

n. 1; 136, n. 3; 142, n. 1; 248, n.

1; 263, n. 1 DANIELSON, see KOSEN DARESTE (C.), his papers, 106, n.;

125, n. 1 DARWIN (Ch.), his works, 118, n. 3;

119, n. 1; 145, n. 1 DAVAISNE, his paper, 109, n. 1; 114,

n. 2

DAVIDSON, his work, 145, n. 1 DAVY, his paper, 122, n. 1 DE CANDOLE (A. P.), his work, 24,

n. 3

DE CANDOLE (Alph.), his work, 19, n. Degrees and kinds of relationship,

29-31

Degrees of organisation, 37, 230 DE HAAN, his work, 145, n. 1 DE KONINCK, see KONINCK DE LA BECHE, his work, 144, n. 1 DELLE CHIAJE, his work, 37, n. 2 DEKBES, his paper, 103, n. 3 DES HAYES, his works, 44, n. 3; 142,

u. 4; 145, n. 1 Desmidiece, not animals, but algse,

DES LONGCHAMPS, his work, 145, n. 1 DES MAREST, his work with BEOGNI-

ART, 145, n. 1

DES MOULINS, his works, 145, n. 1 DESOR, his papers, 103, n. 3; 113, n.

2; 145, n. 1

Development of animals, 264 Dibranchiata, their standing and succession, 164

DIESING, his paper, 45, n. 1 Dimorphcea, as a class, 328 Dimyaria, their standing, 163 Dingo, its origin doubtful, 60 Diversified types found everywhere,

15-21

DOLLINGER, 101, H. 1

Domesticated animals, 81 DOWLER, his paper, 122, n. 1 DUFOSSE, his paper, 122, n. 1

INDEX.

DUFOUR, his work, 116, n. 2 DUGES, his works, 111, n. 1; 188, n. 1 DUJARDIN, his works, 45, n. 1; 104,

n.; 121, n. 1 DUMAS, his paper with Prevost, 12,5,

n. 3; his work, 185, n. 1 DUMERIL (A. M. C.), his work, 45,

n. 2; 64, n.; 307, n. 2 DFMORTIER, his papers, 108, n. 1;

110, n. 1

DUTROCHET, his work, 125, n.

DUVERNOY, his paper, 1 22, n. 1

Duration of life, 133-135

Early attempts to classify animals, 300-302

Earliest types of animals, 31-36

Ech inoderms, their standing, 40; their geological succession, 149 ; their development and geological succession, 170; their structural gradation, 180; their characteristics, 222 ; not to be considered as a primary division of the animal kingdom, 287; a class of Radiata, 294; ctenophoroid characters of the young Echinoderms, 294

Echinoids, their standing and succession, 162

ECKER, his paper, 104, n.

EDWARDS (F. E.), his works, 142, n. 4

EDWARDS (H. Milne), his works, 44, n. 1; 44, n. 3; 45, n. 1; 109, n.;

111, n. 1; 115, n. 1; 117, n. 2; 118, n. 3; 119, n. 1; 139, n. 1; 169, n. 1 ; his classification, 330

EGEKTON (Sir Ph.), his paper, 145, n. 1

Eggs in all animals, 101; classification based upon eggs, 210, n. 1; by Vogt, 365

Egyptian monuments, 82

EHRENBERG, his works, 16, n. 1; 108, n. 3; 136, n. 3; 145, n. 1; 285, n. 1; his classification, 319

Elephant) the young compared to Mastodon, 174

Embryological systems, 350-369

Embryology, its bearing upon classification, 4, 99, 126

Embryonic types, 174

EMMERICH, his work, 145, n. 1

Enaima, correspond to Vertebrata,

Entomostraca, 118

Epicotyledones or EpiviteUians, a primary division of the animal kingdom, 361

Epizoa, as a class, 328

ERDL, his paper, 119, n. 2

ESCHER VON DER LiNTH, his paper with Hier, 145, n. 1

ESCHRICHT, his work, 109, n.

ESCHSCHOLTZ, his work, 44, n. 1

FALCONER, his work, 145, n. 1

FABRE, his paper, 120, n. 1

Families, 6, 236-247

Family analogies, 276; family identity, 22

Faunae, 48

FAVRE (A.), his paper, 145, n. 1

FENISSAC, his work, 44, n. 3

FILIPPI (FiL. DE), his paper, 117, n. 2; 122, n. 1

(TnEO. DE), his papers, 116,

n. 1 Fishes, their standing, 40, 122; the

fishes proper form a distinct class

of Vertebrata, 299 FITZINGER, his works, 45, n. 2; 234;

his classification, 340 Flesh-animals, 208 Florae, 48 FORBES (Eo.), his works, 103, n.; 103,

n. 3; 128, n. 1; 145, n. 1 FORCHHAMMER, his work, 122, n. 1 Form, different meanings of the term,

236 ; characterizes the families of

animals, 236 FRANTZIUS, his paper, 104, n.; 108,

n. 1; 116, n. 2 FREMY, his paper with VALENCIENNES,

102, n.

Fresh water animals, 73 FREY, his works, 37, n. 2; with Leuckart, 104, n. Fundamental relations of animals,

1-14

FUNK, his work, 124, n. 2 Ganoids, a distinct class of Vertebrata,

Ganglioneura, 208 Gasteropoda, their standing, 40 GEGENBAFER, his works, 44, n. 1 ; 103,

n. 3; 110, n. 1; 118, n. 3 GEINITZ, his work, 142, n. 4 Genera, 6,247-249; views of Aristotle,

General remarks upon modern systems, 285-300

INDEX.

Generic analogies, 278 ; generic identity, 22 GEOFFROY ST. HILAIRE (Ei.), his

works, 24, n.; 97, n. 1; 145, n. 1 GEOFFROY ST. HILAIRE (IsiD.), his

works, 73, n.; 98, n.; 215, n. 1 Geographical range of animals, 42-52;

not accidental, 60; in past ages, 152 GERVAIS, his work, 145, n. 1 GERMAR, his work, 142, n. 4 GIBBS, his paper, 145, n. 1 GIEBEL, his work, 144, n. 1 Gills and lungs compared, 92 GIRARD, his paper, 113, n. 2 GLIDDON, see NOTT GOETHE, works on Natural History,

24, n. 3 GOLDFUSS, his works, 141, n. 1; 145,

n. 1

GOODSIR (H. D. S.), his paper, 119,n.l GOPPERT, his work on fossil plants,

141, n. 1 GOSSE, his work, 105, n.; 106, n.; 118,

n. 2 GOULD (A. A.), his works, 37, n. 2; 52,

n.; 244, n. 1

Gradation of structure among animals, 34, 36-42; how it corresponds

to the order of their succession in

geological times, 42 GRANT, his works, 37, n. 2 GRATELOUP, his work, 142, n. 4 GRAY (G. R.), his work, 45, n. 2 Great types or branches of the animal

kingdom, 207-219 GREEN, his work, 145, n. 1 Gregarince, 116 GRUBE, his work, 45, n. 1; 114, n. 2;

117, n. 2 GURLT, his catalogue of worms, 45,

n. 1

Gut-animals, 208 GUTBIER, his work, 142, n. 4 Habitat of animals, 48 HACKEL, his paper, 122, u. 1 HAGENOW, his work, 145, n. 1 HAIME, his paper with EDWARDS, 44,

n. 1; his paper on Cerianthus, 103,

n. 1; his work with D'Archiac, 113,

n. 2; 162, n. 1; 169, n. 3 Halcyonaria, their standing, 161, 223 HALL (J.), his works, 32, n. 1; 142,

n. 4; 145, n. 1

HAMMERSCHMIDT, his paper, 116, n.2 HANCOCK, his paper, 108, n. 2

HARRIS (T. W.), his work, 85, n. 2.

HASSELT, his paper, 124, n. 1

HAWN (F.), his paper, 142, n. 4

HAWLE, his paper with Corda, 145, n. 1

HAYDEN, his paper, 133

HECKEL, his paper, 145, n. 1

HEER, his papers, 145, n. 1; 150, n. 3

Helminths, 114

HENLE, his work with Miiller, 45, n.

2; his paper, 116, n. 2 HEROLD, his works, 120, n. 1; 121, n.

1; 134, n. 2

HIXCKS, his papers, 105, n.; 108, n. 1 HOGG, his paper, 111 n. HOLBROOK, his work, 68 n. Holothurioids, their standing, 162 HOLMES, see TUOMEY and HOLMES Homarus Americanus, 5 Homology, 26, 130, 172 Hornologies of disconnected animals,

25-29 ; limited to animals of the

same branch, 226 HONINGHAUSS, his paper, 145, n. 1 HORNESS, his work, 142, n. 4 HORNER (F. R.), his paper, 125, n. 1 HOYER (H.), his paper, 125, n. 1. HUBER, 214

HUMBOLDT (A. v.), his works, 19, n. 1 (W. v.), his works, 19, n.;

98 n.

HUNTER (J.), his works, 125, n. 1. BUTTON (W.), his work with LINDLEY,

141, n. 1 HUXLEY, his works, 102, n. 1; 105,

n.; 106, n.; 108, n. 1; lll,n.; 113,

n. 2; 115, n. 1 ; 118, n. 2 and 3 ;

his account of Baer's view, 358, n. Hybridity, 250 Hydro ids, 136 Hydrozoa, as a class, 328 Hypembryonic types, 175 Hypocotyledones, or Hypovitellians,

correspond to Vertebrata, 361 Identical types found every where, 21-

Identity of structure of widely distributed animals, 52-60 Immaterial principle of the ammals,97 Immutability of species, 3, 75-84 Independence of organized beings of

physical causes, 22 Individuals, 8, 30, 256, 266 Individuality among animals, 97, 252 Inequality of all the natural groups

of the animal kingdom, 263

INDEX.

Infusoria are not a natural division

of animals, 290,113 Insecta, a class in the system of Linnaeus, 304, 120 Insects, their standing, 40 Intestinal Worms not Radiata, 292 Invertebrata, 208 JACQUEMIN, his paper, 110, n. 1 JAGER, his works, 145, n. 1 JOBERT, his work, 145, n. 1 JOHNSTON (AL. K.), his work, 90, n. JONES (T.R.),hisworks,37,n.2;145,n.l JTTRINE, his works, 118, n. 3 JUSSIEU, his characteristics of genera,

KAISEKLING, his works, 32, n. 1 KAUFMAN, his paper, 121, n. 2 KAUP, his work with BRONN, 145, n. 1;

his views of orders, 234 KEBER, his paper, 114, n. 2 KEFERSTEIN, his work. 141, n. 1 KIDD, Bridgwater Treatise, 11 n. KIENER, his work, 44, n. 3 KING, his work, 142, n. 4 Kingdoms of nature, 215, n. 1 KIRBY, Bridgwater Treatise, 12, n.;

85, n. 2; 132, n. 2; 134, n. 4 KOCH, his paper, 117, n. 2 ; 188, n. 1 KOLLIKER, his works, 44, n. 1; 101,

n. 1 ; 103, n. 3 ; 108, n. 3 ; 110, n.

1; 111, 11. 1; 113, n. 2; 114, n. 1

and 2; 116, n. 2; 120, n. 1; his

classification, 363 KONINCK (DE), his works, 142, n. 4;

145, n. 1 KOREN and DANIELSON, their papers,

106, n.; 110, n. 1 KROHN, his papers, 104, n.; 105, n.l;

108, n. 3; 110, n. 1; 117, n. 2; 118,

n. 1; 118, n. 3. KUCHENMEISTER, his works, 1 15, n. 1 ;

186, n. 1

KUNTH, his paper, 78, n. KUTZING, his paper, 113, n. 2 LACAZE-DUTIIIERS, his paper, 109, n. 1 LACHMAN, his paper, 108, n. 1 LACORDAIRE, his work, 134, n. 1 LAM ARK, his works, 3, n.; 36, n. 3;

44, n. 3; 141, n. 1; 307, n. 3; his

classification, 313 Lamellibranchiata, their standing and

succession, 163; their young, 172 LATREILLE, his work, 248, n. 2; anecdote, 248 LAUREXT, his paper, 110, n. 1

LAVALETTE (A. DE), 116, n. 1

LEA, his papers, 142, n. 4; 145, n. 1

Leading groups of the existing systems of animals, 207

LEBERT, his papers with PREVOST, 124, n. 2; 125, n. 1

LE CONTE, his paper, 145, n. 1

LEIDY, his papers, 103, n. 3; 114, n. 2; 116, n. 1 and 2; 117, 2; 145, n. 1; 153, n. 3

LE HON, his paper with Koninck, 145, n. 1

LENZ, his work, 85, n. 2

Lepidosteus, its young, 173

LEREBOULLET, his papers, 119, n. 2; 122, n. 1

LERN.EANS, 118, 129

LESSON, his work, 44, n. 1

LEUCKART (F. S.), his works, 122, n. 1; 144, n.l

LEUCKART (R.), his works, 24, n. 2 ; 37, n. 2; 38, n.; 44, n. 1; 92, n. 2; 102, n. 1; 104, n.; 105, n.; 108, n. 2; 109, n.; 115, n.l; 117, n. 2; 120, n. 1; 136, n. 3; 186, 286; his primary divisions of the animal kingdom, 333

LEYDIG, his works, 104, n.; 109, n.l ;

110, n. 1; 116, n. 2; 118, n. 2 and 3; 120, n.l; 122, n.l; 165,n. 1; 293

LTEBIG, his work, 185, n. 2 LIEBERKUHN, his papers, 113, n. 2;

114, n. 2; 116, n. 2 Limitation of species to particular

geological periods, 155-159 LINDLEY, his works, 141, n. 1 LINN.EUS, fauna Suecica, 98, n. ; the editions of his system, 303, n. 1; orders, 214, 230; genera, 247; he first introduced classes and orders as natural divisions among animals, 220; his classification, 304 Localization of special structures,62-64 Localization of types in past ages,

152-155 Locomotion, 20 LONGCHAMPS (DE SELYS), 250 LONGET, his work, 101, n. 1. LONSDALE, his work, 145, n. 1 LOVEN, his work, 103, n. 3; 109, n. 1;

111, n.; 117, n. 2. (Correct " Loren" to " Loven", 111)

LUND, his paper, 152, n. 1; his investigations upon the fossils of the Brazils, 152

INDEX.

LUSCHKA, his paper, 114, n. 2 LYCETT, see MOKRIS LYELL, his work, 144, n. 1 M'CoY, his works, 32, n. 1; 142, n. 4;

145, n. 1

M'CRADY, his paper, 105, n. M'DONALD, his paper, 111, n. ; 163,

n. 2

M'LEAY, his work, 345, n. 2; his classification, 344

MAILLET (!)E), his work, 179, n. 1 Mammalia, their standing, 40; their development, 125; their yolk undergoes a complete segmentation, 288; peculiar to New Holland, 60 Man and Animals, difference between,

65, n.

MARCOU, his work, 142, n. 4 Marine animals, their size, 73 MARTIN ST. ANGE, see ST. ANGE MARTIN and CHEMNITZ, their work,

44, n. 3 Marsupialia, cannot be considered as

a distinct class, 298 MATHERON, his work, 142, n. 4 MEEK (P. B.), his paper, 142, n. 4 MECKEL v. HEMSBACH, his paper, 125 MECKEL, his works, 37, n. 2; 125, n. 1 MEDUSA, 138

MEIGS (On.), his paper, 125, n. 3 MEISSNER (G.), his papers, 114, n, 2;

115, n. 1 MENGE, his paper, 117, n. 2 Metamorphoses of animals, 99-132 Metamorphosis, differs from alternate

generation, 100, n. 3 MEYEN, his work, 109, n. MEYER (H.), his work, 120, n. 1 MEYER (H. v.), his work, 145, n. 1 MICHELIN, his work, 145, n. 1. MICHELOTTI, his work with Bellandi,

145, n. 1 Millepora, not a Polyp but a Hydroid, 34 MILLER (Hugh), his works, 12, n.;

163, n. 3

MILLER (J. C.), his work, 145, n. 1 MILNE-EDWARDS, see EDWARDS Modern System in Zoology, 285-300 Mollusks, a primary division of the animal kingdom, 40, 287; their classes, 108 MONGEOT, his work with Schimper,

150, n. 2 Monomyaria, their standing, 163

Monstrosities, 131

Moral faculties in man and the higher

animals, 97 MORRIS and LYCETT, their work, 142,

n. 4; 155, n. 3

MORTON, his works, 142, n. 4; 250,n. 1 MULLER (A.), his paper, 122, n. 1 MULLER (J.), his works, 24, n. 2; 44,

n. 1; 45, n. 2; 101, n. 1; 103, n. ;

105, n. 1; 110, n. 1; 113, n. 2; 116,

n. 2; 122, n. 1; 142, n. 4; 145, n. 1;

162, n. 4; 180, 1; 290, n. 2; his

embryological researches on Echinodernis, 138 MULLER (H.), his papers, 109; 111,

u. 1 MULLER (M.), his papers, 117, n. 2;

118, n. 1 MUNSTER, his works, 145, n. 1 ; 149,

n. 2

MURCHISON, his works, 32, n. 1 Mutual dependance of the animal and

vegetable kingdoms, 185-186 Myeloneura, 208 Myriapods, 120 Myzontes, a distinct class of Vertebrata, 123, n. 1

NaGELi, his papers, 113,n. 2; 118, n. 1 Narrowest limits within which animals may be circumscribed, 49-52 Natural System, 8, 31 NAUMANN, his works, 144, n. 1; 214

Natural provinces of animals and

plants, 48

NELSON, his paper, 114, n. 2 Nematoids, 114

NEWBERRY, his paper, 145, n. 1 NEWPORT, his papers, 114, n. 2; 120,

n. 1; 124, n. 2 NITZSCH, his work, 188 NORDMAN, his works, 104, n.; 110, n.

1; 116, n. 1; 118, n. 3; 129, n. 2 NOTT and GLIDDON, their works, 79, n. Notice of the principal Systems of

Zoology, 285

OERSTED (A. S.), paper, 117, n. 2 OKEN, his works, 24, n. 1, 2; 179;

235; 236, n.; his classification, 337 Oldest fossil remains, 17, n.; 31-36 Opalina, genus of Infusoria based

upon embryos of Distoma, 291 ORBIGNY (D'), his works, 142, n. 4;

144, n. 1; 145, n. 1; 155, n. 3; 162,

n. 3 ; 163, n. 1 ; his work with

FENISSAC, 44, n. 3

INDEX.

Orders among animals, 6; 228-236; their gradation, 41

Ordinal analogy, 275

Ordinal identity, 22

Organised beings, their relations to physical causes, 13, n.

Organs without function, 12

Origin of animals and plants, 15, n.

Ornamentation a specific character,

Other natural divisions among animals, 261-264

OTTO, his work with CAIUS, 37, n. 2

Oviparous animals, 131, n. 1

OWEN (D. D.), his work, 145, n. 1

OWEN (R.), his works, 24, n.; 37, n. 2; 61, n. 2; 101, n. 1; 125, n. 1 and 3; 136, n. 3; 145, n. 1; 153, 2 and 3; 163, 163, n. 2; 299, n. 3; his classification, 325; his investigations upon the fossils of Australia, 153

PANDER, his works, 125, n. l;351,n. 1

Parallelism between the geological succession of animals and the embryonic growth of their living representatives, 168-175

Parallelism between the structural gradation of animals and their embryonic growth, 178-181

Parallelism between the geological succession of animals and plants and their present relative standing, 159-168

Paramecium, genus of Infusoria based upon embryos of Planaria

Parasites, 45

Parasitic animals and plants, 186-191

PEACH, his paper, 105, n.

Pedicellina forms the connecting link between the ordinary Bryozoa and Vorticellas

PEIRCE (BENJ.), his discovery of the relations between the laws regulating revolutions of the members of our solar system and the arrangement of leaves in plants, 193

PERCHERON, his work, 45, n. 1

Period of Linnaeus, 302-308

Period of Cuvier and anatomical systems, 308-336

Permanency of specific peculiarities of all organized beings, 75-84

PERTT, his works, 113, n. 2

PETERS (W.), his paper, 118, n. 1

PFEIFFER, his work, 44, u. 3

Pheasants do not exist in America, 62

PHILLIPS, his works, 142, n. 4

Phyllotaxis, 193

Physical causes, 16, n. ; 21, 23, 47, 47, n.

Physiophilosophers, 235

Physiophilosophical systems, 336-350

PICTET, his works, 142, n. 4; 144, n. 1; 145, n. 1; 148, n. 1; 156, n. 6

Pisces, see Fishes

Plagiostoms, their development, 123, n. 1 ; constitute a distinct class, 133, n. 1

Plans of Structure, 34

Plan of structure characterizes the branches of the animal kingdom, 207

Plants, their geological succession, 150, 167

PLIENINGER, his work with H. v. Meyer, 145, n. 1

POLE, his paper, 163, n. 1

Polymorphism among Acalephs, 137, u. 1 ; among Polyps, 137, n. 1 ; among Mollusks, 137, n. 1; among

Articulata, 137, n. 1

Polycistince no animals, 290, n.

Polyps, their standing, 40; their limits as a class, 287, n.; their characteristics, 222; their development, 169; the freshwater Polyps are Bryozoa, with the exception of Hydras, 44, n.

POMPPER, his work, 46, n.

POUCHET, his works, 31, n. 1; 110, n. 1

POWELL, his work, 3, n.; 11, n.; 17, n.; 76, n.

PREVOST, his papers, 109, n. 1; 110, n. 1; 122, n. 1; 124, n. 2; 125, n. 1; 125, n. 3

Primates, their standing in the system of Linnaeus, 230

Primitive limits of distribution of animals, 58

Progressive types, 177

Prophetic types among animals, 175-

Proportions characterize species, 249

PROSCH, his paper, 136, n. 3

Protozoa as a primary group of the animal kingdom,113;287;289; 333,n.l

Proteus anguimis, 20

Protozoa, 113; as a primary group of animals, 287, 289

PROUT, Bridgwater Treatise, 12, n.

Psorospermia, 116

PURKINJE, his work, 101, n. 2

PUSCH, his work, 142, n. 4

INDEX.

Pycnogonum, 121

QUATREFAGES, his works, 105, n. ; 109, n.; 109, n. 1; 110, n. 1; 117, n. 2; 122, n. 1; 163, n. 2

QUENSTEDT, his works, 1 42, n. 4; 144, n. 1; 145, n. 1

QUETELET, his work, 133, n. 1

Radiata, a primary division of the animal kingdom,40 ; their classes, 106

RANG, see SANDER-RANG

Rangeof distribution of animals, 31, n.

RATHKE, his works, 103, n. 1; 111, n. 1; 119, n. 2; 120, n. 1; 121, n. 1; 122, n. 1; 124, n. 1 and 2; on the embryology of Articulata, 130

RATZEBURG, his works, 85, n. 2; 188

Reality or ideality of the existence of j species, genera, families, etc., 252

Recapitulation, 199-206

REAUMUR, his work, 85, n. 1; 213

REEVE (LOVELL), his work, 44, n. 3

REICHEHT, his works, 102, n. 1; 122, n. 1; 124, n. 2

REID, his paper, 111, n.

Relations between animals and plants and the surrounding world, 84-94

Relations between the structure, the embryonic growth, the geological succession, and the geographical distribution of animals, 181-185

Relation of Individuals to one another, 94-99

Relative standing of the four branches of the animal kingdom, 38

REMAK, his work, 124, n. 2

Reptiles, their standing, 40; a distinct class of Vertebrata, 124

Representative species in the successive geological periods, 81

RETZIUS, his work, 122, n. 1

REUSS, his work, 142, n. 4

Revolutions (The) of the members of our Solar System compared to the arrangement of leaves in plants, 192

Rhizopoda, their true nature still doubtful, 113, probably Algse, 289

RICHARDSON (SiR JOHN), his works, 45, n. 2

RIDINGER, his works, 97, n. 1

ROBIN (On.), his work, 186, n. 1

ROGET, Bridgwater Treatise, 11, n.

ROMER (F. A.), his work, 142, n. 4; 144, n. 1 ; 145, n. 1

ROQUAN, his work, 145, n. 1

Rotifera are Crustacea, 164

Rosel, his works, 100, n. 1; 124, n. 2;

ROUGET, 104, n. RouLiN,his paper, 111, n. 1 Roux, his work, 142, n. 4 RUDOLPHIN, his works, 45, n. 1 Rugosa, 162; their affinities, 170, n. RUPPELL, his paper, 190, n. 3 RUSCONI, his works, 122, n.l; 124,n.2 Salpce, 138

SALTER, his paper, 145, n. 1 SANDBERGER (G. & FR.), their works,

142, n. 4 SANDER-RANG, his work with FENIS-

SAC, 44, n. 3 SARS, his works, 103, n. 1; 109, n.;

110, n. 1; 113, n. 2; 138, n. 1 SAUSSINE (H. DE), his paper, 120, n. 1 SAVIGNT, his works, 24, n. 2; 108, n. 3 SCHEITLIN, his work, 88, n. SCHEUCHZER, his work, 142, n. 3 SCHEUTER (A.), his paper, 121, n. 1 SCHIMPER, his work, 150, n. 2 SCHLEGEL (FR.), his work, 98, n. SCHLOTTHEIM, his work, 141, n. 1 SCHMARDA, his work, 19, n.; 48, n.;

118, n. 1

SCHMERLING, his paper, 145, n. 1 SCHMIDT (A.), his paper, 116, n. 2 SCHMIDT (0.), his paper, 109, n. 1;

110, n. 1

SCHNEIDER, his paper,lll,n.; 113,n.2 SCHOUW, his work, 19 n. SCHUBERT (T. D.), his paper, 121, n. 2 SCHUBLER, his work, 133, n. 1 SCHULTZE (M.), his works, 105, n.; 106, n.; 110, n. 1; 113, n. 2; 117, n. 2; 122, n. 1; 290, n. Science, its true limits, 13, 281 SCILLA (Ac.), his work, 142, n. 2 Scincoids, their classification and geographical distribution, 65 SEDGWICK, his works, 32, n. 1 Selachians, a distinct class of Vertebrata, 123, n. 1; first distinguished by Aristotle, 302 SEMPER, his papers, 111, n.; 120, n.

1; 121, n. 2 Series in the animal kingdom, 20, 34,

36, 38, 40, 69, 343 Serial connexion among animals, 64-

Sexual relations among animals considered as a criterion of specific differences, 250

INDEX.

SHARPE, his paper, 142, n. 4 SHAW, his paper, 122, n. 1 SHUMARD, his paper, 145, n. 1 SIEBOLD (C. THEO. v.), his works, 37,

n. 2; 103, n. 3; 115, n. 1; 116, n.

1; 120, n. 1; 139, n. 2; his primary ,

divisions of the animal kingdom,

287; his classification reviewed, 331 Sipunculoids, 118 SISMONDA (E.), his paper, 145, n. Size and structure of animals, 70-72 Size of animals in its relations to the

medium in which they live, 73-75 SMEATHMAN, 214

SOWERBY (JAM.), his work, 141, n. 1 Species, p. 6, 249-261; views of Aristotle, 301

Specific analogies, 279 Specific identity between living and

fossil animals difficult to ascertain,

Specific differences, 22 SPENCE, his work with KIRBY, 85, n.

2; 132, 1 n.; 134, n. 1 SPIX, his works, 24, n.; 31, n. 1 SPRING, his work, 148 ST. ANGE (MARTIN), his paper, 119,

n. 1; 125, n. 1; 129, n. 1 STANNIUS, his work with SIEBOLD, 37,

n. 2; his papers, 101, n. 1; his classification, 331

STERNBERG, his work, 141, n. 1 STEENSTRUP, his works, 104, n.; 109,

n.; 112, n.; 116, n. 1; 136, n. 2;

on alternate generation, 136 STEIN (F.),his works, 108, n. 1; 114,

n. 2; 116, n. 2; 120, n. 1 STEINHEIM, his paper, 124, n. 2 STEINTHAL, his work, 98 n. Sterelmintha, as a class, 328 STIMPSON, his paper, 105, n. Strata, the lowest strata known to

contain fossils, 17, n. Structural gradation of animals and

their embryonic growth, 179 Structure of parts characterizes the

genera, 247

STRAUSS-DURKHEIM, his work, 12, n. Sub-branches, 263 Sub-classes, 262 Sub-families, ib. Sub-genera, ib. Sub-orders, ib. Succession of animals and plants in

geological times, 140-152, 159

Successive development of characters,

264-271

SWALLOW (J. C.), his paper, 142, n. 4 SWAINSON, his work, 19, n.; 26, n.;

130, n. 2; 345

SWAMMERDAM, his work, 100, n. 1 Synapta digitata, harbours young

snails, 110, n. Synthetic types, 177 Systems of zoology, 285 Tabulata are Hydroids, and not genuine Polyps, 162 TELLKAMPF, his paper, 19, n. Terrestrial animals, their geographical distribution, 43; their size, 73 Tetrabranchiata, their standing and

succession, 164

Thalassicolce, no animals, 290, n. THOMAS, his paper, 124, n. 2 THOMPSON (ALLEN), his papers, 114,

n. 2; 129, n. 1; 130, n. 1 THOMPSON (W. V.), his paper, 119,

n. 1

Thought in nature, 18, ]66 TIEDEMANN, his works, 124, n. 1; 162,

n. 4

TODD, his work, 37, n. 2 Trematods, 115 TREMBLET, 214 TREYIRAXUS (G. R.), his work, 37,

n. 2 Tropical families, generally highest

in their class, or representatives of

older types, 182 TROSCHEL, his works with MULLER,

44, n. 1; 112, n.; 162, n. 4 TSCHDDI, his works, 45, n. 2; 68, n. TUOMEY and HOLMES, their work, 142,

n. 4

Turbellarice, 114 Types, 5, 21; different meanings of

the word, 218; v. Baer's views, 353 Typical identity, 22 UDEKEM (J. de), his paper, 117, n. 2 UNGER, bis work, 150, n. 4 Unity of plan in diversified types, 23 VALENCIENNES, his works, 45, n. 2;

102, n.; 115, n. 1; 121, n. 2; 122,

n. 1; 163, n. 2 VALENTIN, his works, 101, n. 1; 122,

n. 1; 162, n. 4 VAN BENEDEN, his work, 104, n.; 108,

n. 1; 109, n.; 110, n. 1; 111, n. 1;

115, n. 1; 118, n. 3; 121, n. 1 and

2; his classification, 360

INDEX.

VAN DER HOEVEN, his works, 38, n.; 112, n.; 163, n. 2; his Text-Book, 369, n.

Varieties, 268

VERANY, his work, 111. n. 1

Vermes, see Worms, considered as a primary group of the animal kingdom, 287, 332; this view not correct, 296; a class in the system of Liunseus, 304

VERNEDIL (!)E), his works, 32, n. 1; 142, n. 4

Vertebrata, a primary division of the animal kingdom, 40,208, 287; their succession in geological times, 165

Viviparous animals, 131, n. 1

VOGT, his works, 44, n.l ; 1 03, n.3; 108. n. 3; 110, n.l; 122, n. 1; 124, n. 2; 144. n. 2; 163, n. 1; his paper with VERANY,!!!, n. 1; his primary divisions of the animal kingdom, 288; his classification reviewed, 365

VOLKMAN, his work, 124, n. 1

VOLTZ, his paper, 145, n. 1

Volvocina;, not animals, but algae, 290

Vorticellce are genuine Bryozoa, 108,

WAGENER, his work, 115, n. 1

WAGNER (A.), his work, 46, n.

WAGNER (R.), his works, 37, n. 2; 101, n.l; 101,n.2; 114,n.2; 115,n.l

WALTER (G.), his paper, 114, n. 2

WARNECK, his paper, 110, n. 1

WARREN, his work, 145, n. 1

WATERHOUSE, his work, 61, n.

Ways in which and means by which

the plan of structure of animals

is carried out characterises the

classes, 219

WEBER, his paper, 117, n. 2 WEINLAND, his papers, 124, n. 1 and

2; 125, n. 1; 190, n. 1; 263, n. 1 WHEWELL, Bridgwater Treatise,

11, n.

WIEGMAN, his work, 250 WIED (PR. MAX. v. NEU-), his work,

WILL, his work, 104, n. WILLIAMSON, his paper, 118, n. 2 WILMS, his paper, 118, n. 3 WILSON (E.), his paper, 121, n. 2; 214 WIXDISCHMANN, his paper, 110, n. 1 WITTICH, his papers, 121, n. 1; 124,

n. 2

WOLLASTON, his work, 248, n. 1 WOOD, his work, 142, n. 4 WOODWARD (S. P.), 145, n. 1 Worms, their standing, 40 WRIGHT (T. S.), his paper, 105, n. WRIGHT (C.), his paper, 193, n. 2 WYMAN (J.), his works, 19, n.; 122,

n. 1; 124, n. 2; 125, n.3; 145, n.l;

153, n. 3; rudimentary eye in the

blind fish, 20

YARRELL, his work, 122, n. 1 ZADDACH, his works, 118, n. 3; 120,

n. 1

ZIETEN, his work, 142, n. 4 ZIMMERMANN, his work, 19, n. Zoological realms, provinces, etc., 49

T. nicnAp.ns, 3~. CHEAT ijn r.x SIUF.F.T.

39 PATEBNOSTEK Eow, LONDON.

Agriculture and Rural Affairs.

BavlJcn on Valuing Rents, &c. - '

Road Legislation Caird's Prairie Farming Cecil's Stud Farm Hoskyns's Talpa - London's A griculture - - Low's Elements of Agriculture Morten on Landed Property

Arts. Manufactures, Architecture.

- K

- 6

- 10

- 13

- V<

- 16

and

Bourne's Catechism of the Steam

Engine Brande's Dictionary of science, sc.

" Organic Chemistry - Cresy's Civil Engineering Fairbairn's Informa. for Engineers Gwilt's F.ncyclo. of Architecture - Harford's Plates liom VI. Angelo - Humphreys's Parables Illuminated Jameson's Saints and Martyrs " Monastic Orders - " Legends of Madonna - " Commonplace-Book Konig'sPictonal Lift of Luther - I.oudon's Rural Architecture MacDomgall's Campaigns of Hannibal

M.icDougall's Theory of « ar Mostley's Engineering - Piesse's Art of Perfumery - Richardson's Art of Horsemanship ScoiTern on Projectiles, &c. - Steam-Engine,l>ythe Artisan Club L're's Dictionary of Arts, &c.

Biography.

Arago's Lives of Scientific Men - Baillie's Mrmoir of Bate Brialrnont's Wellington Bunsen's Hippolytus . Bunting's (Dr.) Life - Crosse's (Andrew) Memorials Green's Princesses of England Harford's Life of Michael Angelo - Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopaedia Marshman's Life of Carey, Marshman, and Ward

Maunder's Biographical Treasury - Morris's Life of Becket Mountain's (Col.) Memoirs - Parry's (Admiral) Memoirs - Russell's Memoirs of Moo e - " (Dr.) Mezzofanti - SchimmelPenninck's (Mis.) Life - Southey's Life of Wesley - - Stephen's Ecclesiastical Biography Strickland's Queens of England - Sydney Smith's Memoirs Symond's (Admiral) Memoirs Taylor's Loyola - - - - " Wesley - - - - Uwins's Memoirs - - - - Waterton's Autobiography & Essays

Books of General Utility.

Acton's Bread-Book

•' Cookery - - - - 3 Black's Treatise on Brewing - Cabinet Gazetteer - - - - 5 " Lawyer . - - - 5 Cust's Invalid's Own Book - 1 Hints on Etiquette - Hudson's Executor's Guide - - 10 " on Making Wills - - 10 Kesteven's Domestic Medicine - 12 Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopcedia - 12 Loudon's Lady's Country Companion - - 13

Maunder's Treasury of Knowledge 15

" Biographical Treasury lo

" Geographical Treasury 15

" Scientific Treasury - 14

" .Treasury of History - 15

" Natural History - - 15

Piesse's Art of Peifumery - - IS

Pitt's How to Brew Good Beer - 1«

Pocket and the Stud ... 9

Pvcroft's English Reading - - 18

Rich's Comp. to Latin Dictionary 18

Richardson's Art of Horsemanship IB

Kiddle's Latin Dictionaries - - 18

Roget's English Thesaui us - - 19

Rowton's Debater - - - - 19

Short Whist M

Simpson's Handbook of Dining - -0

Thomson's Interest Tables - - 23

Webster's Domestic Economy - 24

Willich's Popular Tables - - 24

Wilmofs Blackstone - 24

Botany and Gardening.

Hawaii's British Freshwater Algce Hooker's British Flora -

" Guide to Kew Gardens - Linclley's Introduction to Botany

" Synopsis of the British Flora •

" Theory of Horticulture - Loudon's Hortus Britannicus

" Amateur Gardener

" Trees and Shrubs -

" Gardening - - -

" Plants - Pereira's Materia Medica Rivers's Rose-Amateur's Guide - Watson's Cybele Britannica Wilson's British Mosses

Chronology.

Brewer's Historical Atlas

Bunsen's Ancient Egypt - - 5

Haydn's Beatson's Index - - 9 Jaquemet's Chronology

" Abridged Chronology- 11

Nicolas's Chronology of History - 12

Commerce and Mercantile Affairs*

Gilbart's Logic of Banking -

•' Treatise on Banking - 8 Lorimer's Yout>g Master Mariner - 13 M'Culloch's Commerce & Navigation 14 Thomson's Interest Tables - - 23 Tooke's History of Pi ices - - 23

Criticism, History, and Memoirs.

Brewer's Historical Atlas - - - Bunsen's Ancient Egypt " Hippolytus • Chapman's Gustavus Adolphus Conybeare and Howson's St. Paul Connolly's Sappers and Miners Crowe's History of France Frazer's Letters during the Peninsular and Waterloo Campaigns Gleig's Essays

Gurney's Historical Sketches Hayward's Essays - Herschel's Essays and Addresses - Jeffrey's (Lord)'Estays Kemble's Anglo-Saxons Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopjedia Macdulay's Crit. and Hist. Essays

" History of England

" Speeches -

Mackintosh's Miscellaneous Works 14 " History of England - 14

M'Culloch'sGeographicalDictionary 14 Maunder's Treasury of History - 15 Meiivale's History of Rome - - 15 " Roman Republic - - 15

Milner's Church History - 15

Moore's (Thomas) Memoirs, &c. - 16 Mure's Greek Literature - 16

Normanby's Year of Revolution - 17 Ferry's Franks - - 17

Porter's Knights of Malta - - 18 Raikes's Journal - - - - 18 Iliddle's Latin Lexicon - 18

Rogers's Essays from Edintt. Reviewl9 " (Sam.) Recollections - 19 Roget's English Thesaurus - - 19 SchimmelPennincV'e Merr.ohs of

Port Koyal - - - 19 SchimmelPeuuinrk's Principles of

Beauty, &c. - - 19

Schmitz's History of Greece - 19

Southey's Doctor - - - - 21

Stephen's Ecclesiastical Biography 2]

" Lectures on French History 2'

Sydney Smith's Works - 20

" Lectures - - 2:

" Memoirs - - 2(

Taylor's Loyola - - 21

" Wesley - - - - 2

Thirlwall's History of Greece - 2;

Turner's Anglo Saxons - - 2-

Uwins's Memoirs - -

Vehse's Austrian Court - 2.'

Wade's England's Greatness - 22

Young's Christ of History -

Geography and Atlases.

Brewer's Historical Atlas - - > Butler's Geography and Atlases - Cabinet Gazetteer - - - - Johnston's General Gazetteer - 1 M'Culloch's Geographical Dictionary 1 Maunder's Treasury of Geography 1 Murray's Encyclo. of Geography - 1 Sharp's British Gazetteer - - 2'

Juvenile Books.

Amy Herbert • - - - 21

Cleve Hall - - 2C Earl's Daughter (The) - -

Experience of Life - - - 2<

Gertrude - - - - 20

Hewitt's Boy's Country Book - II

" (Mary) Children's Year - 10

Ivors - - 20

Katharine Ashton - - - - 20

Laneton Paisona^e - - 20

Margaret Percival - - - - 20 Pi<'sse's f'hvn.ical, Natural, and

Physical Magic - - - - IS

Pycroft's Collegian's Guide - - 18

Medicine, Surgery, &c.

Brodie's'Tsychological Inquiries - o

Bull's Hints to Mothers- - - 5

" Managementof Children - 5

" on Blindness - - 5

Copland's Dictionary of Medicine - 6

Cust's Invalid's Own Book 7

Holland's Mental Physiology - 9

" Medical Notes -and Reflect. 9

Kesteven's Domestic Medicine - 12

I'ereira's Materia Medica - - 17

Richardson's Cold-Water Cure - 16

Spencer's Psychology - - - 21

Todd's Cyclopedia' of Anatomy

and Physiology - - - - 21

Miscellaneous and General Literature.

Bacon's (Lord) Works 3

Defence of Edi/ise uf Faitfl 7 Be Fonblanque on Army Adminis

tration - 7 Eclipse of Faith 7 Fischer's Bacon and Realistic Philosophy - - T Greathed's Letters from Delhi Greyson's Select Correspondence - 8 Gurney'6 Evening Recreations 8 HaBsall'sAdulterationsDetecteJ,&c. 9 Hardn's Book of Dignities 9 Holland's Mental Physiology - 9 Hooker's Kew Guide - 9 Howitt'sRaral Life of England - 10 " Visitsto RemarkablePlaceB 10 Jameson's Commonplace-Book - 11 Last of the Old Squires - - 17 Letters ufa Betrothed - 13 Macaulay's Speeches - - - 13 Mackintosh's MiscellaneousWjrfS 14 Martineau's Miscellanies - - 14 Pycroft's English Hearting - Rich's Comp. to Latin Dictionary 18 Riddle's Latin Dictionaries - - 18 Rowton's Debater - - 19 Sir Roger De Cover-ley • - - 20 Southey's Doctor, &c. - - - 21 Spencer's Essays - - - - 21 Stow'» Training Sysii-.n Thomson's Laws of Thought - 23 Trevelvan on the Native Languages

of India

Willich's Popular Tables

Yonge's English-Greek Lexicon - 24

Latin Gradus Zumpt's Latin Grammar

; f atural History in general.

Agassiz on Classification - - 3

Callows Popular Conchology - 6

Ephemera's Book of the Salmon - 7

Garratts Marvels of Instinct - 8 Gosse's Natural History of Jamaica 8

Kirby and Spence's Entomology - 12

Lee's Elements of Natural History 12

Maunder's Natural History - - 15 Morris's Anecdotes in Natural

History - - 16

Quatrefages' Naturalist's Rambles 18

Stonehenge on the Dog - 21

Turton's Shells ofthoBritishlslands 23

Van der Hoeven's Zoology - - 23

Waterton's Essays on Natural Hist. 24 Youatt's W'ork on th* Dog -

Youatt's Work on the Horse - 24

1 -Volume Encyclopaedias and Dictionaries.

Blame's Rural Sports 4

Brande's Science, Literature, and Art 4

Copland's Dictionary of Medicine - 6

Cresy's Civil Engineering - S

Gwilt's Architecture 6

Johnston's Geographical Dictionary 11

London's Agriculture - - - 13

" Rural Architecture - 13

" Gardening - 13

" Plants - 13

" Trees and Shrubs - - 13

M'Culloch'sGeographiealDictionary 14

" Dictionaryof Commerce 14

Murray's Encyclo. of Geography - 10

Sharp's British Gazetteer - 20

TJre's Dictionary of Arts, &c. - - 23

Webster's Domestic Economy - 24

Religious St. Moral Works.

Afternoon of Life 3

Amy Herbert - - - 20

Bloomfield'sGreekTestament - 4

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress - 5

Calvert's Wife's M.inuai - - 6

Catz and Farlie's Moral Emblems 6

Cleve Hall - 20

Conybeare and Howson's St. Paul 6 Cotton's Instruction?, in Christianity 6

Dale's Domestic Liturgy - - 7

Defence of Eclipse of Faith 7

Earl's Daughter (The) - - 20 Eclipse of Faith - - -

Englishman's Greek Concordance 7

" Heb.&Chald.Coacord. 7

Experience (The) of Life - 20

Gertrude - ... 20

Harrison's Light of th? Forge - 8

Home's Introduction to Scriptures 10

" \hridgmentofditto - 10

Hue's Christianity in China - - 10

Hu:nphr<ys's Parables Illuminated 11

Ivors ; or, the Two Cousins - 20 Jameson's Sacred Legends - - 11 " Monastic LTegends - - 11 Legendsof the Madonna 11 " Lectures on Female Employment 11

Jeremy Taylor's Works- - - 11

Katharine Ashton - - - 20

Konig's Pictorial Life of Luther - 8

Llneton Parsonage - - 20

Letters to my Unknown Friends 13

Lyra Germanica 5

Magiiire's Rome - - - - 14

Margaret Percival - - - - 20

Uarshman's Serampore Mission - 14

Maitineau's Christian Life - - 14

Ihrnns - - 14

Studies of Christianity 14

Merivale's Christian Records - 15

Milner's Church of Christ - - 15

Moore on the Use of the Body - 16

" Soul and Body - 16

" 's Man and his Motives - ]6

Morning Clouds - 16

Neale's Closing Scene - - - 16

Paulson's Earth and Word - - 17

Powell's Christianity without Jud.-ii-m -' - - - 18

" Order of Nature - - 18

Readings for Lent - 20

Confirmation - - 20

Robinson's Lexicon to the Greek

Testament - - 19

Self-Examination for Confirmation SO Sewvll's History of the Early

Church - 20

Sinclair's Journey of Life - - 20

Smith's (Sydney) Moral Philosophy 21

(G.) Wcsloyun Methodism 20

" (J. ). St. Paul's Shipwreck - 20

Southey's Life of Wesley - - 21

Stephen's Ecclesiastical Biography 2]

Taylor's Loyola ... - - 21

" Wesley - ... 21

Theologia Germanica 5

Thumb Bible (The) - - 2i

Ursula ------ 20

Young's Christ of History - - 24

" Mystery - - 24

Poetry and the Drama.

Aikin's (Dr. 1 British Poets • - 3

Arnold's Mi-rope - 3

" Poems 3

Baillie's (Joanna) Poetical Works 3

Goldsmith's Poems, illustrated - 8

L. E. L.'s Poetical Works - 13

Linwood's Anthologia Oxoniensis- 13

Lyra Gtrmaniea - - 5

Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome 14

Mac Donald's Within and Without 14

" Poems - - - 14

Montgomery's Poetical Works - 15

Moore's Poetical Works - 16

" Selections (illustrated) - 16

Lall.i Rookh - 16

" Irish Melodies - - - 16

National Melodies - - 16

Sacred Songs (with 3Iu»ie) 16

" Songs and Ballads - - 16

Shakspeare, by Bowdler - - 19

Southey's Poetical Works - - 21

Thomson's Seasons, illustrated - 23

The Sciences in general and Mathematics.

Arago's Meteorological Essays - 3 " Popular Astronomy - - 3 Bourne's Catechism of Steam- Engine 4 Boyd's Naval Cadet's Manual - 4 Brande's Dictionary of Science, &c. 4 " Lectures on Organic Chemistry 4 Conington's Chemical Analysis - 6 Crtsy's Civil Engineering - - 6 De la Rive's Electricity - - 7 Grove's Correla. of Physical Forces 8 Herschel's Outlines of Astronomy 9 Holland's Mental Physiology - 9 Humboldt's Aspects of Nature - 10 " Cosmos - - - 10 Hunt on Light - - - - 11 Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopfedia - 12 Marcet's (Mrs.) Conversations - 14 Morell's Elements of Psychology - 16 Moseley'sEngineeringft Architecture 16 Ogilvie's Master- Builder's Plan - 17 Owen's Lectureson Comp. Anatomy 17 Pereira on Polarised Light - - 17

Peschel's Elements of Physics - 17

Phillips's Mineralogy - J"

" Guide to Geology - - 17

Powell's Unity of Worlds - - 18

Smee's Electro-Metallurgy - - 21)

Steam-Engine (The) - - - 4

Webb's Celestial Objects for Common Telescopes - - - 24

Rural Sports.

Baker's Rifle and Hound in Ceylon 3

Elaine's Dictionary of Sports - 4

Cecil's Stable Practice 6

" Stud Farm - - 0

Davy's Fishing Excursions, 2 Series 7

Ephemera on Angling - 7

" 's Book of the Salmon - 7

Freeman and Salvin's Falconry - 8

Hawker's Young Sportsman - 9

The Hunting-Field - 9

Idle's Hints on Shooting - - II

Pocket and the Stud u

Practical Horsemanship - - 9

Pycroft's Cricket-Field - - - 18

Richardson's Horsemanship - - 18

MunaMs' Fly-Fisher's Entomology 19

Stable Talk and Table Talk - - 9

Stonehenge on the Dcg - - 21

" on the Greyhound 21

The Stud, for Practical Purposes - 9

Veterinary Medicine, &c.

Cecil's Stable Practice - - 6

" Stud Farm - 6

Hunt's Horse and his Mastir - 11

Hunting-Field (The) - 9

Mih-s's Horse-Shoeing - - - 15

" on the Horse's Foot - - 15

Pocket and the Stud 9

Practical Horsemanship - - 9

Rii-hardson's Horsemanship - 18

Stable Talk and Table Talk - 9

Stonehenge on the Dog - - 21

Stud (The) - - - .9

Youatt's Work on the Dog - - 24

Youatt's Woik on the Horse - 24

Voyages and Travels.

Baker's Wanderings in Ceylon - 3

Earth's African Travels - 4

Burton's East Africa - - 5

" Medina and Mecca - - 5

Domcnech's Texas - - 7

" Deserts of North America 7

First Impressions of Ihe New World 7

Forester's Sardinia and Corsica - &

Hinchliffs Travels in the Alps - 9

Hewitt's Art-Student in Munich - 10

" (W.) Victoria - - 10

Hue's Chinese Empire - in

Hudson and Kennedy's Mont

BUnc - - - - 10

Humbpldt's Aspects of Nature - 10

Hutchinson's Western Africa - 11

Kane's Wanderings of an Artist - 11

Lady's Tour round Monte Piosa - 12

M'C'iure's North-West Passage - 17 MncDougall'sVoyageofthe.Kesnhi(c 14

Minium's New York to Delhi - 15 Mollhausen's Journey to the Shores

of the Pacific - 15

O^born's Quedah - - - - 17

Peaks, Passes, and Glaciers - 17

Scherzer's Central Ameuca - - 19 Senior's Journal in Turkey and

Greece - - 19

Snow's Ticrra del Fuego - - 21

Tennent's Ceylon - - - - 21

Von Tempsky's Mexico - - 23

Wanderings in Land of Ham - 23

Weld's Vacations in Ireland- - 24

" Pyrenees - 24

" United States and Canada- 24

Works of Fiction.

Connolly's Romance of the fi an ks 6

Cruikshank's Fals'aff - 7

Hcwitt'a Tallangetta • - - 10

Mildred Norman - - - - 15

Moore s Epicurean - - - 16

Sewell's Ursula - 20

Sir Roger De Coverley - - - 20

Sketches (The), Three Tales - 29

Southey's The Doctor &c. - - 21

Trollope's Barchester Towers - 23

" Warden - 23

of

SMEW WORKS and 1SSEW EDITIONS

Miss Acton's Modern Cookery for Private

Families, reduced to a System of Easy Practice in a Series of carefully-tested Receipts, in which the Principles of Baron Liebig aud other eminent Writers have been as much as possible applied and explained. Newly-revised and enlarged Edition ; with 8 Plates, comprising 27 Figures, and 150 Woodcuts. Fcp. Svo. 7s. 6d.

Acton's English Bread-Book for Domestic Use, adapted to Families of every grade. Fcp. 8vo. price 4s. 6d. cloth.

The Afternoon of Life. By the Author

of Morning Clouds. Second and cheaper Edition, revised throughout. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

Agassiz. — An Essay on Classification. By Louis AGASSIZ. 8vo. 12s.

Aikin. — Select Works of the British

Poets, from Ben Jonson to Beattie. With Biographical and Critical Prefaces by Dr. AIKIN. New Edition, with Supplement by LTTCY AIKIN ; consisting of additional Selections from more recent Poets. 8vo. 18s.

AragoCF.)— Biographies of Distinguished

Scientific Men. Translated by Admiral W. H. SMYTH, D.C.L., F.R.S., &c. ; the Rev. BADEN POWELL, M. A.; andRoBEKT GRANT, M.A., F.R.A.S. Svo. 18s.

Arago's Meteorological Essays. With an Introduction by Baron HFMBOLDT. Translated under the superintendence of Major- General E. SABINE, R.A., Treasurer and V.P.R.S. Svo. 18s.

Arago's Popular Astronomy. Translated and edited by Admiral W. H. SMYTH, D.C.L., F.R.S. ; and ROBERT GsANT,M.A.,F.R.A.S. With 25 Plates and 358 Woodcuts. 2 vols. Svo. price £2. 5s.

Arnold.— Poems. By Matthew Arnold,

FIEST SERIES, Third Edition. Fcp. Svo. price 5s. 6d. SECOND SERIES, price 5s.

Arnold. — Merope, a Tragedy. By Matthew ARNOLD. With a Preface and an Historical Introduction. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

Lord Bacon's Works. A New Edition,

revised and elucidated ; aud enlarged by the addition of many pieces not printed before. Collected and edited by ROBERT LESLIE ELLIS, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge ; JAMES SPEDDING, M.A. of Trinity College, Cambridge ; and Dou&LAS DENON HEATH, Esq., Barrister-at-Law, and late Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. — VOLS,. I. to V., comprising the Division of Philosophical Works ; with a copious INDEX. 5 vols. Svo. price £4. 6s. VOL. VI. price 18s.

*** VOL. VII., completing the Division of Literary and Professional Works, is just ready.

Joanna Baillie's Dramatic and Poetical

Works : Comprising the Plays of the Passions, Miscellaneous Dramas, Metrical Legends, Fugitive Pieces, and Ahalya Baee; with the Life of Joanna Bailh'e, Portrait, and Vignette. Square crown Svo. 21s. cloth ; or 42s. bound in morocco by Hayday.

Baker. — The Rifle and the Hound in

Ceylon. By S. W. BAKER, Esq. New Edition, with 13 Illustrations engraved on Wood. Fcp. Svo. 4s. 6d.

Baker. — Eight Years' Wanderings in Ceylon. By S. W. BAKEE, Esq. With 6 coloured Plates. Svo. price 15 >.

Bate— Memoir of Capt. W. Thornton Bate, R.N. By the Rev. JOHN BAILLIE, Author of " Memoirs of Hewitson," "Memoir of Adelaide Newton," &c. New Edition ; with Portrait and 4 Illustrations. Fcp. 8ro. 5?.

T, 2

Barth. — Travels and Discoveries in

North and Central Africa : Being the Journal of an Expedition undertaken under the auspices of Her Britannic Majesty's Government in the Years 18-19—1855. By HENRY BARTH, Ph.D., D.C.L., Fellow of the Royal Geographical and Asiatic Societies. &c. With numerous Maps, Wood Engravings, and Illustrations in tinted Lithography. 5 vols. Svo. £5. 5s. cloth.

Bayldon's Art of Valuing Rents and

Tillages, and Claims of Tenants upon Quitting Farms, at both Michaelmas and Lady-Day ; as revised by Mr. DONALDSON. Seventh Edition, enlarged and adapted to the Present Time : With the Principles and Mode of Valuing Land and other Property for Parochial Assessment and Enfranchisement of Copyholds, under the recent Acts of Parliament. By ROBERT BAKER, Land- Agent and Valuer. Svo. 10s. 6d.

Bayldon's (R.) Treatise on Road Legislation and Management ; with Remarks on Tolls, and on Repairing Turnpike-Roads and Highways. Svo. 3s. Gd.

Black's Practical Treatise on Brewing,

based on Chemical and Economical Principles : With Formulae for Public Brewers, and Instructions for Private Families. New Edition, with Additions. Svo. 10s. 6d.

Elaine's Encyclopaedia of Rural Sports ;

or, a complete Account, Historical, Practical, and Descriptive, of Hunting, Shooting, Fishing, Racing, &c. New Edition, revised and corrected ; with above 600 Woodcut Illustrations, including 20 now added from Designs by JOHN LEECH. In One Volume, Svo. price 42s. half-bound.

Bloomfield. — The Greek Testament,

with copious English Notes, Critical, Philological, and Explanatory. Especially adapted to the use of Theological Students and Ministers. By the Rev. S. T. BLOOM- EIELD, D.D., F.S.A. Ninth Edition, revised. 2 vols. Svo. with Map, price £2. 8s.

Dr. Bloomfield' s College and School Edition of the Greek Testament : With brief English Notes, chiefly Philological and Explanatory. Seventh Edition ; with Map and Index. Fcp. Svo. 7s. 6d.

Dr. Bloomfield's College and School Lexicon to the Greek Testament. New Edition, carefully revised. Fcp. Svo. price 10s. Gd.

Bourne. — A Treatise on the Steam-

Engine, in its Application to Minee, Mills, Steam-Navigation, and Railways. By the Artisan Club. Edited by JoiiNBouRNE, C.E. New Edition ; with 33 Steel Plates and 349 Wood Engravings. 4to. price 27s.

Bourne's Catechism of the Steam -• Engine in its various Applications to Mines, Mills, Steam-Navigation, Bailways, and Agriculture: With Practical Instructions for the Manufacture and Management of Engines of every 'class. Fourth Edition, enlarged ; with 89 Woodcuts. Fcp. Svo. 6s.

Boyd. — A Manual for Naval Cadets.

Published with the sanction and approval of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. By JOHN M'NEILL BOYD, Captain, R.N. With Compass-Signals in Colours, and 236 Woodcuts. Fcp. Svo. 10s. 6d.

Brande.— A Dictionary of Science, Literature, and Art : Comprising the History, Description, and Scientific Principles of every Branch of Human Knowledge ; with the Derivation and Definition of all the Terms in general use. Edited by W. T. BRANDE, F.R.S.L. and E. ; assisted by DE. J. CATJVIN. Third Edition, revised and corrected ; with numerous Woodcuts. Svo. 60s.

Professor Brande's Lectures on Organic

Chemistry, as applied to Manufactures ; including Dyeing, Bleaching, Calico-Printing, Sugar-Manufacture, the Preservation of Wood, Tanning, &c. ; delivered before the Members of the Royal Institution. Edited by J. SCOITERN, M.B. Fcp. Svo. with Woodcuts, price 7s. 6d.

Brewer. — An Atlas of History and Geography, from the Commencement of the Christian Era to the Present Time : Comprising a Series of Sixteen coloured Maps, arranged in Chronological Order, with Illustrative Memoirs. By the Rev. J. S. BREWER, M.A., Professor of English History and Literature in King's College, London. Second Edition, revised and corrected. Royal Svo. 12s. 6d. half-bound.

Brialmont.— The Life of the Duke of

Wellington. From the French of ALEXIS BRIALMONT, Captain on the Staff of the Belgian Army : With Emendations and Additions. By the Rev. G. R. GLEIG, M.A., Chaplain-General to the Forces and Prebendary of St. Paul's. With Maps, Plans of Battles, and Portraits. VOLS. I. and II. Svo. 30s.

The THIRD and FOURTH VOLUMES (completion) are now in the press, and will take up the history of the Duke from the Battle of Waterloo, representing him as an Ambassador, as a Minister, and as a Citizen.

Brodie. — Psychological Inquiries, in a

Series of Essays intended to illustrate the Influence of the Physical Organisation on the Mental Faculties. By Sir BENJAMIN C. BRODIE, Bart. Third Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

Dr. Thomas Bull on the Maternal Management of Children in Health and Disease. New Edition. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

Dr. Bull's Hints to Mothers on the Management of their Health during the Period of Pregnancy and in the Lying-in Room : With an Exposure of Popular Errors in connexion with those subjects, &c. ; and Hints upon Nursing. New Edition. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

Dr. Bull's Work on Blindness, entitled

the Sense of Vision Denied and Lost. Edited by the Rev. B. G. JOHNS, Chaplain of the Blind School, St. George's Fields. With a brief Introductory Memoir of the Author by Mrs. BULL. Fcp. Svo. 4s. 6d.

Bunsen. — Christianity and Mankind,

their Beginnings and Prospects. By Baron C. C. J. BUNSEN, D.D., D.C.L., D.Ph. Being a New Edition, corrected, remodelled, and extended, of Hippolytus and his Age. 7 vols. Svo. £5. 5s.

*** Tliis Edition is composed of three distinct works, which may be had separately, as follows :—

1. Hippolytus and his Age ; or, the Beginnings and Prospects of Christianity. 2 vols. Svo. price £1. 10=.

2. Outline of the Philosophy of Universal History applied to Language and Religion: Containing an Account of the Alphabetical Conferences. 2 vols. Svo. price £1. 13s.

3. Analeeta Ante-Xica-na. 3 vols. Svo. price £2. 2s.

Bunsen. —Lyra Germanica. Translated from the German by CATHERINE WINK- WORT a. Fifth Edition of the FIRST SERIES, Hymns for the Sundays and chief Festivals of the Christian Year. New Edition of the SECOND SERIES, the Christian Life. Fcp. Svo. price 5s. each Series.

HYMNS from Lyra Germanica 18mo. Is.

*** These selections of German Hymns have been made from collections published in Germany by Baron BUNSEN; and form companion volumes to

Theologia Germanica: Which setteth forth many fair lineaments of Divine Truth, and saith very lofty ami lovely things touching a Perfect Life. Translated by SUSANNA WINKWORTH. With a Preface by the Rev. CHARLES KINHSLE Y ; and a Letter by Baron BUNSEN. Thirc! Edition. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

Bunsen. — Egypt's Place in Universal

History : An Historical Investigation, in Five Books. By Baron C. C. J. BUNSEN, D.D., D.C.L., D.Ph. Translated from the German by C. H. COTTRELL, Esq., M.A. With many Illustrations. VOL. I. Svo. 28s. ; VOL. II. price 30s. ; and VOL. III. price 25s.

Bunting.— The Life of Jabez Bunting,

D.D. : With Notices of contemporary Persons and Events. By his Son, THOMAS PERCIVAL BUNTING-. In Two Volumes. VOL. I. with Two Portraits and a Vignette, in post Svo. price 7s. 6cl. cloth ; or (large paper and Proof Engravings) in square crown Svo. 10s. Gd.

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress: With a

Preface by the Rev. CHARLES KINGSLET, Rector of Eversley ; and about 120 Illustrations engraved on Steel and on Wood from Original Designs by Charles Bennett. Fcp. 4to. price 21s. cloth, gilt edges.

Bishop Butler's General Atlas of Modern

and Ancient Geography ; comprising Fiftytwo full-coloured Maps ; with complete Indices. New Edition, nearly all re-engraved, enlarged, and greatly improved. Edited by the Author's Son. Royal 4to. 24s. half-bound.

The Modern Atlas of 28 fullcoloured Maps. Royal Svo. price 12s.

The Ancient Atlas of 24 fullcoloured Maps. Royal Svo. price 12s.

Separately

Bishop Butler's Sketch of Modern and

Ancient Geography. New Edition, thoroughly revised, with such Alterations introduced as continually progressive Discoveries and the latest Information have rendered necessary. Post Svo. price 7s. 6d.

Burton.— First Footsteps in East Africa ;

or, an Exploration of Harar. By RICHARD F. BURTON, Captain, Bombay Army. With Maps and coloured Plates. Svo. 18s.

Burton. — Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to El Medinah and Meccah. By RICHARD F, BURTON, Captain, Bombay Army. Second Edition, revised ; with coloured Plates and Woodcuts. 2 vols. crown Svo. price 24s.

The Cabinet Lawyer : A Popular Digest

of the Laws of England, Civil and Criminal ; with a Dictionary of Law Terms, Maxims, Statutes, and Judicial Antiquities ; Correct Tables of Assessed Taxes, Stamp Duties, Excise Licenses, and Post-Horse Duties ; Post-Office Regulations ; and Prison Discipline. 18th Edition, comprising the Public Acts of the Session 1858. Fcp. Svo. 10s. 6d.

The Cabinet Gazetteer : A Popular Geographical Dictionary of All the Countries of the World. By the Author of The Cabinet Lawyer. Fcp. Svo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

B 3

Caird. — Prairie Farming in America :

With Notes by the way cm Canada and the United States. By JAMES CAIRD, M.P., Author of "English Agriculture," "High Farming," &c. 16mo. 3s. 6d.

Calvert. — The Wife's Manual ; or,

Prayers, Thoughts, and Pongs en Several Occasions of a Matron's Life. By the Eev. W. CALVEKT, M.A. Ornamented from Designs by the Author in the style of Queen Elizabeth's Prayer-Book. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Catlow.— Popular Conchology; or, the

Shell Cabinet arranged according to the Modern System : With a detailed Accotmt of the Animals, and a complete Descriptive List of the Families and Genera of Becent •and Fossil Shells. By AGNES CATLOW. Second Edition, much improved ; with 405 Woodcut Illustrations. Post 8vo. price 14s.

Catz and Farlie's Book of Emblems.—

Moral Emblems, from JACOB CATZ and EGBERT FARLIE ; with Aphorisms, Adages, and Proverbs of all Nations. The Illustrations freely rendered from designs found in the works of Catz and Farlie, by JOHN LEIGHTON, F.S.A., and engraved under his superintendence. Imperial 8vo. with 60 large Illustrations on Wood, and numerous Vignettes and Tail Pieces.

Cecil. — The Stud Farm ; or, Hints on

Breeding Horses for the Turf, the Chase, and the Eoad. Addressed to Breeders of Eace- Horses and Hunters, Landed Proprietors, and. especially to Tenant Farmers. By CECIL. Fcp. 8vo. with Frontispiece, 5s.

Cecil's Stable Practice; or, Hints on Training for the Turf, the Chase, and the Eoad ; •with Observations on Baoing and Hunting, Wasting, Eace-Eiding, and Handicapping : Addressed to Owners of Bacers, Hunters, and other Horses, and to all who are concerned in Bacing, Steeple- Chasing, and Fox- Hunting. Second Edition. Fcp. 8vo. with Plate, price 5s. half-bound.

Chapman. — History of Gustavus Adolphus and of the Thirty Years' War up to the King's Death : With some Account of its Conclusion by the Peace of Westphalia, in 1648. By B. CHAPMAN, M.A., Vicar of Letherhead. 8vo. with Plans, 12s. 6d.

onirgton. — Handbook of Chemical

Analysis, adapted to the Unitary System of Notation. By F. T. CONINGTON, M.A., F.C.-S. Post 8vo. 7s. 6cl. Also Tables of Q/'/:l (alive Analysis, designed as a Companion to the Handbook, price 2s. 6d.

Connolly.— The Romance of the Ranks;

or, Anecdotes, Episodes, and Social Incidents of Military Life. By T. W. J. CONNOLLY, Quartermaster of the Eoyal Engineers. 2 vols. 8vo. 21s.

Connolly's History of the Eoyal Sappers and Miners : Including the Services of the Corps in the Crimea and at the Siege of Sebastopol. Second Edition, revised and enlarged ; with 17 coloured plates. 2 vols. Svo. price 30s.

Conybeare and Howson.— The Life and

Epistles of Saint Paul : Comprising a complete Biography of the Apostle, and a Translation of his Epistles inserted in Chronological Order. By the Eev. W. J. CONYBEAEE, M.A. ; and the Eev. J. S. HOWSON, M.A. Third Edition, revised and corrected ; with several Maps and Woodcuts, and 4 Plates. 2 vols. square crown 8vo. 31s. 6d. cloth.

*.£* The Original Edition, with more numerous Illustrations, in 2 vols. 4to. price 48s. — may also be had.

Dr. Copland's Dictionary of Practical

Medicine : Comprising General Pathology, the Nature and Treatment of Diseases, Morbid Structures, and the Disorders especially incidental to Climates, to Sex, and to the different Epochs of Life ; with numerous approved Formulae of the Medicines recommended. Now complete in 3 vols. Svo. price £5. 11s. cloth.

Bishop Cotton's Instructions in the

Doctrine and Practice of Christianity. Intended chiefly as an Introduction to Confirmation. Fourth Edition. 18mo. 2s. 6d.

Cresy's Encyclopaedia of Civil Engineering, Historical, Theoretical, and Practical. Illustrated by upwards of 3,000 Woodcuts. Second Edition, revised and brought down to the Present Time in a Supplement,comprising Metropolitan Water- Supply, Drainage of Towns, Eailways, Cubical Proportion, Brick and Iron Construction, Iron Screw Piles, Tubular Bridges, &c, Svo. 63s. cloth.

Crosse.— Memorials, Scientific and Literary, of Andrew Crosse, the Electrician. Edited by Mrs. CEOSSE. Post Svo. 9s. 6d.

Crowe. — The History cf France. By ETKE EVANS CROWE. In Five Volumes. VOL. I. Svo. price 14s.

Cruikshank. ~ The Life of Sir John

Falstaff, illustrated in a Series of Twentylour original Etchings by George Cruikshauk. Accompanied by an imaginary Biography of the Knight by EGBERT B. BROUGH. Royal 8vo. price 12s. 6d. cloth.

Lady Gust's Invalid's Book. — The Invalid's Own Book : A Collection of Recipes from various Books and various Countries. By the Honourable LADY CUST. Second Edition. Fcp. 8vo. price 2s. 6d.

Dale.— The Domestic Liturgy and Family

Chaplain, in Two Parts : PART I. Church Services adapted for Domestic Use, with Prayers for Every Day of the Week, selected from the Book of Common Prayer; PART II. an appropriate Sermon for Every Sunday in the Year. By the Rev. THOMAS DALE, M.A., Canon Residentiary of St. Paul's. Second, Edition. Post 4to. 21s. cloth j 31s. Gd. calf ; or £2. 10s. morocco.

( THE FAMILY CHAPLAIN, 12s. Separately ^THE DoMBSTIO LITURGY, 10s. 6d.

Davy (Dr. J.) — The Angler and his

Friend ; or, Piscatory Colloquies and Fishing Excursions. By JOHN DAVY, M.D., F.R.S., &c. Fcp. 8vo. price 6s.

The Angler In the Lake District : or, Piscatory Colloquies and Fishing Excursions in Westmoreland and Cumberland. By JOHN DAVY, M.D., F.R.S. Fcp. Svo. 6s. 6d.

De Fonblanque, — The Administration

and Organisation of the British Army, with especial reference to Finance and Supply. By EDWARD BARRING-TON DE FONBLANQUE, Assistant Commissary- General. Svo. 12s.

De la Rive.— A Treatise on Electricity

in Theory and Practice. By A. DE LA RIVE, Professor in the Academy of Geneva. Translated for the Author by C. V. WALKER, F.R.S. With numerous Woodcut Illustrations. 3 vole. Svo. price £3. 13s. cloth.

Domenech. — Seven Years' Residence in

the Great Deserts of North America. By the ABBE DOMENECH. With a Map, and about Sixty Woodcut Illustrations. 2 vols. Svo. [Just ready.

The Abbe Bomenech's Missionary Adventures in Texas and Mexico : A Personal Narrative of Six Years' Sojourn in those Regions. Translated under the Author's superintendence. Svo. with Map, 10s. 6d.

The Eclipse of Faith ; or, a Visit to a

Religious Sceptic, Wi Edition. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

Defence of The Eclipse of Faith, by its Author : Being a Rejoinder to Professor Newman's Reply : Including a full Examination of that Writer's Criticism on the Character of Christ ; and a Chapter on the Aspects and Pretensions of Modern Deism. Second Edition, revised. Post Svo. 5s. 6d.

The Englishman's Greek Concordance of

the New Testament : Being an Attempt at a Verbal Connexion between the Greek and the English Texts ; including a Concordance to the Proper Names, with Indexes, Greek- English and English- Greek. New Edition, with a new Index. Royal Svo. price 42s.

The Englishman's Hebrew and Chaldee Concordance of the Old Testament : Being an Attempt at a Verbal Connexion between the Original and the English Translations ; with Indexes, a List of the Proper Names and their Occurrences, &c. 2 vols. royal Svo. £3. 13s. 6d. ; large paper, £4. 14s. 6d.

Ephemera's Handbook of Angling;

teaching Fly-Fishing, Trolling, Bottom- Fishing, Salmon-Fishing : With the Natural History of River-Fish, and the best Modes of Catching them. Third Edition, corrected and improved; with Woodcuts. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

Ephemera's Book of the Salmon: Comprising the Theory, Principles, and Practice of Fly-Fishing for Salmon ; Lists of good Salmon Flies for every good River in the Empire ; the Natural llistory of the Salmon, its Habits described, and the best way of artificially Breeding it. Fcp. Svo. with coloured Plates, price 14s.

*

Fairbairn.— Useful Information for Engineers : Being a Series of Lectures delivered to the Working Engineers of Yorkshire and Lancashire. With Appendices, containing the Results of Experimental Inquiries into the Strergth of Materials, the Causes of Boiler Explosions, &c. ' By WILLIAM FAIEBAIRN, F.R.S., F.G.S. Second Edition ; with numerous Plates and Woodcuts. Crown Svo. price 10s. 6d.

First Impressions of the New World on

Two Travellers from the Old in the Autumn of 1858 : with Map by Arrowsmith. Post Svo. Ss. 6d.

Fischer.— Francis Bacon of Verulam:

Realistic Philosophy and its Age. By Dr. K. FISCHER. Translated by JOHN OXEN- EORD. Post Svo. 9s. 6d.

B 4

Forester.— Rambles in the Islands of

Corsica and Sardinia : "With Notices of th<-'ir History, Antiquities, and present Condition. By THOMAS FORESTER, Author of Nonc.iy in 1848-1849. With coloured Map ; and numerous Illustrations in Colours and Tints and on Wood, from Drawings made during the Tour by Lieut.- Col. M. A. BIDDULPH, E.A. Imperial Svo. price 28s.

Frazer. — Letters of Sir A. S. Frazer,

K.C.B., Commanding the Royal Horse Artillery under the Duke of Wellington : Written during the Peninsular and Waterloo Campaigns. Edited by Major-General SABTNE, R,A. With Portrait, 2 Maps, and Plan. 8vo. 18s.

Freeman and Salvin. — Falconry: Its

Claims, History, and Practice. By GAGE EARI/E FREEMAN, M.A. (" Peregrine" of the Field newspaper) ; and Capt. F. H. SALVIN. Post Svo. with Woodcut Illustrations from Drawings by Wolf.

Garratt,— Marvels and Mysteries of Instinct ; or, Curiosities of Animal Life. By GEORGE GARRATT. Second Edition, revised and improved ; with a Frontispiece. Fcp. Svo. price 4s. Gel.

Gilbart.— A Practical Treatise on Banking. By JAMES WILLIAM GILBART, F.R.S. Sixth Edition, revised and enlarged. 2 vols. 12mo. Portrait, IGs.

GiToart's Logic of Banking : a Familiar Exposition of the Principles of Reasoning, and their application to the Art and (lie Science of Banking. 12mo. with Portrait, 12s. 6d.

Gleig,— Essays, Biographical, Historical,

and Miscellaneous, contributed chiefly to the Edinburgh and Q/iarfer/i/ Reviews. By the7 Rev, G. R GLEIG, M.A., Chaplain-General to the Forces and Prebendary of St. Paul's. 2 vols. Svo. 21s.

1. Dr. Chalmers*

2. Our Defensive Armament.

3. Natural Theolo.sy.

4. Military Bridges.

5. The War of the Punjauh.

CONTENTS.

G. The Puritans. 1. General Miller.

8. India and its Army.

9. The Madchenstien. lit. Military Education.

The Poetical Works of Oliver Goldsmith.

Edited by BOLTON CORNET, Esq. Illustrated by Wood Engravings, from Designs by Members of the Etching Club. Square crown 8vo. cloth, 21s. ; morocco, £1. 16s.

Gosse. — A Naturalist's Sojourn in

Jamaica. By P. H. GOSSE, Esq. With Plates. Post Svo. price 14s.

Greathed.— Letters written during the i

Siege of Delhi. By IT. H. GREATHED, late of the Bengal Civil Service. Edited by his Widow. Post Svo. Ss. 6d.

Green.— Lives of the Princesses of England. By Mrs. MARY ANNE EYERETT GREEN, Editor of the Letters of Roi/aJ and Illustrious Ladies. With numerous Portraits. Complete in 6 vols. post Svo. price 10s. 6d. each. — Any Yolume may be had separately to complete sets.

Greyson. — Selections from the Correspondence of R. E. H. GREYSON, Esq. Edited by the Author of The Eclipse of Faith. Second Edition. Crown Svo. 7s. 6d.

Grove, — The Correlation of Physical Forces. By W. R. GROYE, Q.C., M.A., F.R.S., &c. Third Edition. Svo. price 7s.

Gurney.— St. Louis and Henri IV. : Being

a Second Series of Historical Sketches. By the Rev. JOHN H. GURNEY, M.A., Rector of St. Mary's, Marylebone. Fcp. Svo. 6s.

Evening Eecreations ; or, Samples from the Lecture-Room. Edited by the Rev. J. H. ' GURNEY, M.A. Crown Svo. 5s.

Gwilt's Encyclopedia of Architecture,

Historical, Theoretical, and Practical. By JOSEPH G\VILT. With more than 1,000 Wood Engravings, from Designs by J. S. GWILT. Fourth Edition. Svo. 42s.

Hare (Archdeacon).— The Life of Luther,

iu Forty-eight Historical Engravings. By GTJSTAV KONIG. With Explanations by Archdeacon HARE and SUSANNA WINK- WORTH. Fcp. 4to. price 28s.

Harford.— Life of Michael Angelo Buonarroti : With Translations of many of his Poems and Letters ; also Memoirs of Savonarola, Raphael, and Vittoria Colonna. By JOHN S. IlAiirOKD, Esq., D.C.L., F.R.S. Second Edition, thoroughly revised ; with 20 copperplate Engravings. 2 vols. Svo. 25s.

Illustrations, Architecttu'al and Pictorial, of the Genius of Michael Angelo Buonarroti. With Descriptions of the Plates, by the Commendatore CANINA ; C. R. COCEERELL, Esq., R A. ; and J. S. HARFORD, Esq., D.C.L., F.R.S. Folio, 73s. 6d half-bound.

Harrison.— The Light of the Forge ; or,

Counsels drawn from the Sick -Bed of E. M. By the Rev. W. HARRISON, M.A., Domestic Chaplain to H.R.H. the Duchess of Cambridge. Fcp. Svo. price 5s.

Harry Hieover.— Stable Talk and Table

Talk ; or, Spectacles for Young Sportsmen. By HARRY HIEOV^R. New Edition, 2 vols. Svo. with Portrait, price 24s.

Harry Hieover.- The Hunting-Field. By Harry HIEOVER. With Two Plates. Fcp. Svo. 5s. half- bound.

Harry Hieover. — Practical Horsemanship. By HARRY HIEOVEK. Second Edition ; with 2 Plates. Fcp. STO. 5s. half-bound.

Harry Hieover.— The Pocket and the Stud; or, Practical Hints on the Management of the Stable. By HARRY HIEOVEB. Third Edition ; with Portrait of the Author. Fcp. 8vo. price 5s. half-bound.

Harry Hieover.— The Stud, for Practical Purposes and Practical Men : Being a Guide to the Choice of a Horse for use more than for show. By HARRY HIEOVER. With 2 Plates. Fcp. Svo. price 5s. half-bound.

Hassall.— Adulterations Detected; or,

Plain Instructions for the Discovery of Frauds in Food and Medicine. By ARTHUR HILL HASSALL, M.D. Lond., Analyst of The Lancet Sanitary Commission ; and Author of the Reports of that Commission published under the title of Food and its Adulterations (which may also be had, in Svo. price 28s.) With 225 Illustrations, engraved on Wood. Crown Svo. 17s. 6d.

Hassall.— A History of the British Fresh

Water Algae: Including Descriptions of the Desmideae and Diatomacese. With upwards of One Hundred Plates of Figures, illustrating the various Species. By ARTHUR HILL HASSALL, M.D., Author of Microscopic Anatomy of the Human Body, &c. 2 vols. Svo. with 103 Plates, price £1. 15s.

Col. Hawker's Instructions to Young Sportsmen in all that relates to Guns and Shooting. llth Edition, revised by the Author's Son, Major P. W. L. HAWKER ; with a Bust of the Author, and numerous Illustrations. Square crown Svo. 18s.

Haydn's Book of Dignities : Containing

Rolls of the Official Personages of the British Empire, Civil, Ecclesiastical, Judicial, Military, Naval, and Municipal, from the Earliest Periods to the Present Time. Together with the Sovereigns of Europe, from the Foundation of their respective States ; the Peerage and Nobility of Great Britain ; &c. Being a New Edition, improved and continued, of Beatson's Political Index. Svo. price 25s. half-bound.

Hayward. — Biographical and Critical

Essays, reprinted from Reviews, with Additions and Corrections. By A. HAYWARD, Esq., Q.C. 2 vols. Svo. price 24s.

CONTENTS.

1. Sydney Smith.

2. Samuel Rogers.

3. James Smith.

4. George Selwyn.

5. Lord Chesterfield.

6. Lord Melbourne.

7. General Von Radowitz.

8. Countess Hahn-Hahn. <J. De Stendahl (Henri

Beyle).

10. Pierre Dupont.

11. Lord Eldon and the

Chances of the Bar.

12. The Crimean Campaign.

13. American Orators and

Statesmen.

11. Journalism in France. 15. Parisian Morals and

Manners. 10. The Imitative Powers of

Music.

17. British Field Sports.

18. Science and Literature

of Etiquette.

19. The Art of Dining.

Sir John Herschel.— Outlines of Astronomy. By SIR JOHN F. W. HEESCHEL, Bart., K.H., M.A. Fifth Edition, revised and corrected to the existing state of Astronomical Knowledge ; with Plates and Woodouts. Svo. price 18s.

Sir John Herschel's Essays from the Edinburgh and Quarterly Revieics, with Addresses and other Pieces. 8vo. price 18s.

Hinchliff.— Summer Months among the

Alps : With the Ascent of Monte Rosa. By THOMAS W. HINCHLIFF, of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-at-Law. With 4 tinted Views and 3 Maps. Post Svo. price 10s. 6d.

Hints on Etiquette and the Usages of

Society : With a Glance at Bad Habits. New Edition, revised (with Additions) by a Lady of Rank. Fcp. Svo. price Half-a-Crown.

Holland. — Medical Notes and Reflections. By SIR HENRY HOLLAND, Bart., M.D., F.R.S., &c., Physician in Ordinary to the Queen and Prince-Consort. Third Edition, revised throughout and corrected ; with some Additions. Svo. 18s.

Sir H. Holland's Chapters on Mental Physiology, founded chiefly on Chapters contained in Medical Notes and Refections. Second Edition. Post Svo. price 8s. 6d.

Hooker.— Kew Gardens; or, a Popular

Guide to the Royal Botanic Gardens of Kew. By SIR WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKEB, ELH., &c., Director. 16mo. price Sixpence.

Hooker and Arnott.— The British Flora ;

comprising the Pheenogamous or Flowering Plants, and the Ferns. Seventh Edition, with Additions and Corrections ; and nu« merous Figures illustrative of the Umbelliferous Plants, the Composite Plants, the Grasses, and the Ferns. By SIR W. J. HOOKER, F.R.A. and L.S., &c. ; and G. A. WALKER-AHNOTT, LL.D., F.L.S. 12mo. with 12 Plates, price 14s. ; with the Plates coloured, price 21s.

B 5

Home's Introduction to the Critical

Study and Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. Tenth Edition, revised, corrected, and brought down, to the present time. Edited by the Rev. T. HAETWELL HOENE, B.D. (the Author) ; the Rev. SAMUEL DAVIDSON, D.D. of the University of Halle, and LL.D. ; and S. PEIDEATTX TEEGELLES, LL.D, With 4 Maps and 22 Yignettes and Facsimiles. 4 vols. 8vo. £3. 13s. 6d.

*** Tlie Four Volumes may also he had separately as follows : —

Vol. I.— A Summary of the Evidence for the Genuineness, Authenticity, Uncorrupted Preservation, and Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures. By the Rev. T.H. Home, B.D..8vo. 15s.

VOL. II.— The Text of the Old Testament considered : With a Treatise on Sacred Interpretation ; and a brief Introduction to the Old Testament Books and the Apocrypha. By S. Davidson, D.D. (Halle) and LL.D 8vo. 25s.

VOL. III.— A Summary of Biblical Geography and Antiquities. By the Rev. T. H. Home, B.D 8vo. 18s.

VOL. IV.— An Introduction to the Textual Criticism of the Neto Testament. By the Rev. T. H. Home, B.D. The Critical Part re-written, and the remainder revised and edited by s. P. Tregelles, LL.D 8vo. 18s.

Home. — A Compendious Introduction

to the Study of the Bible. By the Rev. T. HAETWELL HOENE, B.D. New Edition, with Maps and Illustrations, 12nio. 9s.

Hoskyns.— Talpa ; or, the Chronicles of

a Clay Farm : An Agricultural Fragment. By CHANDOS WEEN HOSKYNS, Esq. Fourth Edition. With 24 Woodcuts from the original Designs by GTEQDGE CB.ULKSHANK. IGrno. price 5s. 6d.

Howitt (A. M.) — An Art-Student in Munich. By ANNA MAEY HOWITT. 2 vols. post 8vo. price 14s.

Howitt.— The Children's Year. By Mary

HOWITT. With Four Illustrations, from Designs by A. M. HOWIIT. Square 16mo. 5s.

Howitt.— Tallangetta, the Squatter's

Home : A Story of Australian Life. By WILLIAM HOWITT, Author of Two Tears in Victoria, &c. 2 vols. post 8vo. price 18s.

Howitt. — Land, Labour, and Gold;

or, Two Years in Victoria : With Visit to Sydney and Van Diemen's Land. By WILLIAM HOWITT. Second Edition, containing the most recent Information regarding the Colony. 2 vols. crown 8vo. price. 10s.

Howitt. — Visits to Remarkable Places :

Old Halls, Battle-Fields, and Scenes illustrative of Striking Passages in English History and Poetry. By WILLIAM HOWITT. With about 80 Wood Engravings. New Edition. 2 vols. square crown 8vo. price 25s.

William Hewitt's Boy's Country Book:

Being the Real Life of a Country Boy, written by birr self ; exhibiting all the Amusements, Pleasures, and Pursuits of Children in the Country. New Edition ; with 40 Woodcuts. Fcp. 8vo. price 6s.

Howitt. — The Rural Life of England. Ey WILLIAM HOWITT. New Edition, corrected and revised ; with Woodcuts by Bewick and Williams. Medium 8vo. 21s.

The Abbe' Hue's work on the Chinese

Empire, founded on Fourteen Years' Travels and Eesidtnce in China. People's Edition, with 2 Woodcut Illustrations. Crown 8vo. price 5s.

Hue.- Christianity in China, Tartary,

and Thibet. By M. 1' Abbe Hue, formerly Missionary Apostolic in China ; Author of The Chinese Empire^ &c. VOLS. I. and II. 8vo. 21s. ; and VOL. III. price 10s. 6d.

Hudson's Plain Directions for Making

Wills in conformity with the Law. New Edition, corrected and revised by the Author ; and practically illustrated by Specimens of Wills containing many varieties of Bequests, also Notes of Cases judicially decided since the Wills Act came into operation. Fcp. 8vo. 2s. Gel.

Hudson's Executor's Guide. New and

enlarged Edition, revised by the Author with reference to the latest reported Cases and Acts of Parliament. Fcp. 8vo. 6s.

Hudson and Kennedy.— Where there 's

a Will there 's a Way : An Ascent of Mont Blanc by a New Route and Without Guides. By the Rev. C. HUDSON, M.A., and E. S. KENNEDY, B .A. Second Edition, with Plate and Map. Post 8vo. 5s. 6d.

Humboldt's Cosmos. Translated, with

the Author's authority, by MES. SABINE. VOLS. I. and II. 16mo. Half-a-Crown each, sewed ; 3s. 6d. each, cloth : or in post 8vo. 12s. each, cloth. VOL. III. post 8vo. 12s. 6d. cloth : or in 16mo. PAET I. 2s. 6d. sewed, 3s. 6d. cloth ; and PAET II. 3s. sewed, 4s. cloth. VOL. IV. PAET I. post 8vo. 15s. cloth ; and 16nio. price 7s. 6d. cloth, or 7s. sewed.

Humboldt's Aspects of Nature. Translated,

with the Author's authority, by MES.SABINE. 16mo. price 6s. : or in 2 vols. 3s. 6d. each, cloth j 2s. 6d. each, sewer).

Ht-mplireys. — Parables of Our Lord.

illuminated and ornamented in the style of the Missals of the Renaissance by HENRY NOEL HUMPHREYS. Square fcp. Svo. 21s. in massivo carved covers ; or 30s. bound in morocco by Hayclay.

Hunt. — Researches on Light in its

Chemical Relations ; embracing a Consideration of all the Photographic Processes. By ROBERT HUNT, F.R.S. Second Edition, v.'ith Plate and Woodcuts. 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Eirnt (Captain).— The Horse and his

Master : With Hints on Breeding, Breaking, Stable-Management, Training, Elementary Horsemanship, Riding to Hounds, &c. By VERB D. HUNT, Esq., late 109th Regt. Co. Dublin Militia. Fcp. 8vo. with Frontispiece, price 5s.

Eutchinson. — Impressions of Western

Africa : With a Report on the Peculiarities of Trade up the Rivers in the Bight of Biafra. By T. J. HUTCHINSON, Esq., British Consul for the Bight of Biafra and the Island of Fernando Po. Post 8vo. price 8s. 6d.

Idle.— Hints on Shooting, Fishing, &c.,

both on Sea and Land, and in tbe Fresh- Water Lochs of Scotland : Being the Experiences of C. IDLE, Esq. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

Mrs. Jameson's Legends of the Saints

and Martyrs, as represented in Christian Art : Forming the FIRST SERIES of Sacred and Legendary Art. Third Edition, revised and improved ; with 17 Etchings and upwards of 180 Woodcuts, many of which are new in this Edition. 2 vols. square crown 8vo. price 31s. 6d.

Mrs. Jameson's Legends of the Monastic Orders, as represented in Christian Art. Forming the SECOND SERIES of Sacred and Legendary Art. Second Edition, enlarged ; with 11 Etchings by the Author, and 88 Woodcuts. Square crown 8vo. price 28s.

Mrs. Jameson's Legends of the Madonna, as represented in Christian Art : Forming the THIRD SERIES of Sacred and Legendary Art, Second Edition, corrected and enlarged ; with 27 Etchings and 165 Wood Engravings. Square crovra 8vo. price 28s.

Mrs. Jameson's Commonplace-Book of

Thoughts, Memories, and Fancies, Original and Selected. PART I. Ethics and Character ; PART II. Literature and Art. Second Edit. revised and corrected; with Etchings and Woodcuts. Crown Svo. 18s.

Mrs. Jameson's Two Lectures on the

Social Employments of Women,— Sisters of

<"• •!!•//>/ and the (.'o.nnumion of Labour. New Edition, with a Prefatory Letter on the present Condition and Requirements of the Women of England. Fcp. 8vo. 2s.

Jaquemet's Compendium of Chronology:

Containing the most important Dates of General History, Political, Ecclesiastical, and Literary, from the Creation of the W^orld to the end of the Year 1854. Second Edition. Post 8vo. price 7s. 6d.

Jaqneaiat's Chronology for Schools : Containing the most important Dates of General History, Political, Ecclesisastical, and Literary, from the Creation of the World to the end of the year 1857. Edited by the Rev. J. ALCORN, M.A. Fcp. 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Lord Jeffrey's Contributions to The

Edinburgh Review. A New Edition, complete in One Volume, with a Portrait engraved by Henry Robinson, and a Vignette. Square crown 8vo. 21s. cloth ; or 30s. calf. — Or hi 3 rols. Svo. price 42s. Comprising—

1. General Literature and Literary Biography.

2. History and Historical Memoirs.

3. Poetry.

4. Philosophy of the Mind, Metaphysics,

and Jurisprudence.

5. Novels, Tales, and Prose Works of Fiction.

6. General Politics.

7. Miscellaneous Literature, &c.

Bishop Jeremy Taylor's Entire Works :

With Life by BISHOP HJSBEH. Revised and corrected by the Rev. CHARLES PAGE EDEN, Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. Now complete in 10 vols. Svo. 10s. 6d. each.

Keith Johnston's New Dictionary of

Geography, Descriptive, Physical, Statistical, and Historical: Forming a complete General Gazetteer of the World. N'tfo Edition, rectified to May 1859. In One Volume of 1,360 pages, comprising about 50,000 Names of Places. 8vo. 30s. cloth; or 35s. halfbouud in russia.

Kane.— Wanderings of an Artist among

the Indians of North America ; from Canada to Vancouver's Island and Oregon, through the Hudson's Bay Company's Territory, and back again. By PAUL KANE. With Map, Illustrations in Colours, and Wood Engravings. Svo. 21s.

Keinble.— The Saxons in England : A

History of the English Commonwealth till the Norman Conquest. By JOHN M. KEM- BLE, M.A., &c. 2 vols. Svo, 2Ss.

B 6

Kesteven.— A Manual of the Domestic

Practice of Medicine. By W. B. KESTEVEX, Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, &c. Square post Svo. 7s. 6d.

Kirby and Spence's Introduction to

Entomology ; or, Elements of the Natural History of Insects : Comprising an Account of Noxious and Useful Insects, of their Metamorphoses, Food, Stratagems, Habitations, Societies, Motions, Noises, Hibernation, Instinct, &c. Seventh Edition, with an Appendix relative to the Origin and Progress of the work. Crown Svo, 5s.

A Lady's Tour round Monte Rosa;

With Visits to the Italian Valleys of Anzasca, Mastalone, Camasco, Sesia, Lys, Challant, Aosta, and Cogne : In a Series of Excursions in the Years 1850, 1856, 185S. With Map, 4 Illustrations in Colours from Sketches by Mr. G. Barnard, and 8 Wood Engravings. Post Svo. 14s.

Mrs. E. Lee's Elements of Natural History ; or, First Principles of Zoology : Com • prising the Principles of Classification, interspersed with amusing and instructive Accounts of the most remarkable Animal?. New Edition ; Woodcuts. Fcp. Svo. 7s. 6d.

LARDNER'S CABINET CYCLOPAEDIA

Of History, Biography, Literature, the Arts and Sciences, Natural History, and Manufactures.

A Series of Original Works by

Complete in 132 vols. fcp. STO. with Vignette Titles, price, in cloth, Nineteen Guineas. The Works separately, in Sets or Series, price Three Shillings and Sixpence each Volume.

A List of the WORKS composing the CABINET CYCLOP.EBIA: —

1. Bell's History of Russia 3 vols. 10s. 6d. I 34. Lardner on Heat . . . . 1 vol. 3s. Gel.

2. Bell's Lives of British Poets 2 vols. 7s.

3. Brewster's Optics 1 vol. 3s. 6d.

4. Cooley's Maritime and Inland Discovery 3 vols. 10s. 6d.

5. Crowe's History of France 3 vols. 10s. I'd.

6. De Morgan on Probabilities 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

7. De Sismondi's History of tlie Italian

Republics 1 vol. 3s. fid.

8. De Sismondi's Fall of the Roman Empire 2 vols. 7s.

9. Donovan's Chemistry 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

10. Donovan's Domestic Economy 2 vols. 7s.

11. Dunham's Spain and Portugal 5 vols. 17s. Gd.

12. Dunham's History of Denmark, Sweden,

and Norway 3 vols. 10s. Gd .

13. Dunham's History of Poland 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

11. Dunham's Germanic Empire 3 vols. 10s. Gd.

15. Dunham's Europe during the Middle

Ages 4 vols. 14s.

16. Dunham's British Dramatists 2 vols. 7s.

17. Dunham's Lives of Early Writers of

Great Britain 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

18. Fergus's History of the United States . . 2 vols. 7s.

19. Fosbroke's Grecian & Roman Antiquities 2 vols. 7s.

20. Fovster's Lives of the Statesmen of the

Commonwealth 5 Tols. 17s. Gd.

21. Gleig's Lives of British Military Commanders 8 vols. 10s. fid.

22. Grattan's History of the Netherlands .. . 1 vol. 3s. 6d.

23. Henslow's Botany 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

24. Herschel's Astronomy 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

25. Herschel's Discourse on Natural Philosophy 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

26. History of Rome 2 vols. 7s.

27. History of Switzerland 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

28. Holland's Manufactures in Metal S vols. 10s. Cd.

29. James's Lives of Foreign Statesmen .... 5 vols. 17s. Gd.

30. Kater and Lardner's Mechanics 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

31. Keightley's Outlines of History 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

32. Lardner's Arithmetic 1 vol. 3s. 6d.

83. Lardner's Geometry 1 vol. 3s. 6d.

Lardner's Hydrostatics and Pneumatics 1 vol. 3s. Gel.

38. Lardner and Walker's Electricity and

Magnetism 2 vols. 7s.

37. Mackintosh, Forster, and Courtenay's

Lives of British Statesmen 7 vols. 21s. Gd.

.'58. Mackintosh, Wallace, and Bell's History

of England 10 vols. 35s.

39. Montgomery and Shelley's eminent Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese Authors 3 vols. 10s. Gd.

40. Moore's History of Ireland 4 vols. 14s.

41. Nicolas's Chronology of History 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

42. Phillips's Treatise on Geology 2 vols. 7s.

43. Powell's History of Natural Philosophy 1 vol. 3s. 6d.

44. Porter's Treatise on the Manufacture of

Silk 1 Tol. 3s. 6d.

45. Porter's Manufactures of Porcelain and

Glass 1 rol. 3s. 6d.

46. Roscoe's British Lawyers 1 rol. 3s. Gd.

47. Scott's History of Scotland 2 vols. 7s.

48. Shelley's Lives of eminent French

Authors 2 yols. 7s.

49. Shuckard and Swainson's Insects 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

50. Southey's Lives of British Admirals 5 vols. 17s. fid.

51. Stebbing's Church History 2 vols. 7s.

52. Stebbing's History of the Reformation. . 2 vols. 7s.

53. Swainson's Discourse on Natural History 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

54. Swainson's Natural History and Classification of Animals 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

55. Swainson's Habits and Instincts of

Animals 1 vol. 3s. 6d.

56. Swainson's Birds 2 vols. 7s.

57. Swainson's Fish, Reptiles, &c 2 vols. 7s.

58. Swainson's Quadrupeds 1 vol. 3s. 6d.

59. Swainson's Shells and Shell-Fish 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

CO. Swainson's Animals in Menageries 1 vol. 3s. Gd.

61. Swainson's Taxidermy and Biography of

Zoologists 1 Tol. 3s. Gd.

02. Thirlwall's History of Greece 8 vols. 28s.

The Letters of a Betrothed. Fcp. 8vo.

price- 5s. cloth.

Letters to my Unknown Friends. By

a LADY, Author of Letters on Happiness. Fourth Edition. Fcp. 8vo, 5s.

L.E.L.— The Poetical Works of Letitia

Elizabeth Landon ; comprising the Improvisatrice, the Venetian Bracelet, the Golden Violet, the Troubadour, and Poetical Remains. New Edition ; with 2 Vignettes by R.Doyle. 2 vols. 16mo. 10s. cloth ; morocco, 21s.

Dr. John Lindley's Theory and Practice

of Horticulture ; or, an Attempt to explain the principal Operations of Gardening upon Physiological Grounds : Being the Second Edition of the Theory of Horticulture, much enlarged ; with 98 Woodcuts. 8vo. 21s.

Dr. John Lindley's Introduction to

Botany. New Edition, with Corrections and copious Additions. 2 vols. 8vo. with Six Plates and numerous Woodcuts, price 24s.

Dr. John Lindley's Synopsis of the

British Flora arranged according to the Natural Orders ; containing Yasculares or Flowering Plants. Third Edition (reprinted) . Fcp. 8vo. 6s.

Linwood.— Anthologia Oxoniensis, sive

Florilegium e Lusibus poeticis diversorum Oxoniensium Grsecis et Latinis decerptum. Curante GITLIELMO LINWOOD, M.A., JSdis Christi Alumno. 8vo. price 14s.

Lorimer's (C.) Letters to a Young Master

Mariner on some Subjects connected with his Calling. New Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.6d.

London's Encyclopaedia of Agriculture :

Comprising the Theory and Practice of the Valuation, Transfer, Laying-out, Improvement, and Management of Landed Property, and of the Cultivation and Economy of the Animal and Vegetable Productions of Agriculture. New and cheaper Edition ; with 1,100 Woodcuts. 8vo. 31s. 6cl.

London's Encyclopaedia of Gardening:

Comprising the Theory and Practice of Horticulture, Floriculture, Arboriculture, and Landscape- Gardening. With many hundred Woodcuts. Corrected and improved _ by MRS. LOTJDON. New and cheaper Edition. 8vo. 31s. 6d.

London's Encyclopedia of Trees and

Shrubs, or Arboretum et Fruticetum Britannicum abridged : Containing the Hardy Trees and Shrubs of Great Britain, Native and Foreign, Scientifically and Popularly Described. With about 2,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. price 508.

London's Encyclopaedia of Plants: Comprising the Specific Character, Description, Culture, History, Application in the Arts, and every other desirable Particular respecting all the Plants found in Great Britain. New Edition, corrected by MRS. LOUDON. With upwards of 12,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. £3. 13s. 6d.— Second Supplement, 21s.

Loudon's Encyclopaedia of Cottage,

Farm, and Villa Architecture and Furniture. New Edition, edited by MRS. LOTJDON ; with more than 2,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. 689.

Loudon's Hortus Britannicus ; or, Catalogue of all the Plants found in Great Britain. New Edition, corrected by MRS. 8vo. 31s. 6d.

Mrs. London's Lady's Country Companion ; or, How to Enjoy a Country Life Rationally. Fourth Edition, with Plates and Woodcuts. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

Mrs. Loudon's Amateur Gardener's

Calendar, or Monthly Guide to what should be avoided and done in a Garden. New Edition. Crown 8ro. with Woodcuts, 7s. 6d.

Low's Elements of Practical Agriculture;

comprehending the Cultivation of Plants, the Husbandry of the Domestic Animals, and the Economy of the Farm. New Edition ; with 200 Woodcuts. 8vo. 21s.

Macaulay.— Speeches of the Right Hon.

Lord Macaulay. Corrected by HIMSELF. 8vo. price 12s. — Lord Macaulay's Speeches on Parliamentary Reform, 16mo. price Is.

Macaulay. — The History of England

from the Accession of James II. By the Right Hon. LORD MACAULAY. New Edition. VOLS. I. and II. 8vo. price 32s. ; VOLS. III. and IV. price 36s.

Lord Macaulay's History of England

from the Accession of James II. New Edition of the first Four Volumes of the 8vo. Edition, revised and corrected. 7 vols. post 8vo. price 6s. each.

Lord Macaulay's Critical and Historical

Essays contributed to The Edinburgh Review. Four Editions, as follows : —

1. A LIBRARY EDITION (the Ninth], in 3 rols. 8vo.

price 30s.

2. Complete in ONE VOLUME, with Portrait and Vignette. Square crown STO. price 21s. cloth ; or 30s. calf.

3. Another NEW EDITION, in 3 vcls. fcr>. 8vo. price

21s. cloth.

4. The PEOPLE'S EDITION, in 2 vols. crown 8vo. price

8s. cloth.

Macaulay.— Lays of Ancient Rome, with

Ivry and the Armada. By the Right Hon. LORD MACAULAY. New Edition. 16mo. price 4s. 6d. cloth; or 10s. 6d. bound in morocco.

.Lord Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome.

With numerous Illustrations, Original and from the Antique, drawn on Wood by George Scharf, jun., and engraved by Samuel Williams. New Edition. Fcp. 4to. price 21s. boards ; or 42s. bound in morocco.

Mac Donald. — Poems. By George

MAC DONALD, Author of Within and Without. Fcp. 8vo. 7s.

Mac Donald.— Within and Without : A

Dramatic Poem. By GEORGE MAC DONALD. Second Edition, revised. Fcp. 8vo. 4s. 6d,

MacDougall.— The Theory of War illustrated by numerous Examples from History. By Lieutenant -Colonel MACDOUGALL, Commandant of the Staff College. Second Edition, revised. Post 8vo. with 10 Plans of Battles, price 10s. 6d.

MacDougall. - The Campaigns of Hannibal,

arranged and critically considered, expressly for the use of Students of Military History. By Lieut.-Col. P. L.MAcDoTiGALL, Commandant of the Staff College. Post 8vo. with Map, 7s. Gel.

M'Dougall— The Eventful Voyage of

H.M. Discovery Ship Resolute to the Arctic Regions in Search of Sir John Franklin and the Missing Crews of H.M. Tjisrnvrry Ships Erebus and Terror,' 1852, 1853, 1854. By GEOEGE F. M'DOUGALL, Master. With a coloured Chart ; 8 Illustrations in tinted Lithography ; and 22 Woodcuts. 8vo. price 21s. cloth.

Sir James Mackintosh's Miscellaneous

Works : Including his Contributions to The Edinburgh Review. Complete in One Volume ; with Portrait and Vignette. Square crown 8vo. 21s. cloth ; or 30s. bound in calf: or in 3 vols. fcp. 8vo. 21s.

Sir James Mackintosh's History of England from the Earliest Times to the final Establishment of the Reformation. Library Edition, revised. 2 vols. 8vo. 21s.

M'Culloch's Dictionary, Practical, Theoretical, and Historical, of Commerce and Commercial Navigation. Illustrated witJi Maps avid Plans. New Edition, revised and adapted to the Present Time ; containing much additional Information. {Just ready.

M'Culloch's Dictionary, Geographical,

Statistical, and Historical, of the -various Countries, Places, and principal Natural Objects in the World. Illustrated with Six large Maps. New Edition, revised; with a Supplement. 2 vols. 8vo. price 63s.

Maguire.— Rome ; its Ruler and its Institutions. By JOHN FRANCIS MAGCTIEE, M.P. Second Edition, revised and enlarged ; with a new Portrait of Pope Pius IX. cet. 66. Post 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Mrs. Marcet's Conversations on Natural

Philosophy, in which the Elements of that Science are familiarly explained. Thirteenth Edition, enlarged and corrected ; with 34 Plates. Fcp. 8vo. price 10a. 6d.

Mrs. Marcet's Conversations on Chemistry, in which the Elements of that Science are familiarly explained and illustrated by Experiments. New Edition, enlarged and improved. 2 vols. fcp. 8vo. price 14s.

Marshman. — The Life and Times of

Carey, Marshman, and Ward : Embracing the History of the Serampore Mission. By JOHN CLARK MARSHMAN. 2 vols. 870. price 25s.

Martineau. — Studies of Christianity :

A Series of Original Papers, now first collected or new. By JAMES MAUTINEATJ. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Martineau. — Endeavours after the Christian Life : Discourses. By JAMES MARTINEAU". 2 vols. post 8vo. 7s. 6d. each.

Martineau.— Hymrs for the Christian

Church and Home. Collected and edited by JAMES MARTINEAU. Eleventh Edition, 12mo. 3s. 6d. cloth, or 5s. calf; Fifth Edition, 32mo. Is. 4d. cloth, or Is. 8d. roan.

Martineau.— Miscellanies : Comprising Essays on Dr. Priestley, Arnold's Life and Correspondence, Church and State, Theodore Parker's Discourse of Relit/ion, " Phases of Faith," the Church of England, and the Battle of the Churches. By JAMES MAR- TINEAU. Post 8vo. 9s.

Maunder's Scientific and Literary Treasury : A new and popular Encyclopaedia of Science and the Belles-Lettres ; including all branches of Science, and every subject connected with Literature and Art. New Edition. Fcp. 8vo. price 10s. cloth ; bound in roan, 12s. ; calf, 12s. 6d.

WISHED BY LONGMAN, GilEEN, AND CO.

Maunder's Biographical Treasury ; consisting of Memoirs, Sketches, and brief Notices of above 12.000 Eminent Persons of All Ages and Nations, from the Earliest Period of History: Forming a complete Popular Dictionary of Universal Biography. Eleventh Edition, revised, corrected, and extended in a Supplement to the Present Time. Fcp. 8vo. 10s. cloth ; bound in roan, 12s. ; calf, 12s. 6d.

Maunder's Treasury of Knowledge, and

Library of .Reference. Comprising an English Dictionary and Grammar, a Universal Gazetteer, a Classical Dictionary, a Chronology, a Law Dictionary, a Synopsis of the Peerage, numerous useful Tables, &c. New Edition, entirely reconstructed and reprinted ; revised and improved by B. B. WOODWARD, B.A. F.S.A. : Assisted by J. MORRIS, Solicitor, London ; andW.HuGHES, F.R.G.S. Fcp. 8vo. 10s. cloth; bound in roan, 12s. ; calf, 12s. 6d.

Maunder's Treasury of Natural History ;

or, a Popular Dictionary of Animated Nature : In which the Zoological Characteristics that distinguish the different Classes, Genera, and Species, are combined with a variety of interesting Information illustrative of the Habits, Instincts, and General Economy of the Animal Kingdom. With 900 Woodcuts. New Edition. Fcp. 8vo. price 10s. cloth ; roan, 12s. ; calf, 12s. 6d.

Maunder's Historical Treasury; comprising a General Introductory Outline of Universal History, Ancient and Modern, and a Series of separate Histories of every principal Nation that exists ; their .Rise, Progress, and Present Condition, the Moral and Social Character of their respective Inhabitants, their Religion, Manners and Customs, &c. New Edition ; revised throughout, with a new GENERAL INDEX. Fcp. 8vo. 10s. cloth ; roan, 12s. ; calf, 12s. 6d.

Maunder's Geographical Treasury. —

The Treasury of Geography, Physical, Historical, Descriptive, and Political ; containing a succinct Account of Every Country in the World : Preceded by an Introductory Outline of the History of Geography ; a Familiar Inqxury into the Varieties of Race and Language exhibited by different Nations; and a View of the Relations of Geography to Astronomy and Physical Science. Completed by WILLIAM HUGHES, F.R.G.S. NMO Edition ; with 7 Maps and 16 Steel Plates. Fcp. 8vo. 10s. cloth ; roan, 12s. ; calf, 12s. 6d.

Mildred Norman the Nazarene. By a WORKING MAN. Crown 8vo. 5s.

Merivale, — A History of the Romans

under the Empire. By the Rev. CHARLES MERIVALE, B.D., late Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. 8vo. with Maps.

VOLS. I. and II. comprising the History to the Fall of Julius Ccesar. Second Edition 28s.

VOL. III. to the establishment of the Monarchy by Augustus. Second Edition 14s.

VOLS. IV. and V. from Augustus to Claudius, B.C. 27 to A.D. 54 32s.

VOL. VI. from the Reign of Nero, JL.T>. »t, to the Fall of Jerusalem, A.D. 70.. 16s.

Merivale.— The Fall of the Roman Republic : A Short History of the Last Century of the Commonwealth. By the Rev. C. MEEI- VALE, B.D. New Edition. 12mo, 7s. 6d.

Merivale (Miss).— Christian' Records :

Short History of Apostolic Age. By L. A. MERIVALE. Fcp. 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Miles.— The Horse's Foot, and How to

Keep it Sound. 'Eighth Edition ; with an Appendix on Shoeing in general, and Hunters in particular, 12 Plates and 12 Woodcuts. By W. MILES, Esq. Imperial 8vo. 12s. 6d.

V Two Casts or Models of Off Fore Feet, No. 1, Shod for All Purposes, No. 2, Shod with Leather, on Mr. Miles's plan, may be had, price 3s. each.

Miles.— A Plain Treatise on Horse-Shoeing. By WILLIAM MILES, Esq. With Plates and Woodcuts. New Edition. Post 8vo. 2s.

Milner's History of the Church of Christ.

With Additions by the late Rev. ISAAC MILNER, D.D., F.R.S. A New Edition, revised, with additional Notes by the Rev. T. GKANTHAM, B.D. 4 vols. 8vo.' price 52s.

Minturn.— From New York to Delhi by

way of Rio de Janeiro, Australia, and China. By ROBERT B. MINTURN, Jun. With coloured Route-Map of India. Post 8vo. price 7s. 6d.

Mollhausen. — Diary of a Journey from

the Mississippi to the Coasts of the Pacific, with a United States Government Expedition. By B. MoLLHAtrsEN, Topographical Draughtsman and Naturalist to the Expedition. With an Introduction by Barou HUMBOLDT ; a Map, coloured Illustrations, and Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8vo. 30s.

James Montgomery's Poetical Works:

Collective Edition ; with the Author's Autobiographical Prefaces, complete ia Or;? Volume ; with Portrait and Vignette. Square crown 8vo. price 10s. 6d. cloth ; morocco, 21s. — Or, in 4 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Portrait, and 7 other Plates, price 14s.

Moore.— The Power of the Soul over the

Body, considered in relation to Health and Morals. By GEORGE MOORE, M.D. Fifth Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 6s.

Moore.— Man and his Motives. By George MOORE, M.D. Third Edition. Fcp. Svo. 6s.

Moore.— The Use of the Body in relation to the Mind. By GEORGE MOORE, M.D. Third Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 6s.

Moore. — Memoirs, Journal, and Correspondence of Thomas Moore. Edited by the Right Hon. LORD JOHN RUSSELL, M.P. With Portraits and Vignette Illustrations. 8 vols. post Svo. price 10s. 6d. each.

Thomas Moore's Poetical Works : Comprising the Author's Autobiographical Prefaces, latest Corrections, and Notes. Various Editions of the separate Poems and complete Poetical Works, as follows : —

S. (?.

LALLA KOOKH, 32mo. ruby type 1 0

LALLA ROOKH, 16mo. Vignette 2 6

IiALLA ROOKH, square crown Svo. Plates 15 0

LALLA ROOKH, fcp. 4to. with Woodcut Illustrations by TEXUIEL, in the press.

IRISH MELODIES, 32mo. ruby type 1 0

IRISH MELODIES, 16mo. Vignette 2 6

IRISH MELODIES, square crown Svo. Plates 21 0

IRISH MELODIES, illustrated by MACLISK, superroyal 8vo 31 G

SONGS, BALLADS, and SACRED SONGS, 32mo.

ruby type 2 G

SONGS, BALLADS, and SACRED SONGS, IGmo.

Vignette 5 0

POETICAL WORKS, People's Edit. 10 PARTS, each 1 0

POETICAL WORKS, Cabinet Edition, 10 VOLS. ea. 3 G

POETICAL WORKS, Traveller's Edit., crown 8vo. 12 6

POETICAL WORKS, Library Edition, medium 8vo. 21 0 SELECTIONS, entitled "POETRY and PICTURES

rromTHOMASMOORE,"fcp.4to.withWoodEnt,'9. 21 0

MOORE'S EPICUREAN, 16mo. Vignette 5 0

Editions printed with the Music.

IRISH MELODIES, People's Edition, small 4to. . . 12 0

IRISH MELODIES, imperial 8vo. small music size 31 6 HARMONISED AIRS from IRISH MELODIES,

imperial Svo 15 0

NATIONAL AIRS, People's Edition, 10 Nos. each.. 1 0

NATIONAL AIRS, imperial Svo. small music size. . 31 6 SACRED SONGS and SONGS from SCRIPTURE,

imperial Svo 16 0

No Edition of Thomas Moore's Poetical Works, or of any separate Poem of Moore's, can be published complete except by Messrs. LONGMAN and Co.

Morell.— Elements of Psychology : Part

I., containing the Analysis of the Intellectual Powers. By J. D. MORELL, M.A., One of Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools. Post Svo. 7s. 6cl.

Morning Clouds. By the Author of

The Afternoon of Life. Second and cheaper Edition, revised throughout. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

Morris (F. 0.)— Anecdotes in Natural

History. By the Rev.F. O. MORRIS, B.A.> Rector of Nunburnholme, Yorkshire, Author of " History of the Nests and Eggs of British Birds," &c. Fcp. Svo. [Just ready.

Morris (J.)-The Life and Martyrdom

of St. Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury and Legate of the Holy See. By JOHN MORRIS, Canon of Northampton. Post Svo. 9s.

Morton.— The Resources of Estates :. A

Treatise on the Agricultural Improvement and General Management of Landed Property. By JOHN LOCKHART MORTON, Civil and Agricultural Engineer ; Author of Thirteen Highland and Agricultural Society Prize Essays. With 25 Illustrations in Lithography. Royal Svo. 31s. 6d.

Moseley.— The Mechanical Principles of Engineering and Architecture. By H. MOSELEY, M.A., F.R.S., Canon of Bristol, &c. Second Edition, enlarged ; with numerous Corrections and Woodcuts. Svo. 24s.

Memoirs and Letters of the late Colonel ARMINE MOUNTAIN, Aide-de-Camp to the Queen, and Adjutant-General of Her Majesty's Forces in India. Edited by Mrs. 'MOUNTAIN. Second Edition, revised 5 with Portrait. Fcp. Svo. price 6s.

Mure. — A Critical History of the Language and Literature of Ancient Greece. By WILLIAM MURE, M.P. of Caldwell. Second Edition. VOLS. I. to III. Svo. price 36s. ; VOL. IV. price 15s. ; VOL. V. price 18s.

Murray's Encyclopaedia of Geography ;

comprising a complete Description of the Earth : Exhibiting its Relation to the Heavenly Bodies, its Physical Structure,' the Natural History of each Country, and the Industry, Commerce, Political Institutions, and Civil and Social State of All Nations. Second Edition ; with 82 Maps, and upwards of 1,000 other Woodcuts. Svo. price 60s.

Neale. — The Closing Scene ; or, Christianity and Infidelity contrasted in the Last Hours of Remarkable Persons. By the Rev. ERSKINE NEALE, M.A. New Editions. 2 vols. fcp. Svo. price 6s. each.

Normanby (Lord). — A Year of Revolution. From a Journal kept in Paris in the Year 1848. By the Marquis of NOEMANBY, E.G. 2 yols. 8vo. 24s.

Ogilvie. — The Master-Builder's Plan ;

or, the Principles of Organic Architecture as indicated in the Typical Forms of Animals, By GEOKGE OGILYIE, M.D. Post 8vo. with 72 Woodcuts, price 6s. 6d.

Oldacre.— The Last of the Old Squires. A Sketch. By CEDEIC OLDACKE, Esq., of Sax - Normanbiu-y, sometime of Christ Church, Oxon. Crown Svo. price 9s. 6cl.

Ostaorn, — Quedah ; or, Stray Leaves

from a Journal in Malayan Waters. By Captain SHEEABD OSBOEN, E.N., C.B., Author of S/ray Leaves from an Arctic Journal, &c. With a coloured Chart and tinted Illustrations. Post Svo. price 10s. 6d.

Osborn.— The Discovery of the North-

West Passage by H.M.S. Investigator, Captain R. M'CLURE, 1850-1854. Edited by Captain SHEBAED OSBORN, C.B., from the Logs and Journals of Captain R. M'Clure. Third Edition, revised ; with Additions to the Chapter on the Hybernation of Animals in the Arctic Regions, a Geological Paper by Sir RODEEICK I. MUBCHISON, a Portrait of Captain M'Clure, a coloured Chart and tinted Illustrations. Svo. price 15s.

Owen. — Lectures on the Comparative

Anatomy and Physiology of the Invertebrate Animals, delivered at the Royal College of Surgeons. By RICHABD OWEN, F.R.S., •Hunterian Professor to the College. Second Edition, with 235 Woodcuts. 8vo. 21s.

Professor Owen's Lectures on the Comparative Anatomy and Physiology of the Vertebrate Animals, delivered at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1844 and 1846. With numerous Woodcuts. VOL. I. 8vo. price 14s.

Memoirs of Admiral Parry, the Arctic

Navigator. By his Son, the Rey. E. PAEIIY, M.A. of Balliol College, Oxford ; Domestic Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of London. Sixth Edition ; with a Portrait and coloured Chart of the North- West Passage. Fcp. 8vo. price 5s.

Pattison. — The Earth and the Word;

or, Geology for Bible Students. By S. R. PATTISON,' F.G.S. Fcp. Svo. with coloured Map, 3s. 6cl.

Peaks, Passes, and Glaciers : a Series of

Excursions by

Rev. J. LL. DAVIES, M.A.

Rev. J. F. HARDY, B.D.

T. W. HlNCHLIFF, M.A.

W. MATHEWS, Jun., M.A. A. C. RAMSAY, F.R S. & U.S. A. WILLS, of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law, and

Edited by JOHN BALL, M.R.I.A., F.L.S., President of the Alpine Club. Second Edition ; with 8 Illustrations in Chromolithograpliy, 8 Maps illustrative of the Mountain-Explorations described in the volume, a Map illustrative of the Ancient Glaciers of part of Caernarvonshire, various Engravings on Wood, and several Diagrams. Square crown Svo. 21s.

*#* The EIGHT Swiss MAPS, accompanied by a Table of the HEIGHTS of MOUNTAINS,' may be had separately, price 3s. 6d.

Dr. Pereira's Elements of Materia

Medica and Therapeutics. Third Edition, enlarged and improved from the Author's Materials, by A. S. TAYLOE, M.D., and G. O. REES, M.D. : With numerous Woodcuts. VOL. I. Svo. 2Ss. ; VOL. II. PAET I. 21s. ; VOL. II. PAET II. 26s.

Dr. Pereira's Lectures on Polarised Light, together with a Lecture on the Microscope. 2d Edition, enlarged from Materials left by the Author, by the Rev. B. POWELL, M.A., &c. Fcp. Svo. with Woodcuts, 7s.

Perry.— The Franks, from their First

Appearance in History to the Death of King Pepin. By WALTER C. PEKEY, Barristerat-Law, Doctor in Philosophy and Master of Arts in the University of Gottingen. Svo. price 12s. Gel.

Peschel's Elements of Physics. Translated from the German, with Notes, by E. WEST. With Diagrams and Woodcuts. 3 vols. fcp. Svo. 21s.

Phillips's Elementary Introduction to

Mineralogy. A New Edition, with extensive Alterations and Additions, by H. J. BEOOKE, F.R.S., F.G.S. ; and W. H. MILLEB, M.A., F.G.S. With numerous Wood Engravings. Post Svo. 18s.

Phillips.— A Guide to Geology. By John PHILLIPS, M.A., F.R.S., F.G.S., &c. Fourth Edition, corrected to the Present Time ; with 4 Plates. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

Piesse's Chymical, Natural, and Physical Magic, for the Instruction and Entertainment of Juveniles during the Holiday Vacation. With 30 Woodcuts and an Invisible Portrait of the Author. Fcp. 8vo. 3s. 6d. harlequin cloth.

Piesse's Art of Perfumery, and Methods

of Obtaining the Odours of Plants : With Instructions for theManufactureof Perfumes for the Handkerchief, Scented Powders, Odorous Vinegars, Dentifrices, Pomatums, Cosmetiques, Perfumed Soap, &c. ; and an Appendix on the Colours of Mowers, Artificial Fruit Essences, &c. Second Edition, revised and improved ; with 46 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d.

Pitt.— How to Brew good Beer : a complete Guide to the Art of Brewing Ale, Bitter Ale, Table Ale, Brown Stout, Porter, and Table Beer. To which are added Practical Instructions for making Malt. By JOHN PITT, Butler to Sir William R. P. Geary, Bart. Fcp. 8vo. 4s. 6d.

Porter. — History of the Knights of

Malta, or the Order of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem. By Major WHITWORTH PORTER, Royal Engineers. With 5 Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo. 24s.

Powell.— Essays on the Spirit of the

Inductive Philosophy, the Unity of Worlds, and the Philosophy of Creation. By the

F.G.S., Savilian Professor of Geometry in the University of Oxford. Second Edition, revised. Crown 8vo. with Woodcuts, 12s. 6d.

Christianity without Judaism : A Second Series of Essays on the Unity of Worlds and of Nature. By the Rev. BADEN POWELL, M.A., &c. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

The Order of Nature considered in reference to the Claims of Revelation : A Third Series of Essays on the Unity of Worlds and of Nature. By the Rev. BADEN POWELL, M.A., &c. Crown Svo. 12s.

Pycroft. — The Collegian's Guide ; or,

Recollections of College Days : Setting forth the Advantages and Temptations of a University Education. By the Rev. J. PrCROFT, B.A. Second Edition. Fcp. Svo.

Pyevoft's Course of English Reading-, adapted to every taste and capacity ; or, How and What to Read : With Literary Anecdotes. New Edition. Fcp. Svo. price 5s.

Pycroft's Cvicket-Field ; cr, the Science and History of the Game of Cricket. Third Edition, greatly improved ; with Plates and Woodcuts. Fcp. Svo. price 5s.

Quatrsfages (A. De). — Rarablss of a

Naturalist on the Coasts of France, Spain, and Sicily. By A. Do QETATREFAGES, Member of the Institute. Translated by E. C. OTTE. 2 vols. post Svo. 15s.

Raikes (T.)— Portion of the Journal kept

by THOMAS RAISES, Esq., fromlSSl to 1847: Comprising Reminiscences of Social and Political Life in London and Paris during that period. New Edition, complete in 2 vols. crown Svo. with 3 Portraits, price 12s. cloth.

Rich's Illustrated Companion to the

Latin Dictionaryand Greek Lexicon : Forming a Glossary of all the Words representing Visible Objects connected with the Arts, Manufactures, and Every-Day Life of the Ancients. With about 2,000 Woodcuts from the Antique. Post 8vo. 21s.

Richardson. — Fourteen Years' Experience of Cold Water : Its Uses and Abuses. By Captain M. RICHARDSON, late of the 4th Light Dragoons. Post Svo. with Woodcuts, price 6s.

Horsemanship ; or, the Art of Riding

and Managing a Horse, adapted to the Guidance of Ladies and Gentlemen on the Road and in the Field : With Instructions for Breaking-in Colts and Young Horses. By Captain M. RICHARDSON, late of the 4th Light Dragoons. With 5 Plates. Square crown 8yo. 14s.

Eiddle's Copious and Critical Latin- English Lexicon, founded on the G-erman- Latin Dictionaries of Dr. William Freund. New Edition. Post 4to. 31s. 6d.

Riddle's Complete Latin-English and

English-Latin Dictionary, for the use of Colleges and Schools. By the Rev. J. E. RIDDLE, M.A. of St. Edmund Hall, Oxford. New and cheaper .Edition, revised and corrected. Svo. 21s.

esovnrifplv f T!ie English-Latin Dictionary, 7s. Separately | Th(J Lat;in.English Dictionary, 15s.

Riddle's Young Scholar's Latin-English

and English-Latin Dictionary. N.-w and cheaper Edition, revised and corrected. Square 12ino. 10s. Gd.

, , f The Latin-English Dictionary, 6s.

Separately |TUe English-£alin Dictionary, 5s.

."Riddle's Diamond Latin-English Dictionary. A Guide to the Meaning, Quality, and right Accentuation of Latin Classical Words. Royal 32mo. price 4s.

Rivers's Rose-Amateur's Guide ; containing ample Descriptions of all the fine leading varieties of Roses, regularly classed in 'their respective Families ; their History and Mode of Culture. Fcp. Svo. 3s. 6d.

Dr. E, Robinson's Greek and English

Lexicon to the Greek Testament. A New Edition, in great part re-written. Svo. 18s.

Mr. Henry Rogers's Essays selected from

Contributions to the Edinburgh R> V/'I'/P Second Edition. 3 vols. fcp. Svo. price 21s.

13. Vanity and Glory of

Literature.

14. Ultramontane Doubts.

15. Right of Private Judgment. 10. The Oxford Tractarian

Schools. 17. Recent Developments

ofTractarianism.

1. Thomas Fuller. '2. Andrew Marvell. 8. Martin Luther.

4. Leibnitz.

5. Pascal.

6. Plato and Socrates.

7. Descartes.

8. John Loi'ke.

9. Sydney Smith's Lactures.

10. English Language

(Structure).

11. English Language

(History).

12. The British Pulpit.

18. Reason and Faith.

19. Revolution and Reform.

20. Treatment of Criminals.

21. Prevention of Crime.

Samuel Rogers's Recollections of Personal and Conversational Intercourse with

CHARMS JAMES Fox, EDMUND BUEKE, HENRY GBATTAN',

Second Edition. Fcp. Svo. 5s.

PRKTCE TAI/T/EYKANTI,

LOED GREXVILLE, anil DCKE OF

Dr. Roget's Thesaurus of English Words

and Phrases classified and arranged so as to facilitate the Expression of Ideas and assist in Literary Composition. Eighth Edition, revised and improved. Crown Svo. 10s. 6d.

Ronalds's Fly-Fisher's Entomology:

With coloured [Representations of the Natural and Ai tificial Insect, and a few Observations and Instructions on Trout and Grayling Fishing. Fifth Edition, thoroughly revised by an Experienced Fly-Fisher ; with 20 new coloured Plates. Svo. 14s.

Rowton's Debater: A Series of complete

Debates, Outlines of Debates, and Questions for Discussion; with ample References to the best Sources of Information. New Edition. Fcp. Svo. 6s.

Russell (Dr.) — The Life of Cardinal

Mezzofanti : With an Introductory Memoir of eminent Linguists, Ancient and Modern. By C. W. RUSSELL, D.D., President of St. Patrick's College, Maynooth. With Portrait and Facsimiles. Svo. 12s.

Scherzer.— Travels in the Free States of

Central America : Nicaragua, Honduras, and San Salvador. By Dr. CARL SCUEKZER. With a coloured Map. 2 vols. post Svo. 16s.

Mrs. SchimmelPenninck's Writings and

Life, edited by her relation, CHRISTIANA C. HANKIN : —

Life of Mary Anne SchimmelPennmck. Third and cheaper Edition, with Corrections and Additions ; complete in One Volume, with Portrait Post Svo. 10,?. Qd.

Select Memoirs of Port-Royal. To which are added Tour to Alet, Visit to Port-Royal, Gift of an Abbess, Biographical Notices, &c. from original Documents. Fifth Edition^ revised 3 vcls. post Svo. 2Ly.

T?he Principles of Beauty, as manifested Nature, Art, and Human Character : with a Classification of Deformities ; II. An Essay on the Temperaments (with Illustrations) ; III. Thoughts on Grecian and Gothic Architecture Post Svo. 12,?. 6d.

Dr. L. Schmitz's School History of Greece,

from the Earliest Times to the Taking of Corinth by the Romans, B.C. 146, mainly based on Bishop Thirlwali's History of Greece. Fifth Edition, with Nine new Supplementary Chapters on the Civilisation, Religion, Literature, and Arts of the Ancient Greeks, contributed by CHRISTOPHER KNIGHT WATSON, M.A., Trin. Coll. Camb. ; and illustrated with a Map of Athens and 137 Woodcuts, designed from the Antique by G. Scharf, juu., F.S.A. 12mo. 7s. 6d.

Scoffern (Dr.) — Projectile Weapons of

War and Explosive Compounds. By J. SCOITERN, M,B.-Loml., late Professor of Chemistry in the Aldersgate College of Medicine. Fourth Edition, brought up to the present time in a Si 7/7 <!<. •>; i-,;l. P->-t Svo. with Woodcuts, 9s. 6d. SUPPLEMENT, containing new resources of Warfare 2*.

Senior.— Journal kept in Turkey and

Greece in the Autumn of 1857 and the beginning of 1858. By NASSAU W. SENIOR, Esq. With 2 Maps and 2 Views in chromolithography. Post Svo. 12?.

Bowdler's Family Shakspeare : In which

nothing is added to the Original Text ; but those words and expressions are omitted which cannot with propriety be read aloud. Illustrated with Thirty-sis Vignettes engraved on Wood from original Designs by o. COOKE, R.A.

H. SINGLETOIf, K. SHIRK!), R.A.

New Edition, printed in a more convenient form. 6 vols. fcp. Svo. price 30s. cloth ; separately, 5s. each.

-'V* The LIBRARY EDITION, with the same Illustration?, in One Volume, medium Svo. price 21s. cloth.

T. STOTHARD, li.A.

K. W} : TALL, R.A.

Sewell (Miss).— New and cheaper Collected Edition of the Tales and Stories of the Author of Amy Herbert. Complete in 9 vols. crown 8vo. price £1. 10s. cloth ; or each work, comprised in a single volume, may be had separately as follows : —

AMY HERBERT 2s. Gd.

GERTRUDE 2s. 6d.

The EARL'S DAUGHTER 2s. Gd.

The EXPERIENCE of LIFE 2s. 6d.

CLEVE HALL 3s. 6d.

IYORS ; or, the TWO COUSINS 3s. 6d.

KATHARINE ASHTON 3s. 6d.

MARGARET PERCIVAL 5s. Od.

LANETON PARSONAGE . 4s. Gd.

"mO the thoroughness -*- and integrity, the absolute rectitude inculcated in thought, word, and deed, and to the tender charity extended to the erring and repentant, we are inclined to attribute the hold these works take on readers of all classes and all ages. The

pure transparent sincerity tells even on those who arc apt to find any work whose aim and object are religious, heavy and uninteresting. The re-publication of these works in an easily accessible form is a benefit of wli'icU we cannot over-estimate the solid advantages." GLOBE.

Also ly the Author of Amy Herbert,

Ursula : A Tale of English Country Life.

2 Tols. fcp. 8vo. price 12s. cloth.

History of the Early Church, from the

First Preaching of the Gospel to the Council of Nicea. ISiuo. 4s. 6d.

Self-Examination before Confirmation :

With Devotions and Directions for Confirmation-Day. 32mo. Is. 6d.

Readings for a Month preparatory to Confirmation : Compiled from the Works of Writers of the Early and of the English Church. Fcp. 8vo. price 4s.

Readings for Every Day in Lent: Compiled from the Writings of BISHOP JEREMY TATLOE. Fcp. 8vo. price 5s.

Sharp's New British Gazetteer, or Topographical Dictionary of the British Islands and Narrow Seas : Comprising concise Descriptions of about Sixty Thousand Places, Seats, Natural Features, and Objects of Note, founded on the best authorities. 2 vols. 8vo. price £2. 16s.

Short Whist; its Rise, Progress, and

Laws : With Observations to make any one a Whist-Player. Containing also the Laws of Piquet, Cassino, Ecarte, Cribbage, Backgammon. By Major A. New Edition ; to which are added, Precepts for Tyros, bv Mrs. B. Fcp. 8vo. 3s.

Simpson.— Handbook of Dining; or, How

to Dine, theoretically, philosophically, and historically considered : Based chiefly upon the Physiologic du Gout of Brillat-Savarin. By LEONARD FEANCIS SIMPSON, M.R.S.L. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

Sinclair. — The Journey of Life. By CATHERINE SINCLAIR, Author of The Business of Life. New Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

Sir Roger De Coverley. From the Spectator. With Notes and Illustrations, by W. HENRY WILLS ; and 12 Wood Engravings from Designs by F. TAYLER. Second and cheaper Edition. Crown Svo. 10s. 6d. ; or 21s. in morocco by Hayday. — An Edition without Woodcuts, in 16m.o. price Is.

The Sketches: Three Tales. By the

Authors of Amy Herbert, The Old Man's Home, and Hawkstone. Third Edition ; with 6 Illustrations. Fcp. Svo. price 4s. 6d.

Smee's Elements of Electro -Metallurgy.

Third Edition, revised, corrected, and considerably enlarged ; with Electrotypes and numerous Woodcuts. Post Svo. 10s. 6d.

Smith (G.) — History of Wesleyan Methodism. By GEORGE SMITH, F.A.S., Member of the Royal Asiatic Society, &c. YOL. I. Weslnj and //is Times; and Vol. II. The Middle Age of Methodism, from the Death of Wesley in 1791 to the Conference of 1816. Crown Svo. price 10s. 6d. each volume.

Smith (J.) —The Voyage and Shipwreck

of St. Paul : With Dissertations on the Life and Writings of St. Luke, and the Ships and Navigation of the Ancients. By JAMES SMITH, of Jorclanhill, Esq., F.R.S. Second Edition ; with Charts, Views, and Woodcuts. Crown Svo. 8s. 6d.

A Memoir of the Rev. Sydney Smith. By his Daughter, LADY HOLLAND. With a Selection from his Letters, edited by MRS. AUSTIN. Nao Edition. 2 vols. Svo. 28s.

The Rev. Sydney Smith's Miscellaneous

Works : Including his Contributions to The Edinburgh Review. Four Editions : —

1. A LIBRARY EDITION (the Fourth), in 3 vols. Svo. with Portrait, 36s.

2. Complete in ONE YOLUME, with Portrait and Yiguette. Square crown Svo. price 21s. cloth ; or 30s. bound in calf.

3. Another NEW EDITION, in 3 vols, fcp. Svo. price 21s.

4. The PEOPLE'S EDITION, in 2 vols. crowu Svo. price 8s. cloth.

The Rev. Sydney Smith's Elementary •,

Sketches of Moral Philosophy, delivered at the Royal Institution in the Years 1804, 1805, and 1806. Third Edition. Fcp.8vo.7s.

Snow.— Two Years' Cruise off Tierra

del Fuego, the Falkland Islands, Patagonia, and the River Plate : A Narrative of Life in the Southern Seas. By W. PARKER SNOW, late Commander of the Mission Yacht Allen Gardiner ; Author of " Voyage of the Prince Albert in Search of Sir John Franklin." With 3 coloured Charts and 6 tinted Illustrations. 2 vols. post 8vo. 24s.

Robert Southey's Complete Poetical

Works ; containing all the Author's last Introductions and Notes. The Library Edition, complete in One Volume, with Portrait and Vignette. Medium 8vo. price 21s. cloth ; 42s. bound in morocco. — Also, the First collected Edition, in 10 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Portrait and 19 Vignettes, price 35s.

Southey's Doctor, complete in One Volume. Edited by the Rev. J. W. WABTER, B.D. With Portrait, Vignette, Bust, and coloured Plate. Square crown Svo. 21s.

Southey's Life of Wesley ; and Rise and

Progress of Methodism. Fourth and cheaper Edition, with Notes and Additions. Edited by the Author's Son, the Rev. C. C. SOUTHET, M.A. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 12s.

Spencer.— Essays : Scientific, Political, and Speculative. By HERBERT SPENCER, Author of Social Statics. Reprinted chiefly from Quarterly Reviews. Svo. price 12s.cloth.

Spencer. The Principles of Psychology. By HERBERT SPENCER, Author of Social Statics. Svo. price 16s. cloth.

Stephen.— Lectures on the History of

France. By the Right Hon. SIR JAMES STEPHEN,K.C.B.,LL.D.,Professor of Modern History in the University of Cambridge. Third Edition. 2 vols. Svo. price 24s.

Stephen.— Essays in Ecclesiastical Biography ; from the Edinburgh Review. By theRight Hon. SIR JAMES STEPHEN, K.C.B., LL.D., Professor of Modern History in the University of Cambridge. Third Edition. 2 vols. Svo. 24s.

CONTEXTS.

1. Hililebi-and.

2. Saint Francis of Assisi.

3. The Founders of Jesuitism.

4. Martin Luther.

n. The French Benedictines. 6. The Port Royalists.

7. Richard Baxter.

8. The Evangelical Succession.

9. William Wilberforce.

10. The Clapham Sect.

11. The Historian of Enthusiasm.

12. The Epilogue.

Stonehenge. — The Dog in Health and

Disease : Comprising the Natural History, Zoological Classification, and Varieties of the Dog, as well as the various Modes of Breaking and Using him for Hunting, Coursing, Shooting, &c. ; and including the Points or Characteristics of Toy Dogs. By STOXEHENGE. With about 70 Illustrations engraved on Wood. Square crown Svo. price 15.s. half-bound.

Stonehenge's Work on the Greyhound: Being a Treatise on the Art of Breeding, Rearing, and Training Greyhounds for Public Running ; their Diseases and Treatment : Containing also Rules for the Management of Coursing Meetings, and for the Decision of Courses. With Frontispiece and Woodcuts. Square crown Svo. 21s.

Stow.— The Training System of Education ; including Moral School Training for large Towns, and the Normal Seminary for Training Teachers to conduct the System. By DAVID STOW, Esq., Honorary Secretary to the Normal Seminary, Glasgow. Eleventh Edition, enlarged ; with Plates and Woodcuts. Post Svo. price 6s. 6d.

Strickland. — Lives of the Queens of England. By AGNES STRICKLAND. Dedicated, by express permission, to Her Majesty. Embellished with Portraits of every Queen, engraved from the most authentic sources. Complete in 8 vols. post Svo. price 7s. 6d. each. — Any Volume may be had separately to complete Sets.

Memoirs of Rear-Admiral Sir William

Symonds, Ent., C.B., F.R.S., Surveyor of the Navy, from 1832 to 1847 : With Correspondence and other Papers relative to the Ships and Vessels constructed upon his Lines, as directed to be published under his Will. Edited by JAMES A. SHARP. With Sections and Woodcuts. Svo. price 21s.

Taylor. — Loyola : and Jesuitism in its Rudiments. By ISAAC TAYLOR. Post Svo. with Medallion, 10s. 6d.

Taylor. — Wesley and Methodism. By ISAAC TAYLOR. Post Svo. Portrait, 10s. 6d.

Tennent. — Ceylon : an Account of the

Island, Physical, Historical, and Topographical : with copious Notices of its Natural History, Antiquities, and Productions. Illustrated by 7 Maps, 17 Plans and Charts, and 101 Engravings on Wood. By Sir J. EMERSON TENNENT, Z.C.S., LL.D., &c. 2 vols. Svo.

eoiviPLETiora

OF

THE TRAVELLER'S LIBRARY.

Summary of the Contents of the TRAVELLER'S LIBRARY, complete in 102 Parts, price One Shitting each, or in 50 Volumes, price 2*. M. each in cloth. — To be had also, in complete Sets only, at Five Guineas per Set, bound in cloth, lettered, in 25 Volumes, classified as follows : —

ARCTIC VOYAGES AND \ F MAYNE

DISCOVERIES / BY *' m

GERMANY, ETC. : NOTES OFl „ LAING

A TRAVELLER / "" B

RUSSIA AND TURKEY . . BY J. R. M'CULLOCH.

SWISS MEN AND SWISS 1 BT R FFRGUSON

MOUNTAINS J BY K. i )N.

SKETCHES OF NATURE ) p VON TSOHITm

IN THE ALPS fBYJT. VUfl 1

VISIT TO THE VAUDOIS1 „_ F

CHINA AND THIBET BY XHE ABBE' HUC.

SYRIA AND PALESTINE " EOTHEN."

THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, BY P. GffiOMOGBE.

NIGER EXPLORATION. .BY T. J. HUTCH1NSON.

NORTH AMERICAN WILDS .... BY C. LAJS'MAN.

A LADY'S VOYAGE BY IDA PFEIFFER.

THE LIFE OF MARSHAL 1 BY THE REV. T, 0.

TURENNE / COCKAYNE.

FERDINAND I. AND MAXIMI- 1

LIAN II )

FRANCIS ARAGO'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY. THOMAS HOLCROFT'S MEMOIRS.

BY RANKE.

CHESTERFIELD* SELWYN, BY A. HAYWARD.

ANECDOTES OF DR. JOHNSON, BY MRS.l'IOZZI.

AN ESSAY ON THE LIFE AND! BY HENRY GENIUS OF THOMAS FULLER/ ROGERS.

RANKE'S HISTORY OF THE POPES.

ADDISON'S LIFE AND WRITINGS.

HALLAM'S CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY. CROKER'S EDITION OF BOSWELL'S LIFE OF JOHNSON.

LORD MACAULAY'S SPEECHES ON PARLIA-

THE LOVE STOHY, FKOM SOUTHEY'S DOCTOR. SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY. ... } SpECT4TOR. MEMOIRS OF A MAITRE-D'ARMES, uy DUMAS. « "« SOUYESTBE.

PHILOSO- 1

'

SIR EDWARD SEAWARD'S

Yt.bl

NATURAL HISTORY, &c.

HCRKATlb:?ISTORY °F } ™ DK' L' KEMP-

INDICATIONS' OF iNSTiNCT, BY DR. L. KEMP.

ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH, &c. BY DR. G. WILSON. OUR COAL-FIELDS AND OUR COAL-PITS. CORNWALL, ITS MINES, MINERS, &c.

SELECTIONS FROM SYDNEY SMITH'S

RAILWAY MORALS AND> B H SPENCER

RAILWAY POLICY > Tl „

LONDON BYJ. R.M'CULLOGH.

Thirlwall.— The History of Greece. By the Eight Rev. the LOED BISHOP of ST. DAVID'S (the Rev. Connop Thirlwall). 8 vols. 8vo. with Maps, £3. —An Edition in 8 vols. fcp. Svo. with Vignette Titles, 28s.

Thomson's Seasons. Edited by Bolton

CORNET, Esq. Illustrated with 77 fine Wood Engravings from Designs by Members of the Etching Club. Square crown 8vo. 21s. cloth ; or 36s. bound in morocco.

Thomson (the Rev. Dr.) — An Outline of

the necessary Laws of Thought : A Treatise on Pure and Applied Logic. By WILLIAM THOMSON, D.D., Provost of Queen's College, Oxford. 4f/i Edition. Pep. 8vo. 7s. Gel.

Thomson's Tables of Interest, at Three,

Four, Four-and-a-Half, and Eive per Cent., from One Pound to Ten Thousand, and from 1 to 365 Days, in a regular progression, of single Days ; with Interest at all the above Rates, from One to Twelve Months, and from One to Ten Years. Also, numerous other Tables of Exchanges, Time, and Discounts. New Edition. 12mo. price 8s.

The Thumb Bible ; or, Verbum Sempiternum. By J. TAYLOR. Being an Epitome of the Old and New Testaments in English Verse. Reprinted from the Edition of 1693 ; bound and clasped. 64ino. Is. 6d.

Todd (Dr.) -The Cyclopaedia of Anatomy

and Physiology. Edited by ROBERT B. TODD, M.D., 'F.R.S., &c., ' Physician to King's College Hospital; late Professor of General and Morbid Anatomy in King's College, London. Assisted in the various departments by nearly all the most eminent cultivators of physiological science of the present age. No.v complete in 5 vols. Svo. pp. 5,350, illustrated with 2,853 Woodcuts, price £6. 6s. cloth,

Tooke.— History of Prices, and of the

State of the Circulation, during the Nine Years from 1848 to 1856 inclusive. Forming VOLS. V. and VI. of Tooke' s History of Prices from 1792 to the Present Time ; and comprising a copious Index to the whole of the Six Volumes. By THOMAS TOOKE, F.R.S. and WILLIAM NEWMABCH. 2 vols. Svo. price 52s. 6cl.

Trevelyan (Sir C.) — Original Papers

illustrating the History of the Application of the Roman Alphabet to the Languages of India. Edited by MONIER WILLIAMS, M.A., bite Professor of Sanskrit in the East-India College, Haileybury. Svo. with Map, 12s.

Trollope.— The Warden : a Hovel. By

ANTHONY TEOLLOPE. New and cheaper Edition. Crown Svo. price 3s. 6d. cloth.

Trollope's Barchester Towers, a Sequel to the Warden. New and cheaper Edition, complete in One Volume. Crown Svo. 5s.

Sharon Turner's History of the Anglo -

Saxons, from the Earliest Period to the Norman Conquest. Seventh Edition, revised by the Rev. S. TUBNEB. 3 vols. Svo. 36s.

Dr. Turton's Manual of the Land and

Fresh-Water Shells of Great Britain : With Figures of each of the kinds. New Edition, with Additions, by Dr. J. E. GRAY, F.R.S., &c., Keeper of the Zoological Collection in the British Museum. Crown Svo. with 12 coloured Plates, price 15s. cloth.

Dr. Ure's Dictionary of Arts, Manufactures, and Mines : Containing a clear Exposition of their Principles and Practice. Fourth Edition, much enlarged ; most of the Articles being entirely re-written, and many new Articles added. With nearly 1,600 Woodcuts. 2 vols. Svo. price 60s.

Uwins.— Memoir and Correspondence of

Thomas Uwins, R.A., late Keeper of the Royal Galleries and of the National Gallery, &c. Edited by Mrs. UWINS. 2 vols. post Svo. 18s.

Van Der Hoeven's Handbook of Zoology.

Translated by the Rev. WILLIAM CLAKS, M.D., F.R.S. , &c. Professor of Anatomy in the University of Cambridge. 2 vols. Svo. with 24 Plates of Figures, price 60s. cloth ; or separately, VOL. I. Invertelratat 30s., and VOL. II. Vertebrata, 30s.

Vehse.— Memoirs of the Court, Aristocracy, and Diplomacy of Austria. By Dr. E. VEHSE. Translated from the German by FEANZ DEMMLEE. 2 vols. post Svo. 21s.

Von Tempsky. — Mitla ; or, Incidents

and Personal Adventures on a Journey in Mexico, Guatemala, and Salvador, in the Years 1853 to 1855. By G.F. VON TEMPSKY. With Map, Illustrations in colours, and Woodcuts. Svo. 18s.

Wade. — England's Greatness : Its Rise

and Progress inGovernment, Laws, Religion, and Social Life ; Agriculture, Commerce, and Manufactures; Science, Literature, and the Arts, from the Earliest Period to the Peace of Paris. By JOHN WADE, Author of the Cabinet Lawyer, &c. Post Svo. 10s. 6d.

Wanderings in the Land of Ham. By a DAUGHTER of JAPHET. Post Svo. 8s. 6d.

Waterton.— Essays on Natural History, chiefly Ornithology. By C. WATERTON, Esq. With the Autobiography of the Author. 2 vols. fcp. 8vo. 10s.

Watertoii's Essays on Natural History. Third Series ; with a Continuation of the Autobiography, and a Portrait of the Author. Second Edition, Fcp. 8vo. price 6s.

Watson's Cybele Britannica ; or, British

Plants and their Geographical Relations. By HEWETT COTTRELL WATSON. 4 vols. 8vo. price 42s. cloth ; or each vol. separately, price 10s. 6d. The fourth volume is devoted to general views and tabular summaries, showing the phy to -geography of Britain under various aspects.

Webb. — Celestial Objects for Common

Telescopes. By the Eev. T. W. WEBB, M.A., F.R.A.S., Incumbent of Hardwick, Herefordshire. With Woodcuts, and a Map of the Moon 12 inches in diameter engraved on Steel. 16mo. 7s.

Webster and Parkes's Encyclopaedia of

Domestic Economy ; comprising such subjects as are most immediately connected with Housekeeping : As, The Construction of Domestic Edifices, with the Modes of Warming, Ventilating, and Lighting them — A description of the various articles of Furniture, with the nature of their Materials — Duties of Servants— &c. New Edition ; with nearly 1,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. price 50s.

Weld. — The Pyrenees, West and East, a Summer Holiday in 1858. By CHARLES EICHARD WELD, Barrister-at-Law. With 8 Illustrations in Chrotno-xylography from Drawings by the Author. Post 8vo. 12s. 6d.

Weld's Vacation Tour in the United States and Canada, Post 8vo. with Map, 10s. 6d.

Weld's Vacations in Ireland. Post 8vo. with View. 10s. 6d.

Willich's Popular Tables for ascertaining the Value of Lifehold, Leasehold, and Church Property, Eenewal Fines, &c. ; the Public Funds ; Annual Average Price and Interest on Consols from 1731 to 1858 ; Chemical, Geographical, Astronomical, Trigonometrical Tables ; Common and Hyperbolic Logarithms ; Constants, Squares, Cubes, Roots, Reciprocals ; Diameter, Circumference, and Area of Circles ; Length _of Chords and Circular Arcs ; Area and Diagonal of Squares ; Diameter, Solidity, and Superficies of Spheres ; Bank Discounts ; Bullion arid Notes, 1844 to 1859. Fourth Edition, enlarged. Post 8vo. price 10s.

Wilmot's Abridgment of Blackstone's

Commentaries on the Laws of England, intended for the use of Young Persons, and comprised in a series of Letters from a Father to his Daxighter. 12mo. price 6s. 6d.

Wilson's Bryologia Britannica: Containing the Mosses of Great Britain and Ireland systematically arrangedanddescribed according to the Method of Bruch and Schimper ; with 61 illustrative Plates. Being a New Edition, enlarged and altered, of the MuscoJogia Britannica of Messrs. Hooker and Taylor. 8vo. 42s. ; or, with the Plates coloured, price £4. 4s. cloth.

Yonge.-A New English-Greek Lexicon

Containing ah1 the Greek Words used by Writers of good authority. By C. D. YONGE, B.A. Second Edition, revised and corrected. Post 4to. price 21s.

Yonge's New Latin Gradus : Containing Every Word used by the Poets of good authority. For the use of Eton, Westrninster,'Winchester, Harrow, Charterhouse, and Rugby Schools; King's College, London ; and Marlborough College. Sixth Edition. Post 8vo. price 9s.; or with APPENDIX of Epithets classified, 12s.

Youatt's Work on the Horse, comprising

also a Treatise on Draught. With numerous Woodcut Illustrations, chiefly from Designs by W. Harvey. New Edition, revised and enlarged by E. N. GABRIEL, M.R.C.S., C.V.S., Secretary to the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. In One Volume, 8vo. price 10s. 6(1. cloth.

Youatt. -The Dog. By William Youatt. A New Edition; with numerous Engravings, from Designs by W. Harvey. 8vo. 6s.

Young. — The Christ of History: An

Argument grounded in the Facts of His Life on Earth. By JOHN YOUNG, LL.D. Second Edition. Post 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Young.-The Mystery; or, Evil and God. By JOHN YOUNG, LL.D. Post 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Zumpt's Grammar of the Latin Language. Translated and adapted for the use of English Students by DR. L. SCHMITZ, F.R.S.E. : With numerous Additions and Corrections by the Author and Translator. 4th Edition, thoroughly revised. Sro. 14s.

[September 1859.

LONDON : PRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE & CO. NEW-STREET SQUARE