Sixteen SERMONS

Preached in St. Alary- Je-Boiv-Chiircb, London -,

At the Honourable Mr. BO TLB's Lectures,

in the Years 171 1, and 1712.

With large Notes, and many curious Observations.

By W. DERHAM, Canon of Windfor^ Redor of Upminfter in EJfex^ and F.R. S.

Maid CJ" impia confuetudo eji contra Deos difputare, five animo id Jit, five fimulaie. Cicer. de Nat. Deor. L. 2. fine.

The Fifth Edition, more CorreSl than aay of the former.

LONDON: Printed for W. and J. Innys, at the

Pnnce'%'Arms the Wca End of St. Paul's. 17x0.

T O T H E

most Reverend Father in G OD,

fHO MA S,

Lord Archbifliop of Canterbury. Primate of all ENGLAND, &c.

The Surviving Trustee of the Honourable Mr. BOTLE's Lectures.

May it pleafe Tour Grace,

May jullly put these Lectures under your Graces Patronage, their Publication being wholly owing to You : For having the Honour to be a Member of the K o Y A L Society, as well as a 'Divine ^ I was minded to try what I could do towards the Improvement of Thilojophical Matters to Theological Ufes ; and accordingly laid a

A ^ Scheme

The Dedication.

Scheme of what I have here publillied a Part of, and when I had little elfe to do, I drew up what I had to say, making it rather the diverting Exercifes of my Leifure Hours, than more ferious Theological Stti- )ites. This Work, (although I made aconfiderable progress in it at firlt, whiUt a Novelty , yet ) having no Thoughts of Publilhing, I laid afide, until your Grace, being informed of my design by some of my Learned Friends, both of the Clergy and Laity, was pleafed to call me to the unexpefted Honour of Preaching Mr. Boyle's Lectures: An Honour I was little aware of in my Country-Privacy, and not much acquainted with Perfons in high Stations, and not at all, particularly, with your Grace. So that therefore as it pleafed your Grace, not only to confer an unfought profitable Honour upon me (a Stranger) but alfo to continue it for Two Years , out of Your good Opinion of my Performance, in some measure, anfwering Mr. Boyle's End ; io I can do no less than make this publick, grateful Acknowledgment of your Grace's great and unexpected Favour.

But it is not my self alone ; but the whole Lecture alfo is beholden to your Grace's kind and pious Endeavours. It was You that encouraged this noble Charity, and aflifted in the Settlement of it, in the Honourable Founder's Life-time ; and fmce his Death, it was You that procured a more

certain

The Dedication.

certain Salary for the Lecturers, pt'\id more conllantly and duly than it was before *,

these Benefits as I my self have been a Sharer of, so I should be very ungrateful ihould I not duly acknowledge, and repay

* It may not only gratify the Reader's Curiofity, but alfo be of Ufe for preventing Encroachments in Time to come, to give the following Account of Mr. Boyle's Lectures.

Mr. Boyle, by a Codicil, dated July 18. 1691. and annexed to his Will, charged his Mefi'uage or Dwelling-house in St. Michael's Crooked-Lane, London, with the Payment of the clear Yearly Rents and Profits thereof, to forne Learned Divine in London, or wjtliin the Bills of Mortality, to be Eleded for a Term not exceeding Three Years, by his Grace the prefcnt Lord Archbifliop of Canterbury (then Dr. TenifonJ Sir He};ry uijliurfi , Six John Rotheram , and John ETjelyn, Efq;. The Bufir.eis he appomred those Lectures for, was, among others, to be ready to fat iifie real Scruples, and to answer Juch new Objeclions and Difficulties, as might be Jlarted : to which good Anfzvers had not been made. And alfo, To Preach Eight Sermons in the Tear, the firfi Monday (/January, February, March, April a/ii May , and of September, Odober and November. The Subje<fl of these Sermons was to be, The Proof of the Chrijlian Religion agatnft notorious Infidels, Viz. Atheijls, Thetjls, Pagans, Jczus, and Mahometans, not defcending lower to any Controverfies that are among Chrifttans themjelves. But by Reaibn the Lefturers were feldom continued above a Year, and that the house fometimes ftood empty, and Tenants brake, or failed in due Payment of their Rent, therefore the Salary fometimes remained long unpaid, or could not be gotten without some Difficulty : To remedy which Inconvenience, his prefcnt Grace of Canterbury procured a Yearly Stipend of 50/. to be paid Quarterly forever, charged upon a harm in the Parifli of Brill, in the County of Bucks: Which Stipend is accordingly very duly paid when demanded, without see or Reward.

A 3 with

The Dedication.

with my repeated Thanks and good Wilhes, And that the infinite Rewarder of well-doing may give Your Grace a plentiful Reward of these, and Your many other, both Publick and Private Benefadions, is the hearty Wifh of.

Your G R A c e'5

MqB Humble and Thankful

Son and Servant^

S the noble Founder of the Lectures / have had the Honour of Treachmg, was a great Improver of Natural Knowledge, so^ in all Troba* litj', he did it out of aptous End^ as well as in Turfuit of his Genius. For it was his fettled Opinion, that nothing tended more to cultivate true Religion and Tiety in a Man's Mind, than a thorough Skill in Thilofofhy, Andfuch Ejfe6i it manifeflly had in him, as is evident from divers of his publifhed Tieces; from his conjlant T)e/^ortment in never mentioning the Name of God without a Paule, and vi- ^^t J/s.^r"'' ' fible Stop in his Dilcourfe ; ^«^ from the noble Foundation of his LeBures for the Honour of God, and the generous Stipend he allowed for the same.

A 4

And

To the Reader.

And forafmuch as his Leisures were apfointedby him for the Proof of

Vtd Mr. BoyleV j.^^ Chriftian Religion asainft

Will. A 1 -n II' "

Atheilts and other notorious Infidels, I thought, when I had the Honour to be made his LeBurer, that I could not better come uf to his Intent, than to attemft a ^emonftration of the Being and Attributes of God, in what I may call- Mr. Boyie'j own, that is a Phyfico-Theological, fVay. And, be- Jides that it was for this very Service that I was called to this Honour, I was the more induced to follow this Method, by reason none of my learned and ingenious Vredeceffors in these LeBures, have done it on purpose, btd only cafually, in a tranjient, piecemeal manner ; they having made it their business to prove the great ^Points of ChriJIianity in another IV ay, which they have accordingly admirably done. But confidering what our Honourable Founder'j- Opinion was of Natural Knowledge, and that his Intent was., that those Matters bypaffing through divers Hands, and by being treated of in dtjjerent Methods, should take in most of what could be said upon the Subje5f, I hope my ^Performance may he acceptable, although one of the meaneft.

As for others, who have before me done fomething of this kind\ as Merfenne on Genefis ; i>r. Cockburne in his EfTiys ; Mr. Ray iw/'/.f Wifclomof God,C9<^. and 1 may add the firfi of Mr. BoyleV LccSlurcrs, the most karned'Dr. Bcnily *// his BoyleV Ledurc?, the "■ ' eloquent

To the Reader.

eloquent Arch-Bijloop of Cambray, (and 1 hear, the mgemous Monf. Perault hath fomething of this k'tnd^ hut never faw it :) I say^ as to these lec^rned and ingenious Authors^ as the Creation is an amfle SubJeB, so I induftrioufly endeavoured to avoid doing over Vi'hat they before had done ; and for that reason did not, for many Tears, read their Books until I hadjinijh'd my own. But when I came to compare what each of us had done, 1 found my fe If in many Things to have been ant ic if ated by some or other of T hem, efpe daily by my Friend, the late great Mr. 'Kvj. And therefore in some T^ laces I jhorten d my "discourse^ and referred to them ; and in a few others, where the Thread of my T^ifcourfe would have been interrupted, I have made ufe of their Authority, as the bejt Judges ; as of Mr. RayV, for Injiance, with Relation to the Mountains and their T'lajits, and other ^rodu^s. If then the Reader Jhould meet with any Thing mentioned before by others, itnd not accordingly acknowledged by me, I hope he will candidly think vie no 'Plagiary, because I can affure him I have alonq^, (where I was aware of it,) cited my Authors with their due Traife. And it is scarce pojffible, when Men write on the same, or a Subje^ near akin, and the Obfervatinns are obvious, but that they miift often hit upon the (avie Thinq^ : And f equently this may happen from Terfons 7?iaking Ob fit vat ions about one, and the same Thing, without knowing what each other hath done ; which indeed, when thejirfl Edition of

my

To the Reader.

my Book was nearly printed off, I found to he my own Cafe, having (for wajit oflDr. HookV Micrography being at hand, it being a very scarce Book, and many Tears Jince I read it, J given ^efcriptions of two or three Things, which 1 thought had not been tolerably well obferv'd before, but are defer ib'd well by that curious Gentleman.

One is a Feather, the mechanism of which we in the main agree in, except in his Reprefentation in Fig. i. Scheme ii. which is fomewhat different from what 1 have reprefented in my Fig. i8, &c. Btit 1 can ft and by the Truth, though not the Elegance of my Figures. But as to the other ^differences, they are accidental, occafion'd by our taking the Tarts in a different View, or in a different Tart of a Vane ; and to say the Truth, (not flattering my f elf, or detratlingfrom the admirable observations of that great Man, J I have hit upon a few Things that efcafdhim, being enabled to do so, not only by the Help of such Microfcopes as he made ufe of\ but alfo by those made by Mr. Wilfbn, which exceed all I ever faw, whether of Engliili, Dutch, or Italian 7nake ; several of which Sorts I have fecn and examined.

The other Thing we have both of us figured and defcrib d, is. The Sting of a Bee or Wafp ; in which we differ more than in the la(t. But by a careful Rc-examination, I find, that although T>r, HookV observations

To the R F. A D F R.

tions are more critical than ofiy 'were before^ yet they arc not Jo true as mine. For as to the Scabbard, (as he calls ity) I could never discover any Beards thereon ; and I dare be confident there are none, but 'what are on the fJi'o Shears. And as to the T'oint of the Scabbard, he hath rcprefented it as tubular j or blnntifli at the Tof ; but it really termt- 7iates in a Jharp Toint^ and the two Spears and the Toy Jon come out at a Slit^ or longijh Hole, a little below the Top or Toint. And as to the Spears, he makes them to be but one, and that the Toint thereof lies always out of the Scabbard. But by a ftriti Examination, they will be found to be two, as I have said, and that they always lie within the Scabbard, except in flinging ; as I have reprefented them, in Fig. xi. Jrom the transparent Sting of a IVafp. And as to the Spear being made of Joynts, and parted into two, as his Fig. x. Scheme i6. reprefents^ I could never upon a Review, discover it to be so^ but imagine, that by feeing the Beards lying upon, or behind the Spears, he might take them for Joynts, and by feeing the Toint of one Spear lie before the other, he might think the Spear was parted in ti^o. But leji the Reader Jhould think himfclf impofed upon both by 'T)r. Hook and my Self, it is necefjary to be obferv'd, that the Beards for Tenrcrhooks as 'Dr. Hook calls them) lie only on one Side of each Spear, not all round them ; and are therefore not to be fecn, utile Cs they are laid in a due Tofiur^ in the

Micro-

To the Reader.

Mkrofcope, viz. Jideways, not tinder, or atop the Sfear.

The lajt Thing (which fiarce defervcs mention) is the Mcchanifm of the Hair, ^hich T)r. Hook found to be /olid, like a long Tiece of Horn, not hollow, as Malpighi found it in some Animals. And I have found both those great Men to be in some measure in the Right, the Hair of some Animals, or in some farts of the Body being very little, if at all tubular ; and in others, f articulariy Mice, Rats and Cats, to be as I have refrefented in my Fig. 14. ^c.

And now if my Inadvertency in other Things hath no worfe EffeB than it hath had in these, namely, to confirm, correal, or clear others Ob fer vat ions, I hope the Reader will excufe it, if he meets with any more of the like kind. But not being confcious of any such Thing (although probably there may be many such) I am more follicitous to beg the ' Reader's Candour and Favour, with Relation both to the Text and Notes : In the former of which, I fear he will think I have as much under- done, as in the latter overdone the Matter : But for my Excufe, I de- Jtre it may be confided d, that the textual ^art being Sermons, to be deliver d in the 'Fuljpit, it was neccjfary to infifi but briefly ftpon many of the Works of God, and to leave cut many Things that might have been admitted in a more free discourse. So that I wifh

it

To the Rfader.

/.'' may not be thought I have said too much rather than too little for Jiich an Occafion and ^lace. And indeed^ I had no J^all Trouble in expunging fomc Things^ altering tnany^ and foftening the mojl^ andy in a vjord, giving in some measure the IVhole a different ^Drefs than what 1 had at firfl drawn it uf in^ and what it now appears in.

And as for the Norcs, which 7nay be thought too large, I confefs I might have Jhortcn'd them, and had Thoughts of doing it, by cafl^ ing Jbme of them into the Text, as an inge^ nious, learned Friend advis'd. But when I began to do this, I found it was in a Manner to new-make all, and that I jhould be neceffitated to tranfcribe the greatest 'Part of the Book, which f having no AffiftantJ would have been too tedious for me, being pretty well fat igu'd with it before. I then thought it best to pare off from some, and to leave out others, and accordingly did so in many Places, and would have done it in more, particularly, in many of the Citations out of the Ancients, both Poets and others, as alfo in many of the anatomical observations, and many of my own and others observations : But then I confidefd as to the first, that those Citations do (many of them at leaf) Jhew the Senfe of Mankind about God's IVorks, and that the mojl of them may be acceptable to young Gentlemen at the IJniver- Jities, for whose Service these Lefiures are greatly intended. And as to the anatontical Notes, and some others of the like. Nature,

mojt

To the Reader.

moji of them serve either to the Confirmation^ or the Illiiflrationy or Explication of the Text^ if not to the learned^ yet to the un^ skilful, less learned Reader ; for whose fake^ if I had added more, I believe he would for^ give me. And lastly^ as to the observations of 7ny self and some others, where it happens that they are long^ it is commonly where a Necejfity lay upon me of fully exprejfing the Author's Senfe, or my own, or where the Thing was new, and never before Tubliflfd*, in which Cafe, it was neceffdry to be more express and Particular, than in Matters better known, or where the Author may be referred unto.

In the former Editions I promifed another Part I Had relating to the Heavens, if I was thereunto encouraged. And two large Imprefflons of this Book, having been fold offy so as to admit of a Third before the Tear was gone about ; and hearing that it is tranflated into two, if not three Languages -, but efpedaily being importuned by divers learned Terfons, both known and unknown, I have thought my self fajfciently engaged to perform that T^romife ; and have accordingly pub lijhed that Tart,

So that I have now carry d my Survey through most Tarts of the visible Creation^ except the Waters, which are for the most Tart omitted; and the Vegetables, which, for want of Timc^ I was forced to treat of

in

To the Rf,adf.r.

/;/ a ferfunEiory Manner,^ And to the %• dertakiiig of the former of tbcfcy having rece'ivd divers SoUicitations frorn Terjons unhioiL'U as "oi'ell as kncuL'Jiy I think my self bound in Civility to oii'u their Favour^ and to return them my hearty thanks for the kind Opinion they have Jhe'wn of my other ^erformanccsy that they have encouraged me to undertake this other Task. And accordingly I have begun it, and (as far as my Affairs mill permit) have made Jome ^rogrefs in it : But Age and Avocations gro'wing upon me, I begin to fear 1 Jhall scarce he able to Jinijh it as I izoiild, and therefore mnfl recommend that ample and noble Subject to others, who have more leifure, and would do it better than L

As to Additions, 'Thave been much follicited thereto by divers cmiotis and learned 'Per fins, wfiqj,^€uld have had me to infer t some of their. Oi'Jervatii^js.; and many more of my own : J^ ina U'pk of this Nature^ this would have heeu^eiidlefs ; and although the Book would t^ertby be lender' d much better, and more co'mpleat, yet I could by no Means excufe so great an Injuftice to the Turchafers of the former Editions. And therefore (except tn the fecond Edition, where it was not eafy to be avoided) few Additions or Alterations have been made, befides what were Typographical., or of [mall ' consideration. Only in the tbitd Edition I a- PI en ded t he fir Ji T ar ag7 aph of KoiQ I . Chap. 5-.

Book

To the Reader.

Book I.' concerning Gravity ; and in the Fourth^ Page i6. and i8. / inferted two ^ajfages out of Seneca , that were inad- *vertently left out^ and corre died many Things^ that nfon a careful Review^ feeni'd to want amendment.

And lastly^ as to the following Analyfis, it was added at the Re que ft of some of my learned and ingenious Friends ; and although it might have been contradfed^ they would not suffer it to be so.

AN

( o

Hi' -ii. S^^ P^ s^^ s^ s^ s^ -J^ #• #- ^- ■$- '

Following Book.

H E Works of the Creation relating to our Terraqueous Globe, are such as are viliblc in the

( Outworks or Appendages of the Globe, viz. these three : ( I. The atmosphere

rCompofed of Air and Vapours, P.7^^4' Ufeful to

Rcfpiration and Animal Life 5. Vegetation of Plants 9. Conveyance of CThe winged Tribes. "^Sound II.

The Fundions of Nature. Reflcfting and Refrading Light 11. ^^Containing the

rWinds, which are of great Ufc and NeceflUy

To the Salubrity and pleasure of the Air 14. ^ <^ In various Engines 18. In Navigation.

Clouds and Rain : Of great Ufe to the Refrefliment of the Earth and the things therein z:. Origine of Fountains, according to fomc 13. Light. Its TFountain 26.

I Wonderful necessity and Ufe. •

I Improvement by Glafles z8. I Velocity. i^Expanfion 29. \^3- Gravity.

b Its

{!

If Its great Benefit 33. 1_< "

C^y

{I

cause of Levity, which is of great Ufe in the World 35. ^Terraqueous Globe it fell'l Of which I take a View in f Generaf of.

rits Spherical Figure, which is the most commodious in regard of, Light 40. Heat.

Lodgment of the V/atcts. The Winds 41. Its Bulk 43. Its Motion ihid. "^ TAnnua!. ■< (Diurnal.

Its Place and Djftancc from the Sun, and other heavenly

Bodies 46. Its Diftribution, so as to cause all the Parts of the Globe to Balance each other 48. Be helpful to one another. {jrhQ great Variety and Quantity of all things ferving for Food, Phyfick, Building, and every Ufe and Occafion of all Ages, Places, and Creatures 53. An Objedion answered 55. ^Particular of the Earth : of its rConftituent Parts, viz. Its

'^Soils and Moulds, necessary to the TGrowth of various Vegetables 61. "l^Various Occafions of Man, and other Animals 6il Various Strata or Beds, affording Materials for Tools. Firing. Building.

Dying, and thoufands of other things 64. Conveyance of the sweet Fountain-Waters 6$. Subterraneous Caverns and Vulcano's; of great Ufe to the Countries where they are 67. (^Mountains and Valleys, which are not rude Ruins,but Works

of design, inafmuch as this Strudure of the Earth is TThe molt beauii-1'ul and pleafant.

I The most Salubrious: to some Conftitutions, the Hills; to some, the Valleys 7r. rest to (kreen us, and other things 71. { Beneficial to the

Produdlion of various Vegetables. Harbour and Maintenance of various Animals 73. Generation of Minerals and Metals -j], ^absolutely necelTary to the Conveyance of the Rivers ; and in all probability to the Origine of Fountains il>id.

Conj Conclufion against blaming GOD 8r.

I Its Inhabitants; which are cither Senfitive or Infknfit'tve.

Concerning the f Senlitive, fonie things are

rCommon to all the Tribes, particularly thcfe Ten : n. The five Senfes and their Organs ; the 85.

TEyc, an admirable Piece of Mcchanifm in regard of it^ /'Forni, for the moll part Spherical, which is belt for CThe Reception of Objedts. "^Motion of the Eye 90.

Situation in the molt commodious part of the Body of every Creature. Motion, in some Animals,

{Every way. Fixed ; anc

d the excellent Provifion in that cafe pr. Size : which is in

f All Crcatrures, according to their Occafions. ^ Such as live abroad in the Light, larger. (^Such as live under ground, less. Number, in some Animals :

{Two 94. More : Together with the wife Provifion to prevent double Vifion. Parts; some of which are viewed

Tranfiently, the Arteries, Veins, and some of

the muscles and Tunicks. More ftriftly some of the TMufcles, and the excellent Provifion made fot their peculiar Ufes, Equilibration, crc. 96. Tunicks : Among which the various Apertures, Forms, and Pofitions of the Pupil are particularly noted 99. Humours, especially the prodigious Finery and Compofition of the CryltaUine, according to Mr. Lezvenhoeck, ^Nerves loj. Optick. Motory. LGuard and Security, provided for by

The Reparation of the Aqueous Humour. Covering of the Eye Lids. Strong and curious Bones. Hard and firm Tunicks. Withdrawing them into their Heads ic»9. Of ered Vifion in.

(S

b 1

Heiring.'

(4)

Hearing. Its rOrgan, the Ear, 113,

TDouble, enabling us to hear every way, and a good I Provilion for the LoJs or Hurt of one. •i Situated in the very bcft place for Information, I Security, and near the Eye and Brain. t.The Fabrick of the

rOutward Ear, which is in

All Creatures formed, guarded, placed, and every way accoutered according to their various Places and Occafions 115. Man fuitable to his eredf posture ; and all its Parts, the Hdix, Tragm, Concha, &c. admirably fuited to the Reception and Melioration of Sounds, and the Security of the Part. (^Inward Ear : In which I take a View of the iii. "Auditory PaHage, curiously tunnelled, tortuous, and fmooth ; and being always open, is lined with the naufeous Ear-wax for a Guard. Tuba Euftachiana 122. Bone, particularly hard and context for Guard,

and to affift the Sound. Tympanum, and its Membrane, muscles, and four little Bones to correfpond to all kinds of Sound. Labyrinth, Semicircular Canals, Cochlea; all

made with the utmoft Art 127. ^Auditory Nerves, one of which is ramified to the Eye, Tongue, muscles of the Ear, and to the Heart; whence a great Sympathy between those Parts iz8. Object, Sound. Under which 1 conlider, C Thelraprovementsthereof by the Wit of Man 129. <^ Its great necessity, and excellent Ufes 13Z. \^ 4 Its pleasure, and the Power of Mufick 134. Smelling. In which fenfethefe things are remarkable; the Noftrils, always open,cartilaginous,and endowed with

muscles 137. Laminae, ferving for ("A Guard against noxious Things 138. ")^The fpreading of the Ojfadory Nerves. Prodigious Ufe of it in all, especially some of the Ir-' rationals 139. Tafte. The Things most remarkable in which Senfc

are, the rNerves fpread about the Tongue and Mouth, with

I their Guard. <-

The Papillae, neatly made 140.

Situ-

( y )

I Situation thereof to be a CentincI to the Stomach and j Food.

^.Confcnt thereof with the other Senfes.by some Branches of the fitch Pair 141. ^Feeling. Page 141.

{whose Organ is the Nerves 143. Which is difperJcd through every Part of the Body, and the admirable Benefit thereof. II. respiration the grand Adt of Animal Life 14J. rMinidenng to the Circulation of the Blood and Diaflolc of the Heart. The Parts concerned therein are

The Larynx, wirh its great Variety of muscles, crc.

for respiration, and forming the Voice r48. r. achea and Epiglottis, exquilitely conlri v'd and made. iJronchi and Lungs, with their curious Arteries,

Veins and Nerves 150. Rib?, Diaphragm, and the fevcral muscles concerned. ^Its DefccPiS in the

Foetus in the Womb 153. Amphibious Creatures 157. ^ Some Animals in Winter. Ill The Motion of Animals : Concerning^which Iconfider 'Tranfieniiy the

Mulclcs, and their -Strudure, their Size, Faftening

to the Joynts, Motions, cr-c. 158. Bones, and tlieir curious Make. Joynts, witli iheir Form, Bandage and Lubricity i6r. Nerves, and their Origine, Ramifications and Inofculaiions. V, More particularly the Loco-Motive A(ft it self, which is

t^Swift or slow, with Wing-S Legs many or few, or none at all, according to the various Occafions and Ways , of Animals Lives. As particularly in

Reptiles, whose Food and Habitation is near at hand. Man and Quadrupeds, whose Occafions require a larger Range, and therefore a fwifrer Motion 164. Birds, and Infccfts.whose Food, Habitation and Safety I require yet a larger Range, and have accordingly

I a yet fwifter Motion and dircdl Conveyance.

Geometrically and neatly performed by theniceft RuJes. (^Well provided for by ihe

{Due F.quipoife of the Body r6^. Motive Parts being accurately placed with regard to the Center of the Body's Gravity, and to undergo their due Proportion of Weight and Exercifc.

b 3 IV. The

(«)

i

\

IV. The Place allotted to the several Tribes of Animal^ to live and aft in. Concerning which I oblerve that Their Organs are adapted to their Place 167. All Places habitable are duly flocked. Various Animals have their various Places; and the

wisdom thereof 168.

V. The Balance of Animals Numbers, so that the World is not

rOverftocked by their Increafe. ')_Depopulated by their Death. Which is efFefted in

The several Tribes of Animals by a due Proportion in the

{Length of their Life 169. Number of their Young, in J Ufeful Creatures being many. (_Pernicious few. Man very remarkably by the Different Length of his Life. 7 Soon after the Creation 171. When the World was more, but not fully peopled 171. When it was fufficiently flocked, down to the present time. Due Proportions of Marriages, Births and Burials 174. Balance of Males and Females 175. Vl.~The Food of Animals. In which the Divine Management and Providence appears in the 179. TMaintainmg such large Numbers of all kinds of Animals on the Land, in the Seas, and divers Places too unlikely to aff'ord sufficient Food. Adjuftment of the Quantity of Food to the Number of Devourers, so that

There is not too much, so as to rot, and annoy

the World i8r. The most ufeful is most plentiful, and eafieft propagated jl^id. Delight which the various Tribes of Animals have to the Varieties of Food, so that what is grateful to one, is naufeous to another : Which is a wife means to cause C All Creatures to be fufficiently fupplied. -<^ All sorts of Food to be confumed. ^The World to be kept sweet and clean by those means 183. Peculiar Food, that particular Places afford to the

Creatures reliding therein 184. Curious Apparatus in all Animals for Gathering, an,d Digeftion of their Food, viz. the

Mouth

(7)

TMouth, nicely ftiaped for Food, vc In Some, little and n.urow 189. Some, with a large deep Incifiire. Infcds very notable to catch , hold and devour Prey ; to carry Burdens, to bore and build their Habitations 190. Birds as notable. Horned in all. In some Hooked for Rapine, climbing, crc. 191. Sharp and strong to pierce Trees, zj/c. Long and flender to grope. Long and broad to qu:\frer. Thick and fhup edged to hufk Grain. ComprefTed to raifc Limpet; , crc. Teeth, which are peculiarly hard, rtrmly inferred in the Javvs,varioufly Hiiped in the (ame, and diflcieiit Animals, deficient young Creatures, ct-c. 194. Saliva) Glands, commodioufly placed for Maltication and Dej^lutition 196. muscles and Tendons, fcrving to Millication, strong

and well lodged. Gullet, fized according to the Food ; with curious

Fibres, zj-c 116. Stomach ; 197.

Which hath a curious mechanism of Fibres, Tunicks. Glands, Nerves, Arteries and Veins. whose Faculty of Digeftion by such fccming weak

Menllruums is admirable. whose Size and Strength is conformable to the Nature of the Food, or Occafions of Animals,' Which is in

{Tame Animals but one. Ruminants, Birds, crc. more. Guts, whose Tunicks, Olands, Fibres, Valves, and

Periftaltick Motion deferve Admiration 201. Ladleals, together with the Impregnations fropa the V. Pancreas, Gall, Glands, and Lymphaedu(!^s. l^Sagacity of all Animals in finding out, and providing Food. In

{Man less remarkable for the fake of hisUnderftanding zoi Inferiour Creatures. In inch as are ^ Come to mature Age, and are able to help thcmfclves, by their

Accurate Smell 203. Natural Craft.

Hunting and groping out of Sight. Seeing and Sraelhn^ at great Dill.uiccs 205. [in. CIimbing;the (IrongTendons and muscles acting there- Seeing in the dark. Helplefs. As 107. b 4 Young

(8)

;

r Young Creatures.

IrMan, born the most helplcfs of any, the Parents 3 reason, Hands and AfFedion fufficmg. ) Irrationals : For whose Young the Creator hath rnade I C. a sufficient Provifion partly by the Parent- Animal's own

2T<>^yj)\ and Diligence in Nurfing and Defending them 2.07. Sagacity and Care in reporting their Eggs and Young, where Food and all NecefTaries are to be found 209. Ability of the Young themfclves to (hi ft for, and help themselves, with the little Helps of their Dams 210.

(.Creatures deflitute of Food at some Seafons, or likely to want It, who

{Are able to live long without Food iii. Lay up Food before-hand.

VII. The Cloathing of Animals, which is 214. f Suited to the Place and Occafions of all. In

' Man, it is left to his own reason and Art, joined with sufficient Materials: Which is belt for him, because he may fute his Cloathing to his Quality

and Bufmeis 218. For Perfpiration and Health fake. To exercife his Art and Induftry. To excite his Diligence in keeping himself sweet

and clean. In being the Parent of divers Callings 219. Irrationals: Who are either Ready furniflied with proper Cloathing.

On the dry Land with Hair, Fleeces, Furrs, Shells,

hard Skins, «rc. 220. In the Air with Feathers, light, flrong and warm. In the Waters with Scales, hard for Guard ; fmooth for PafTage ; or with strong Shells to guard such as move more flowly 223. j^Provide for themselves by their Textrine, or Architechtonick Art. Of which under the next Branch. l^Well garniftied, being all Workman-like, compleat, in its kind beautiful, being 224. r Adorned with gay, various and elegant Colours. 2 If fordid, yet with exad Symmetry, and full of cu- ^ rious mechanism.

VIII. The houses and Habitations of

Man

L

(9)

Man, who is abundantly furniflicd with r Contrivance and Art to build and garnifli his Habi- <^ tations 116. ^Materials of all sorts to clTect his Works.

Irrationals, whole marvellous liilbndismanitened by tl^c Convenience of their NeAs and Habitations for the j'Hnching and hducation of their Young iz8. ^Giiard and Defence of thcmielves and their Young, I'ahrick of their Nerts, scarce jmitable by Man, and fiicwn by their Contrivance and Make, bein^ exai!t!y fuitabic to their Occalions, and made by Putting only a few ugly Sticks, Mofs, Dirt, o^f. togctiier 231. i3ui!ding Combs according to the best Rules of Matheinaticks. Weaving Webs, and making Cafes. For which Service the Parts of their Bodies, and Materials afforded by them are very considerable. IX. Animals Self Prefervation. For which there is always a Guard in proportion to the Dangers and Occafions of their State. Which is obfcrvabje in

Man, whose reason and Ait lupplies the Defe^ of

Natural Armature. Irrational Creatures; who

As they aie on oneHand fufficiently guarded by their rShells, Horns, Claws, Stings, crc. 239. Changing their Colours. Wings, Feet, and Swiftnefs. Divmg in, and tinging the Waters. F.jecfting Juices out of their Body. Accurate Smell, Sight and Hearing Natural Craft 145.

Uncouth Noife, ugly Gelliculations, and Jiorrid

Afpcdl. Horrible Stink and Excrements. I^Soon the other Hand can by their Strength, Sagacity, or natural Artifices entrap and captivate what is nece/Tary for their Food and other Occafiuns, A- Animal's Generation, riiquivocal, is denied 244. i_Univocal, Which of

TMan, is ^V^£V««« i,ck.x, pafTed wholly hy \Irrational Creatures, which is remarkable for their f Sagacity in chufing the fitteft Place for their E"»s I and Young : Where it is obfervable what a

< <

Com-

( lo )

Compleat Order they observe.'

Neat Apparatus their Bodies are provided with

for this purpose 148, Natural Venom they injed with their Eggs into

Vegetables to pervert Nature, and produce Balls,

and Cafes 250. Making ufe of the fitteft Seafons, either

{All Seafons 251. When Provifions are most plentiful and eafieft had. Due Number of Young 252.. Diligence and Concern for their Young, in point of

{Incubation 253. Saf

fety and Defence 254. t. Faculty of Nurfing their Young, by

iuclding them. In which it is obfervable How fuitable this Food is.

How willingly puted with by all, even themodfavage. "^ What a compieat Apparatus in all Creatures of Dugs,

y Putting Food in their Mouths, with their proper Parts

/ for catching and conveying Food 255.

V^ Neither way,but by laying in Provifions before-hand2s6.

Having in the Fourth Book thus difpatched the Decad of Things in common to the Senfinve Creatures, I take a view of their particular Tribes, vtz.. of C Man ; whom I consider with relation to his

rSoul. Concerning which having curforily mentioned divers things, I infift upon two as (hewing an efpecial divine Management, the Various Genii, or Inclinations of Men, which is a wife

c

) Provifion for the Difpatch for all theWorld's Affairs, and that they ms iventive Faculty.

) and that they may be performed with pleasure 263. C Inventive Faculty. In which it is remarkable that

Its Compafs is so large, extending to all things of "{ Ufe, and occafioning so many several Callings. ^Things of greatest necessity and Ufe were foon and eafily found out ; but things less ufeful later, and dangerous things not yet. Here of divers particular Inventions, with an Exhortation to exercife and improve our Gifts. Body. In which the things particularly remarked upon

are the rEreft posture 282.

The most convenient for a Rational Being. Manifeftly intended, as appears from the Strufture

of some particular Parts mantioned 285. Nice Structure of the Parts miniftring thereto. Equilibration of all the Parts 286. Figure

(")

^1

Figure and Shape of Man's Body ir.ofl agreeable to

his Place and business 287. Stature and Size, which is much the belt for Man's

St.ne z88. Strucf^ure of the Parts, v.hich are Without Botches and Blunders. Of due Strength. Of the bed Form.

Vloft accurately accommodated to their proper Offices. Lodgment of the Parts, as the Five Scnfes 197. Hand.

Legs and Feet. Heart. ^Vilcera.

/Several Bones and muscles, u-c. 198. '>- Covering of all with the Skin. Provifion in Man's Body to Prevent Evils by the

Situation of the Eyes,Ears,Tongue andHand3oo Guard afforded all, especially the prmcipal Parts. Duplication of some Parts. Cure Evils by means of r"Proper Emundories 30T.

^Difeafcs themlelves making Difcharges of things ) more dangerous 303.

^Pain givingWarning,and exciting ourEndeavoutj J^Confent of the Parts, effcded by the NcrvcSj a Sample whereof is given m the Fifth Pair, branched to the Eye, Ear, <^c. ^Political, fociable State. Vox the Prefervation and Security of which the Creator hath taken care by variety of Mens C Faces 308. ^ Voices. ( Hand-writing. Qiiadrupeds. Of which I take no notice, but wherein

they differ from Man, viz. rProne Poflure, which is considerable for

The Parts miniflering to it, especially the Legs and Feet, n-.ed and made in foras for rStrength and slow Motion 315. Agility and Swiftnefs. Walking and Running. Walking and Swimming. Walking and Flying. Walking and Diggmg.

Tra-

( t^ )

(I

r j I Travelling the Plains. I LTraverfing Ice, Mountains, o'c.

v^Its Ufefulnefs to 'Gather Food 317. Catch Prey.

Chmb, Leap and Swim. Guard themselves.

Carry Burdens, Till the Ground, and other Ufes Man.

tParts differing from those of Man. THead, wherein I consider

Its Shape, commonly agreeable to the Animal's Motion 319. The Brain, which is, LefTer than in Man 319. Placed lower than the Cerebellum. The Niftitating Membrane 3x1. «^arotid Arteries, and Rete Mirabile. Nites. Neck.

{Anfwering the Length of the Legs 312. Strengthened by the Whitleather. Stomach, 314.

{Correfponding to the several Species. Suited to their proper Food, whether Flefli, Grain, c^c. Heart : Its

Ventricles in some C One only 315. .^ Two.

(^ Three, as some think.

Situation nearer the midil of the Body, than in Man. Want of the Fallening of the Pericardium to the Midriff 327. LNervous kinds, A Sample of which is given in the different Correfpondence between the Head and Heart of Man and Bead, by the means of the Nerves 3Z9. Birds. Concerning which I take a View of their TBody and Motion ; where I consider

^Ihe Parts concerned in their Motion 333.

^The Shape of the Body, made exadly for fwimming in, and pafTing through the Air. Feathers, which are

most exadtiy made for Lightnefs and Strength, All well placed in every Part, for the Covering

and Motion of the Body. Preened and drefled 334, Wings, which are

fMade of the very best Materials, viz,, of Bones

light

( 13 )

light and strong ; Joynts exadly opening, fliut* ting, and moving, as the Occafions of Hight require ; and the Peroral Mujcles, of the greatest Strength of any in the whole Body. ^Placed in the nicell point of the Body of every Species, according to the Occafions of Ilight, fwimming or Diving. Tail, which is well made, and placed to keep the Body fteady, and aflift la its Afccnts and Dcfcents 337. LLegs and Feet, which are made light for Flight, and incomparably accoutred for their proper Occafions* of Swimming 338. Walking. Catching Prey. Roofting. Hanging.

Wading and Searching the Waters. Lifting them upon their Wings. Motion it self.

fPerformed by the niceft Laws of Mcchanicks. I {_Anrwering every purpose and Occafion. LOther Farts of the Body, viz.. the

THead, remarkable for the commodious f Shape of it fclf 341. Forms of the Bill. Site of the Eye and Ear. Pofition of the Brain. -< Strudlure of the C Larynx. ^ Tongue. ■ (^ Inner Ear.

i l^Provifion by Nerves in the Bill for tailing and diftinguifliing Food 344. Stomachs, one to

Macerate and prepare 345. Grind and digeft Lungs incomparably made for respiration 346. Making the Body buoyant. ^Neck, which is made C In due Proportion to the Legs. -<J To fearch in the Waccrs, and ^To counterpoife the Body in Flight. Instate. Of wiuch 1 take notice of three Thing?, ivz. ihcir

Migration

Lu

{!

( 14)

fMigration remarkable for r^The Knowledge Birds have of

) CTheir Times of Paflage 348.

V

Their Accommodation for lon^ Flights by lon^

>

The Places proper for them.

or

L

eli'e Ikong Wings. Incubation, which is considerable for The Egg, and its parts 351.

Ad itself; that these Creatures should betake themselves to it, know this to be the Way to produce their Young, and with delight and Patience fit such a due Number of Days. The Negled of it in any, as tire Oftrich, and the wondertul Provilion for the Young in that Cafe 354. Nidification. Of which before. Infers. Which, altho' a defpifed Tribe, doth in some Refpeds more set forth the infinite Power and wisdom of the Creator, than the larger Animals. The things in this Tribe remarked upon are their rBody 359.

rShaped, not so much for long Flighrs, as for their Food, and Condition of Life. Built not with Bones, but with what serves both for

Bones and Covering too. Eyes, reticulated to see all ways at once 360. Antennae, and their Ufe 361. Legs and Feet made for Creeping 363. Swimming and Walking. Hanging on fmooth Surfaces. Leaping. Digging.

Spinning and Weaving Webs and Cafes. Wings, which are

Nicely diftended with Bones 365. Some incomparably adorned with Feathers and elegant Colours. Some joynted and folded up in their Elytra, and

diftended again at pleasure. In Number either Two, with Poifes. Four, without Poifes. LSurprizing Minutenefs of some of those Animals themselves, especially of their Parts, which are as numerous and various as.in other Animal Bodies 367. State : which fets forth a particular Concurrence of the Divine Providence, in the wife and careful Provifion that is made for their

Security

{.

( I? )

Security againfl Winter, by their r Sublilling in a different, •w/.c. their Nympha or Au- I reh'a lUtc 369. Living in Torpitude, without any Wafte of Body or

Spirits 370. Laying up Provifion before-hand.. Prerervation of their Species by their Chufing proper Places, to Jay up their Eggs and Sperm,

so that the CEggs may have due Incubation 373. \Young sufficient Food.

Care and Curiolity in repofiting their Eggs in neat Order, and with the proper Part uppermolt 382. Incomparable Art of Nidification,by being endow'd with Parts proper for, and agreeable to the fcveral Ways of

Nidification, and the Materials they ufe in it. Archite»5^onick Sagacity to build and weave their Cells, or to make even Nature herself their Hand-maid 384. Reptiles. Which agreeing with other Animals in fomething

or other before treated of, I consider only their r Motion, which is veryrcmarkablc,whetherweconfidcr the Manner of it, as rVermicular 394. . Sinuous. «; ^'< Snail-like.

^ I CatterpiUar-like. \^MuItipedous. Parts miniftring to it. ^Poifon, which serves to C Scourge Man's Wickednefs 398. ■<^ Their eafy Capture and Maifery of their Prey. 4 Their Digeftion. ^Watery Inhabitants considerable for their Great Variety 401. Prodigious Multitudes.

Vaftbulkof some,and furprizingminutcnefsofothers403 Incomparable Contrivance and Stru<fture of their Bodies. Supplies of Food. Ilefpiration.

Adjuftfnent of their Organs of Vifion to their Element. I'oife and Motion of the Body every Way 402. i^Infti.ntive Inhabitans. Among which having mentioned FofC\h and others, I infill only upon Vegetables, and that in a curfory manner upon their

I/' Great Variety for the Icvcral Ulcs of the World 404. Anatomy. ^ Leaves 407. IFJovvcrs and their admirable'Gaiety. Seed, remarkable tor its Cc-

( i<5)

Generation. Make.

Containing in it a compleat Plant 40S. i'refervation and Safety in the Gems, Fruit, Earth, o-c. i)Owing, wh'ich is provided for by Down, Wings, Springy Cafes, carried about by Birds, fown by the HulLandman, i^c ^ix. Growing and Standing: Some by r Their own Strength 417.

<^ The Help of others, by clafping about, or hanging upon ^ them.

,'LRemarkable \Jk, especially of some which seem to be' provided for the Good of {All Places 420. Some particular Places, to {Heal some Local Diftempers. Supply feme Local Wants. Practical Inferences upon the whole are these Six, viz,. That GOD'S Works.

I. Are great and excellent 425.

1. Ought to be enquired into, with a Commendation of such as do so 42,7.

3. Are manifefl to all, and therefore Atheifm unreafonable 418.

4. Ought to excite Fear and Obedience 431.

5. Ought to excite Thankfulnefs 431.

6. Sould move us to pay God his due Homages and Worfliip, particularly that of the Lords Day : which is an Appointment

The most antient 438.

Wifely contrived for Difpatch of business, and to prevent Carnality.

Whole proper business i«, to ceafe from Worldly, and to foilov/ Spiritual Employments ; the cliief of which is the Publick Worniip of GOD.

Terraqueous Globe.

I NTROT>VCTI O N.

PP5^;N /y^/.cxi.2. The Pfalmift aflcrts, That

the {a) Pf^orks of the Lord are great j fought out of all them that have pleasure therein. ^i This is true of all God's Works^ particularly of his Works of Creation : Which, vjhcn fought out, or, as the Hebrew Word [b) fignificth, when heedfully and deeply pried into, folicitoufly obferv^d and enquired out, especially when clearly difcovere^

{a) It is not unlikely that the Pfalmift might mean, at lead have an F.ye to, the Works oj the Creation in this Text, the Word nu/yD being the same that in Pfal. 19. i. is tranflated God's Ha?}dy-work, which is manifeftly apphcd to the Works of Creation, and properly fignificth Tatfum, Opus, Opijicium, from nU/y Fecit, Paravit, Aptavit. And faith Ktrcher, ftgnificat talem ajfetlioncm , qua atiquid exifiit -velreaiiier, zel ornate, velut ncn fit in priftino ftatu quo fdt. Concord, p i. col. 031.

{i>) vm lojHxfivitjperquiJivit, fcifcitatuseji, Buxtor. in veib. Et ftmul importat curam, isr folicitudinem' Conrad. Kirch, ib. p. I. col. 1 174.

B to

•L Survey of the

to US; in this Cafe, I say, wc find those Works of God abundantly to deferve the Pfalmift's Character of being Great "s^xA Noble j inafmuch as they are made with the most exquifite Art, {c) contrived with the utmoft Sagacity, and ordered with plain wife Def^gn, and miniftring to admirable Ends. For which rcrtfon St. Paul might well affirm of those noiyiy.oiJoc of God, {d) That the inviftble 'Things of God, even his eternal Power and Godhead, are underjlood by them. And indeed they are the moll eafy, and intelligible Demonftrations of the Being and Attributes of God j {e) especially to such as are unacquainted with the

(c) i^od fi omnes tnundt partes ita cenflltutA funt, nt neque ad ufutn meltores potuer'tnt eJJ'e, 7ieq'ie ad Jpeciem puLchriores ; videa- Tnn4 utrkm ea fortiiltafint, an eo ftatu, quo cohdrere nulla mcdo totuerint, ntji fenfu mnderante divinaque provtdentia. Si ergo fneliora. funt ea qti& NaturA, quatn ilia, qua Arte perfeSla fitnty nee Ars effiiit quid fine rattone ; ne Natura quidem rationis expert efi habenda. Glut tgittir convenit, fignum, aut tabulam pidiam cum adfpexeris, fcire adhibitameffe artem ; cumque procul curfum navigii z/ideris, non dubitare, quin id ratione atque arte moveatur : aut chm Solarium, &c. Miindum autem, quic^ has ipfas artes, CJ* earum artifices, CT" cun^a compledlatur, confiiti CT* rationis ejJ'e expert em put are ? &iuod ft in Scythiam, aut in Britanniam, Sph^ram aliquts tulerit hanc, quam nuper familiaris nofier ejfecit PofidoniHs, cujus fiinguls, converfiones idem efficiunt in Sole,

^c. quod cfficieur in ccslo ftngulis d:ebus CT' noClibus ; quis in

it'Idbarlarie dnbiret, quin ea Sph^ra fit perfet'ia Ratione ? Hiaute7ndubicant de Mundo, ex qnoo' oriuntur, c^ fiunt omnia, cafune ipfie fit effcchis, — ;in Ratione, an Mente divind? Et Archimedem arbitrantur plus valuijj'e in imitandis Sph^rs converfionibus, quam Naturam in efiiciendis, pr&fertim cltm '/nttltis partibus ftnt ilia perfe£la, quam h&c {imulata, folertius, &c. Cic. de Nat. 1.2. c. 34,35-

(d) And a little before he faith or Natureii^d?, Omnemergo regit Naturam ipfc [Deus] ct'c.

(e) Alundus codex eji Dei, in quo jugiterlegere debcmus, Bernard. Serm.

Arbitror nullam gentem, neque Hominum focietatem, apud que J ulla Deorum efi religio, quidquam habere facris Eleufiniis a^i Saii'^thraciis fimile : Ea tamen obfcure docent qui profitentuf : Natnr& vero opera in omnibus animantibus [tint perjpicua. G;.len. de Uf.Part. 1. 17. c. r.

Subtilties

Terraqueous Globe. 3

Subtilties of reasoning and Argumentation j as the greatert parr oF Mankind arc.

It may not therefore be unfuitable to the Nature and design of Lcfturcs (/) founded by one of the greatell Vertuofo's of the lafl: Age, and inllituted too on purpose for the Proof of the ChriHian Religion againll Athcifls and other Infidels, to improve this occafion in the Dcmonrtrationof the i^^- ing and yjttributes of an infinitely wife and powerful Creator,^from a Curfory Survey of the Works of Creatiojiy or (as often called) of Nature.

Which Works belong either to our terraqueous Globe., or the Heavens.

I {hall begin with our own Globe, being neareft, and falling mod under our Senfes. Which being a Subjed very various and copious, for the more methodical and orderly proceeding upon it, I shall diftribute the Works therein :

I. Into such as are not properly Parts, but j^ppendages or Out-works of the Globe.

II. The Globe it self.

{/J Philofophia eji Catechlfmus ad Fidem. Cyril, i. contr. Jul.

B z BOOK

Survey of the

B O O K I.

Of the Out-Works of the Terraqueous Globe j the atmosphere^ Light ^ and Gravity,

C H A P. I.

Of the Atmojphere in general.

^iHE atmosphere, or Mafsof Air, Vapours

I and Clouds, which furrounds our Globe,

^/| will appear to be a matter of DeHgn, and

I§1 the infinitely wife Creator's Work, if we

consider its Nature and Make (a), and its U/e to the World (^).

1 . Its Nature and Make, a Mafs of Air, of fubtile penetrating Matter, fit to pervade other Bodies, to penetrate into the inmoft Recefles of Nature, to excite, animate, and fpiritualizc j and in short, to be the very Soul of this lower World. A thing consequently

2, Of greatest Ufe to the World, ufcful to the Life, the Health, the Comfort, the pleasure, and business of the whole Globe. It is the Air the

(a) Mttndi piri ejl Aer, o" qft'tdem necejfaria : Hie est enim qui fceliim terrapujue connetiit, &c. Senec. Nat. Qu. 1. i. c. 4.

(^b) Jpfe Aer nobtjcum videt, nobijcum audit, nobijcum fonat ; nihil enimiorum fine eo fisripoteftt^z, Cic. de Nat. Deor. 1. z.

c- 33.

whole

Chap. I, atmosphere. $

whole Animal World breatheth, and livech by ; not only the Animals inhabiting the Earth {c) and

Air,

(t) As the Air is of abfolute NecelTity to Animal Life, so it is neccirary that it should be of a due Temperament or Confiftcnce; not soul, by re-ifon that fuffocateth : net too r.\re and thin, because that fufficeth not ; with Examples of each of wiiich, I Hiall a little entertain the Reader. In one of Mr. liazvkibee's Compreffing Engines, I closely fliut up a Sparroiv withou*: forcing any Air in ; and in less than an Hour the Bird began to pint, and be concerned ; and in less than an Hour and half to be fick, vomit, and more out of Breach ; and in two Hours time was nearly expiring.

Another I put in and comprelTed the Air, but the Engine leaking, I frequently renevved the ComprefTure ; by which means, (although the Bird panted a little after the first Hour,) yet after such frequent ComprefTures, and ImmifTion of frefli Air, it was very little concerned, and taken out feemingly unhurt after three Hours.

After this 1 made two other Experiments in comprefTed Air, with the Weight of two Atmofpheres injected, the Engine holding tight and well; the one with the Great litmoufe, the other wich z Sparrow. Eor near an Hour they Teemed but little concerned ; but after that grew fainter, and in two Hours lime fick, and in three Hours time died. Another thing I took notice of, was, that when the Birds were (ick and very reftlefs, I fancied they were fomewhat relieved for a fliort space, with the Motion of the Air, caufed by their fluttering and ftiaking their Wings, (a thing worth trying in the Diving- Bell). I shall leave the ingenious Reader to judge what the craife was of both the Birds living longer in comprelTed, than uncomprelfed Air; whether a lels quantity of Air was not fooner fouled and rendred unfit for respiration, than a greater.

From these Experiments two Things are manifefted ; one is, th.Tt Air, in some measure comprelTed, or rather heavy, is necefTary to Animal Lire: Of which by and by. The other, that frelh Air is alio necessary : For pent up Air, when overcharged with the Vapours emitted out of the Animal's Body, becomes unfit for respiration. For which reason, in the Diving- Bell, after some time of ffay under Water, they are forced to come up and take in frcfii Air, or by some such means recruir it. But the famous Cornelius Drebell conir\\cd not only aVelTelto be rowed under Water, but alfo a Liquor to be carried in that VelTel, that would supply the want of frefbAir. The VeflTel was made for King James \. It carried twelve Rowers, befides the Paflengers. It was tried in the River of Thames ; and one

B 3 Qi

6 Survey of the Book I.

of thePerfons that was in that fubmarine Navigation was then alive, and told it one, who related the Matter to our famous Founder, the Honourable, and moil Ingenious Mr. Boyl. As to the Liquor, Mr. Boyl faith, he discovered by a Dodor of Phyfick, who married Drehell's Daughter, that it was ufed from time to time when the Air in the fubmarine Boat was clogged by the Breath of the Company, and thereby made unfit for respiration ; at which time, by unftopping a VefTel full of this Liquor, he could fpeedily reftore to the troubled Air such a proportion of vital Parts, as would make it again for a good while fit for respiration. The Secret of this Liquor Drebell would never dilclofe to above one Perfon, who himself affured Mr. Boyl what it was. Vid. Boyl, Exp. Phyf. Mech. of the Spring of the Atr, Exp. 41. in the Digref. This Story I hAve related from Mr. Boyl, but at the same time much quellion whether the Virtues of the Liquor were so efFedual as reported.

And as toogrofs, so too rare an Air is unfit for respiration. Not to mention the forced Rarefadions made by the Air-Pump, in the following Note ; it is found, that even the extraordinary natural Rarefadions, upon the tops of very high Hills, much afifed respiration. An Ecclefiaftical Perfon, whohadvifited the high Mountains of Armenia, (on which some fancy the Ark refted) told Mr. Bo^jl^ that whilft he was on the upper part of them, he was forced to fetch his Breath oftner than he was wont. And taking notice of it when he came down, the People told him, that it was what happen'd to them when they were so high above the Plane, and that it was a common observation amoB3them. T'he like observation the same Ecclefiallick made upon the top of a Mountain in the Ceve-anes. So a learned Traveller, and curious Perfon, on one of the bighell Ridges of the Pyrenees, call'd Pic de Midi, found the Air not \o fit for respiration, as the common Air, but he and his Company were fain to brerih iliortcr and oftner than in the lower Air. Vid. Phil. TranfaSl. No. 63, or Lowthorp\ Abridg. Vol. 2.. p. 2i6.

Such anotbc: Relation the learned Jofeph Aco/ia gives of himfeK and h^ Company, that, when they palfed the high Mountains of Peru, which they call Periacaca, ^to which he faith, the Alp^ ihemfelves fetmedto them but as ordinary Houfesy in regard of I'i'/h Toivers, ) He and his Companions were furpri- Xed with such extreme Pangs of Straining and Vomiting, ( not •without cafting up of Blood too,) and with so violent a Dijiemper, that he concludes he Jlyj-'iH undoubtedly have died; hut that this laftcd KCt above three or four Hours, before they came into a more convenient and natural Temperature oj the Air. All which he concludes proceeded from the too great Subtilty and Delicacy of the 4ir, which is not proportionable to humane respiration, which requires a more grofs and temperate Air, Vid. Boyl, uht fupra.

Thus

Chap. I. atmosphere. J

Air {d)^ but those of the Waters {e) too. Without it

most

Thus it appears, that an Air too Subtile, Rare and Light, is unfit for respiration : But the cause is not the Subtilty ortoo grot Delicacy, as Mr. £<>:>/ thinks, but the too great Lightnefs iliereor, which renders it unable to be a Counterbalance, or nn Antngonift to the Heart, and all the Mulcles miniftring to respiration, and the Diafiole of the Heart. Oi which Ice IJouk 4. (3hap. 7. Note i.

And as our Inability to live in too rare and light an Air may difcouragethofe vain Attempts of Flying and VVhimlies of passing to the Moon, vc. so our being able to bear an heavier State of the Air is an excellent Provilion for Mens Occalions in Mines, and other great Depths of the Earth ; and thole other greater PrelTures made upon the Air, in the Diving-Bell^ when we defcend into great Depths of the Waters.

{d) That the Inhabitantsof the Air, (Birds and Infeds,) need the Air as well as Man and other Animals, is manifelt from their fpeedy dying in too feculent, or too much rarefied Air; of which see the preceding and following Note/. Bui yet Birds and Infedls (some Birds at least) can live in a rarer Air than Man. Thus Eagles, Kites, Herons, and divers other Birds, that delight in high Flights, are not affedted with the Rarity of the Medium, as those Perfons were in the preceding Note. So Infeds bear the Air-Pump long, as in the following Note/.

{e) Creatures inhabiting the Waters need tlie Air, as well as other Animals, yea, and frefli Air too. The Hyrirocanthari of all Sorts, the Nympha of Gnats, and many other Water- Infeds, have a lingular Faculty, and an admirable Apparatus, to raise their back Parts to the top of the Waters, and take in frclL Air. It is pretty to see, for instance, the Hydrocanthari come and thruft their Tails out of the Water, and take in a Bubble of Air, at the tip of their V agin & ■and TzWs, and then nimbly carry it down with them into the Waters; and, when that is fpent, or fouled, to afcend again and recruit it.

So Fillies alfo are well known to ufe respiration, by passing the Water through their Mouths and Gills, But C<j;/>j will hve out of the Water, only in the Air; as is manifest by the Experiment of their way of Fatting them in Holland, and which hath beenpradifed herein England, viz.. they hang them up in a Cellar, or some cool Place, in wet Mofs in a small Net, with their Heads out, and feed them with white Bread foaked in Milk for many Days. This was told me by a Perfon very curious, and of great Honour and Eminence, whofc Word (if 1 had leave to name him) no Body would queftion: And it being an Inlhnce

B 4 of

8 Survey of the Book I.

most Animals live scarce half a Minute (/) j and others, that are the moll accullomed to the want of it, live not without it many Days.

And

of theRefpiration oF Fifliesvery fingular, and fomewhat out of the way, I have for the Reader's Diverlion taken notice of it.

(/) By Experiments I made my itM in the Air Pump, in September and OSlober , 1704; I observed that Animals whose Hearts have tv^ro Ventricles, and no Foramen Ovale, as Birds, Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice, crc. die in less than half a Minute counting from the very firll Exfudion ; especially in a small Receiver.

A Mole (which I fufpefted might have born more than other Quadrupeds) died in one Minute (without Recovery) in a large Receiver; anddoubtlefs would hardly have furvived half a Minute in a small Receiver, A Bat (although wounded) fuftained the Pump two Minutes, and revived upon the re-admiffion of the Air. After that, he remamed fourMmutes and a half and revived. lastly, After he had been five Minutes, hecontinued gafping for a time, and after twenty Minutes I readmitted the Air, but the Bat never revived.

As for Infeih : IVafps, Bees, Hornets, Graflioppers, zx\d Lady- Cows feemed dead in appearance in two Minutts, but revived in the open Air in two or three Hours time, notvvichftanding they had been in Vacuo twenty four Hours.

The Ear-zvig, the great Staphylinus, the great black lowfy Beetle, and Ibme other Infedls would leem unconcerned at the Vacuum a good while, and lie as dead ; but revive in the Air, although some had lain fixteen Hours in the exhaufted Receiver.

Snails bear the Air Pump prodigioufly, especially those in Shells ; two of which lay above tv/enty four Hours, and feemed not much affeded. The same Snails I left in twenty eight Hours more after a fccond Exhauflion, and found one of them quite dead, but the other revived.

Fro^% and Toads bear the Pump long, especially the former. A large Toad, found in the house, died irrecoverably in less. than fix Hours. Another Toad and Frog I puc in together, and the Toad wasfeemingly dead in two Hours, but the Frog juil alive. After they had remained there eleven Hours, and feemingly dead, the Frog recovered in the open Air, only weak, but the Toad was quite dead. The same Frog being put in again for twenty feven Hours, then quite died.

The Animalcules in Pepper-Water remained in F<ic«o twenty four Hours. And after they had been expofed a Day or two to the open Air, I found some of them dead, some alive.

(S) That

Chap. I. Atrnofphere, 9

And not only Animals thcmfelves , but even Trees and Plants, and the whole vcgcraMe Race, owe their Vegetation and Life to this ull. r.. VSzmcnt > as will appear when I come to fpcuK -if them, and is manifell from their Glory and Verdure in a free Air, and their becoming Pale and Sickly, and Languifhing and Dying, when by any means excluded trom it {g).

Thus ufeful, thus neccll'ary, is the Air to the Life of the animated Creatures j and no less is it to the Motion and Conveyance of many of them. All the winged Tribes owe their Flight and Buoyancy (/;) to ir, as shall be shewn m proper place : And even the watery Inhabitants themfelres cannot

afcend

{£) That the Air is the principal cause of the Vegetation of Plants, Ecrelli proves in his excellent Book D« Mot. Animal. Vol.2. Prop. 181. Andin the next I'ropofiiion, he alfurcth. In plant is quoque peragt Aeris refplrationem quandam impirfedam, a. qua, tarum vita pendet, cj- ccnjervatur. But ot this more when I come to furvcy Vegetables.

Some Lettice-Seed being fown upon [ome Earth m the open Air, and [ome of the same Seed at the same time upon other Earth in a Glajf- Receiver of the Pneumatick Engine, aftervjards exhaufted of Air : The Seed expofed to the Air was grown up an Inch and half high wiihin Eight Days ; hut that in the ex~ haufted Receiver not at all. And Air being again admitted into the same emptied Receiver, to see whether any of the Seed would then come up, it was found, that in the Space of ons Week it zvas grown up to the Height of two or three Inches. Vid. Phil. Tranl'. No. 23. Lowth. Abridg. Vol. 2. p. 206.

(h) In volucrihus pulmones perforati acrem infpiratum tn toiant ventris cavitatem admiitunt. Hujus ratio, ut propter ccrpcns truhcum Aere repletum cr quaf extenjum, ipja magi- r.olatilia evadant, faciliufque ab aere externo, propter mtimi penum, JU" jlenteniur. Equidem pifces, quo levms in aquis natent, i.-t Abdthmine veficas Aere infiatas gejlant : pariter <i^ volucres, pro. ter corporis truncum Aere impletum cr qtiafi inflatum, nud- Aeri incumbentes, minus gravantur, proindeque levius c expeditiUs volant. Willis de Aniin. Brut. p. i. c. 3.

(i) Fifhts

lo Survey of the Book I.

afcend and defccnd into their Element, well without it (/').

But

(?) Fifties hy reason of the Bladder of Air within thetn, can fuftaWy or keep t hem/elves in any Depth of Waier : For the Air in that Bladder betng more or iefs comprejj'ed, according to the Depth the Fiji} fu'itns at, takes up more or tejs Space ; and consequently, the B idy of the Ftjh, part (fwhofe Bulk this Bladder is, is greater or Iefs according to the several Depths , and yet retains the same Weight. Now the Rule dc Infidcntibus humido »;, that a Body, that is heavier than so much Waier, as is equal in §luantity to the Bulk of it, will fink, a Body that is lighter will swim; a Body of equal Weight tvill rest in any part of the Water. By this Rule, if the Fiftj , in the middle Region of the Water t be of equal Weight to the Water, that is commenfurate to the Bulk of it, the Fiji) will re[l there, without any Tendency tfpvjards or downwards : And if the Fifh be deeper in the Water, the Bulk of the Fiflj becoming Iefs hy the Comprejfion of the Bladder, and yet retaining the same Weight, it will fink, and red at the Bottom. And on the other side, if the Fifty be higher than the middle Region, the Air dilating it (elf, and the Bulk of the Fifty consequently increafing, but not the Weight, the Fifty will rife upwards and rest at the top of the Water. Perhaps the

Tifli by same A£lion can emit Air out of its Bladder , and,

when not enough, take in Air, and then it zvill not be wondred, that there should he always a fit Proportion of Air in all Fifties to serve their Vfe, Scc. Then follows a Method of Mr. Boyl to experiment the Truth of this. After which, in Mr. Lozvthorp's Abridgment, follow Mr. Ray's observations. / think tly>at — — — hath hit upon the true Ufe of the Swimming- Bladders in Fif.ies. For, I. It hath been observed, that if the Swimming- Bladder of any Fifty be pricked or broken, such a Fifty finks prefently to the Bottom, and can neither fupport or raise it self up in the Water, l. Flat Fifties, as Soles, Plaife,&ZC. tvhich lie always grovelling at the Bottom, have no Swimming- Bladders that ever 1 could find. 3. In mo ft Fifties there is a manifest Chanel leading from the Gullet < to the said Bladder,

which without doubt serve! for the conveying Air thereunto.

In the Coat of this Bladder is a mujculous Power to contrail it when the Fift) lifts. See more very curious Ohfervations relating to ihii Matter, of the late great Mr. Ray, as alfo of the curious .iiionymous Gentleman in the ingenious Mr. Lowthorp's Abridgment, before cited, /. 845. from Phil. Jranf. N. 114, II^

(k) Among

Chap. I. atmosphere, ii

But it would be tedious to defccnd too far into Particulars, to reckon up the many Benefits of this noble Appendage of our Globe in many ufeful Engines ('^)i in many of the Funftions and Otv-rations oF Nature (/) in the Conveyance of Sounds; and a Thoufand Things befides. And I shall but

juft

(i-) Among the Engines in which the Air :s ufeful, Pumps may be accounted not contemptible ones, and divers other Hydrauhcal hngmcs, which need not to be particularly inliilcd on. In these the Water wa? imagined to nfe by thepowerof Suction, to avoid a r<JCM«w, and such unintellroiblc Stuff; but the julHy famous Mr. Bo;y/ was the ftrrt that folved ihefe Phaenomena by the Weight of the Atmo/pherc. His ingenious and curious observations and Experiments relating hereto, maybe seen in his little Traft, Of the Cau/e of AttraiHion Ly Suction, and divers others of his Trads.

(/) it would be endlefs to fpecify the Ufcs of the Atr in Nature's Operations : 1 (IvUl therefore, for a Sample only, name its great Ufe to the World in conferring animated Bodies, whether endowed with animal or vegetative Life, and its contrary Quality of dilTolving other Bodies; by which means many Bodies that would prove Nuifanccs to tlie World, arc put out of the Way, by being reduced into their firH Principles, (as we say\ and so embodied with the Earth agnin. Of its Faculty as a Menftruum, or its Power to difToive Bodies; I may inllance in CryftalGlaircs, which, with long keeping, especially if not ufed, will in Time be reduced to a Powder, as 1 have seen. So divers Minerals, Earth.s, Stone?, Foffil- Shells, Wood, crc. which from Noah's Flood, at leafl: for many Ages, have lain underGround, lb fecure from Corruption, that, on the contrary, they have been thereby made much the stronger, have in the open Air foon mouldered away. Of whith lali, Mr. Boyl gives an instance (from the Dijfertation de adm'trandis Hungar. Aijuis) of a great Oak, like a huge Beam, dugout of a Salt Mine in Tranfylvania, so hard, that it would not eafily he luroughr upon by Iron Tools, yet, being expofed to the Air out of the Aline, it became so rotten that in four Days it was eafy to he broken, and crumbled betzvcen one's Fingers. Boyl'i Sufpic. about some hid. Qual. in the Air, j>. 18. So the Trees turned out of the Earth by the Breaches at Weft-Thurrock and Dagenham, near me, although probably no other than Alder, and interred many Ages ago in a rotten oazy Mold, were so exceedingly tough, hard, and found at

fint.

12- Survey of the Book I,

jull mention the admirable ufe of our atmosphere in minifbing to the enlightening of the World, by its rtflcdmg the Light of the heavenly Bodies to us {m); and retracing the Sun-beams to our Eye, before itevjr furmounteth our Horizon {n) j by which means ths Day is protracted throughout the whole Gl' he- i a.id the long aiid difmal Nights are ihorten'd in the frigid Zones, and Day fooner approacheih

fiift» rhat I could make but little Impreflions on them with the Sr'Okv.s of an Ax; but being expofed to the Air and Water, io'jn h^.^mc lb roiten as to be crumbled between the Fingers. See my OSiervacions in Philof. Tranfa^. N^ 335.

C"/?, By rcjieit'ivg the Light cj the heavenly Bodies to us, I mea.i that VV'iTtenefs or Lightnefs which is in the Air in the Day time, cauled by the Rays of Light ftriking upon the Parti- CIC3 of the .'"urn ■'■phere, as well as upon the Clouds above, and the other Objcftts oeneath upon the Earth. To the lame cause alfo we owe the Twilignt, -viz. to the Sun- beams touching the Uf'permoll Particles of our atmosphere, which they do when tne Sun is about eighteen Degrees beneath the Horizon, Anuasthe Beams rtrach more and more of the airy Particles, iu iJ).uki!efs goes off, and Day l;ght comes on and encreafeth. For ail Exemplificinon of this, the Experiment may serve of trar.iin'ttuig a few Rays of the Sun through a small Hole into a dark R.jum : By which means the Rays which meet with Dul>, and oti.cr i'aiticirs Hying in the Air, are render'd visible; or (which ^mounts to the lame; those fwimming small Bodies are rendeied vitirle, by thtir rcfleding the Light of the Sunbeams to the Eye, which, without inch Reflection, would it self f^'i invillHle

The ;\7ureCoIou;" of the Sky Sir Ifaac Netvton attributes to Vapouis bfginning lo condcnle, and that are not able to reilc-'^ ihc other Col jurs. V. Optic. 1. 1. Par-. 3. Prop. 7.

!>•) By the Refradive Power of the Air, the Sun, and the fith.! hc-ivcnly B'idies seem higher than really they are, efpecialiv neir the Horizon. What the Refracftions amount unto, vhat Vari.itions they have, and what Alterations in time they c.'uie. may be btiefiy seen in a little Book called, The Artificial Cl-'Ck Maker, Chnp. 11.

j-iltho'igh this infletlive &uality of the Air be a great Incumbraiice and Confufun of Aftronom'tcal observations ; yet it

is not without some considerable Benefit to Navigation ; and indued in some Cafes, the Benefit thereby obtained is much greater

thar>

Chap. I. atmosphere. 13

proacheth them j yea the Sun it fdf rifeth in Appearance (when really it is ablcnt from thcmj to the great Comfort of those forlorn Places {p).

But palling by all tlielc Things with only a bare mention, and wholly omitting others that might have been named, I shall only inlift upon the excellent Ufe of this noble circumambient Companion of our Globe, in refpedtof two of its Meteors, the Winds, and the Clouds and Rain (/>).

thiXn -.vo.di he the Benefit of having the Ray proceed in an exa6l flra'ght Line. [Then he mentions the iienefit hereof to the Polar Parts of the World] But this by the by (iaith he.) The great Advantage I covftder therein, is the firfl discovery of La>;d upon the Sea ; for by means hereof, the tops of Hills and Lands art raised up Into the Air, so as to be difcovera>'le fever al Leagues farther off on the Sea than they would be, were there no such Refrafiion, which is of great Benefit to Navif^aibn for fleering their course in the Night, when they approach near Land ; and iikewije fjr dlreHlni them In the Day-time, mnch more certainly than the most exatt Celefllal Obfervaiions could do by the Help of an unlnflecled Ray, especially in such Places as they have no Scundtngs. [Then he propoies a Method to find by these means the Dulance of O'ojeds at Sea.] V. Dr. if wit's Pofi. Works. Le<ft of Navig. p. 466.

(0) Cum Belgs. in nova. Zembla, hybernarent, Sol lilts apparuit iGdiebus cliiUs, quam reveraln Horiz-onte exlfleret, hoc efl, chm adhuc infra Huriz^ontem deprefj'us effet quatuor tirciter gradibus fjr quidem acre fereno. Varen. Geog. c. 19. Prop. ii.

[these Hollinders] found, that the N"i,ht in that place fliortened no less than a whole Month ; wrjtch mufl needs be a very great Comfort to all such Places as live very far towards the North andSouth Poles, where length of Night, and want of feel n" the Sun, cannot chufe but be very tedious and irkfome. Hook Ibid.

[By nie.insof the Refradions] we fiund the Sun to rife twenty Minutes bifore It fJjonld ; and in the livening to remain above the Horizon twenty Minutes ( or thereabouts ) longer than it fl)ould. Captain James's ]o\\\x\. in Boyl of Cold. Tit. 18. p. 190.

ip) Aer — In Nubes cogttur : humorem-]ue colllgens terram attget imbrlbus: turn effiuens hue <:;r illuc, ventos efficit. Idem annua$ frigorum o" calornm facit varletates: idemque (jTvolatus Alttum fufllnet, a- fpirltu duatts alit Q^ fuflentat animames. Cic. dc Nat. Deor. 1. 1. c. 39.

CHAP.

14 Book I.

C H A P. II.

Of the Winds {a),

TO pass by other Confiderations, whereby I might demonllrate the Winds to be the infinite Creator's Contrivance, I shall infift only upon their great ufefuhiefs to the World. And so great is their Ufc, and of such abfolute necessity are they to the Salubrity of the atmosphere, that all the World would be poifoned without those Agitations thereof. We find how putrid, fetid, and unfit for

Rcfpiration,

(<z) Ventus est aer fiuens, is Seneca's Definition, Na.^. I. 5. And as Wind is a Current of the Air, so that which excites or alters its Currents may be jurtly said to be the cause of the Winds, An iSquipoife of the atmosphere produceth a Calm ; but if that ^quipoife be more or less taken off, a Stream of Air, or Wind, is thereby accordingly produced either stronger or weaker, fwifter or flower. And divers things there are that may make such Alterations in the ^Equipoife or Balance of the atmosphere,^/;^. Eruptions of Vapours from Sea or Land ; Rarefactions and Condenfations in one Place more than another ; the falling of Rain, prelTure of the Clouds, ctt, Pltny, 1. i. c. 45. tells us of a certain Cavern in Dalmatian called Senta, in quem, faith he, deje^o levi pondere, quamvis tranqudlo die, turb'tni fimUts etnicat procella. But as to Caves it is observed, that they often emit Winds more or less. Dr. Connor, taking notice of this ma!:ter,fpecifiesthere,/»r^^«o Neapolitano ex immanl Cuman& SihylU antra tenuem ventum efftueutem percept. The like he observed at the Caves at Ba'is,, and in some of the Mines of Ger-r nmny^ and in the large Salt- Mines of Cracow in Poland. Ubi, faith he, op'tfices, c ipfe fod'ins. domtnm Andreas Morftln^ Nob. Polonus, mihi ajferuerunr, quod tanta altquando Ventorum tempefias ex ambagiofis hujus fod\n& recejJibHs furgere folebat, quod laborantes fojj'ores burnt profternebat, nee non portas c domicilia (qu£ fibi in hac fodink artifices exftruunt) penitus evertebat. Bern. Connor. Differt. Med. Phyf. p. 33. Artie. 3.

And as great Caves, so great Lakes fometimes fend forth Winds. So Gajfendus faith the Lacus Legnim doth, E quo dum txoritHr ftimus» nubti hat^d dnh'ti creanda eftt quA fit brevi in

ttmpefiatem

Chap. II. Of the Winds. 15-

respiration, as well as Health and pleasure, a (lagnating, confined, pent up Air is. And if the whole Mafs of Air and Vapours was always at rest, and without Motion, inltead of refrefhing and animating, it would fuftocate and poifon all the World :

But

tempeftatem fizilfmam exoneranda. Gaffend. Vit. Peiresk. 1. 5. p. 417.

but the mort univcrfal and constant Alterations of the Balance of the atmosphere arc from Heat and Cold. This ii manifest in the General Trade- Winds, blowing all the Year between the Tropicks from Eaft to Weft : if the cause thereof be (as some ingenious Men imagine) the Sun's daily progress round that part of the Globe, and by his Heat rarefying one part of the Air, whilft the cooler and heasier Air behind preffcth after. So the Sea and Land Breezes in Note d. And so in our Climate, the Northerly and Southerly Winds (commonly eftecmed the causes of cold andwarm Weather), are really the l.rTeds of the Cold or Warmth of the Atmo^ fphere : Of which I have had lb many Confirmations, that 1 have no doubt of it. As for instance, it is not uncommon to see a warm Southerly Wind, fuddenly changed to the North, by the fall of Snow or Hail ; to see the Wind in a frofty, cold Morning North, and when the Sun hath well warmed the Earth and Air, you may observe it to wheel about towards the Southerly Quarters ; and again to turn Northerly or Eafterly in the cold Evening. It is from hence alfo, that in Thunder-Showers the Wind and Clouds are oftentimes contrary to one another, (especially if Hail falls) the fukry V\'eathc*r below direding the Wind one way; and the Cold above the Clouds another way. I took Notice upoa March the rof'^ 171V, (and divers such like instances I have had before and since) that the Morning was warm, and what Wind llirred was Weft-South-Weit, but the Clouds were thick and black (as generally they are when Snow enfues) : A little before Noon the Wind veered about to North by Weft, and fometinies to other Points, the Clouds at the same time flying some North by Weft, some South-Well : About one of the Clock it rained apace, the Clouds ftymg fometimcs North- Eaft, then North, and at last both Wind and Clouds fettled North by Weft , At which time Sleet fell plentifully, and it grew very cold. From all which I observe, i. That although our Rtj.ion below was warm, the Region of the Clouds was cold, as the black, fnowy Clouds /hewed, i. That

the

1 6 Of the Winds. Book I.

But the perpetual Commotions it receives from the Gales and Storms, keep it pure and healthful {h).

Neither are those Ventilations beneficial only to the Health, but to the pleasure alfo of the Inhabitants of the Terraqueous Globe J witnefs the Gales which fan us in the heat of Summer j without which, even in this our temperate Zone, Men are scarce able to perform the Labours of their Calling,

or

the ftruggle between the warmth of ours, and the cold of the cloudy Region, flopped the airy Currents of both Regiors. 3. That the falHng of the Snow through our warmer Air melted into Rain at first; but that it became Sleet after the fuperiour Cold had conquered the inferiour Warmth. 4. That, as that Cold prev^iiled by Degrees, so by Degrees it wheeled about both the Winds and Clouds from the Northwards toward- the South.

H.^-pocrptes, 1. z. De Vi(^. Orat. Omnes Ventos vel a. nive, glacte, 'vehement't gelu, fluminibus, &:c. fpirare neceJJ'e judicat, Bartholin, de ufu Nivis, c. i.

(b) It is well observed in my Lord Howard'^ Voyage to Conflantinople, that at Vienna they have frequent Winds, which if they ceafe long in Summer, the Plague often enfues : So that it is now grown into a Proverb, that if Auftria be not windy y it is fubjetl to Contagion. Bohun ot Wind, p, 113.

From some such Commotions of the Air I imagine it is, that at Grand Cairo the Plague immediately ceafes, as foon as the A'//^ begins to overflow ; although Mr. Boy/ attributes it to nitrous Corpufcles. Determ. Nat. of Iffiuv. Chap. 4.

Nulla enim propemodum regio est, qu£ non habeat aliquem fiatum ex fe nafcentem, cr circa fe cadentem.

Inter cxteraitaq; ProvidentiA opera, hoc quoq; aliquis, ut dig' num admiratione fufpexerit. Non enim ex una, causa, Ventos aut invenit, nut per diver/a difpofuit : fed primum ut aera non finerent pigrefcere, fed affidua vexations utilem redderent, vitalernq; trailuris. Sen. Nat. Quaeft. 1. 5. c. 17, 18.

All this is more evident, from the cause afl^gned to malignant epidemical Difeafes, particularly the Plague, by my ingenious, learned Friend, Dr. Mead; and that is, an hot and moift Temperament of the Air, which is observed by Hippocrates, Galen, and the general Hiftories of Epidemical Difeafes, to attend those Diflempers. Vid. Mead of Poifons, EJJdy ^. p. i6r. But indeed, whether the cause be this, or poifonous, malignant Exhalations or Animalcules, as others think,

the

Chap. 11. Of the Winds, xy

or not without Danger of Health and Life {c). But elpccially, witncls the perpetual Gales which throughout the whole Year do fan the Torrid Zone, and make that Climate an healthful and pleafanc

Habitation,

the Winds are however very falutifcrous in such Cafes, in cooling the Air, and dilperling and driving away the moilt or peltit'erous Vapours.

(c) July 8. 1707, (called for some time after the Hot Tuef' d^y,) was so cxceflively hot and fuJocating, by reason there was no Wind flirring, that divers Perfons died, or were in great Danger of Death, in their Harveft-Work. Particuj Luiy one who had formerly been my Servant, a healthy, hirty, young Man, was killed by the Heat : And several Horfcs on the Road dropped down and died the same Day. In the foregoing Notes, having Notice of some Things

I relating to Heat, although it be fomewhat out of the way, I hope the Reader will excufe me, if I entertain him wiuifome observations I made about the Heat of the Air under the Line, compared with the Heat of our Bodies. J. Patncky who, as he is very accurate in making Barometrical and Thermoinetrical Inllruments, had the Curiofuy for the nicer adjulling his Thermometers, to fend two abroad under the Care of two very fenlible, ingenious Men ; one to the Nonhcra Lat. of 81 ; the other to the Parts under the i^quinodial : Itx these two different Climates, the Places were marked where the Spirits Hood at the feverelT: Cold and greatest Heat. And according to thele observations he graduates his Thermometers. With his Standard I compared my Standard Thermometer, from all the Degrees of Cold, I could make with Sal jirmoniack, &c. to the greatest Degrees of Heat our Thermometers would reach to. And with the same Thermometer (of mine) I experimented the greatest Heat of my Body, in July 1709. first in an hot Day without F.xercife, by putting the Ball of my Thermometer under my Armpits, and •ther hotteft Parts of my Body. By which means the Spirits were raised 184 Tenths of an Inch above the Ball. After that, in a much hotter Day, and indeed nearly as hot as any Day with us, and after I had heated my my self with strong Exercife too, as much as I could well bear, I again tried the same Experiment, but could not get the Spirits above 2.88 Tenths ; which 1 thought an inconfiderable Difference, forfo fcemingly a very different Heat of my Body. But from some J^xperiments I have made (altho' I have unfortuaalely forgori8 Of the Winds. Book I.

Habitation, which would otherwife be scarce habitable.

To these I might add many other great Conveniencies of the Winds in various Engines, and various Bufinefles. I might particularly infill upon its great Ufe to tranfport Men to the fartheft diftant Regions of the World {d) and I might particularly speak of the general and coafting Trade-Winds, the Sea, and the Land- Breezes ; {e) the one ferving to carry the Mariner in long Voyages from Eaft to Well } the other ferving to waft him to particular

Places J

ten them) in veryjcold Weather, I imagine the Heat of an healthy Body to be always much the same in the warmeft Parts thereof, both in Summer and Winter. Now between those very Degrees of 184 and z88, the Point of the equatorial Heat falleth. From which observation it appears, that there is pretty nearly an equal Contemperament of the Warmth of our Bodies, to that of the hotteft Part of the atmosphere inhabited by us.

If the Proportion of the Degrees of Heat be defired from the Freezing-Point, to the Winter, Spring, and Summer Air, the Heat of Man's Body, of heated Water, melted Metals, and so to adlual Fire ; an Account may be met with of it, by my most ingenious Friend, the great Sir ifaac Newton, in Phil. TranfaSl. N". Z70.

{d) In hoc Providentia ac Difpofitor Hie Mundi Deus, aera.

"Ventis exercendum dedit, — non ut nos clajfes partem freti occupaturas compleremus mtlite armato, 8cc. Bedit Hie ventos ad cuftodiendam cceli terrarumq; tetnperiem, ad evocandas fuppri" fnendafq; aquas, ad alendos fat(num atq; arborum friiSlus ; quos ad maturltatem cum allis caufis adducit ipfa ja£fatto, attrahens cibum in fnmma, er ne torpeat, promovens. Dedit ventos ad ulteriora nofcenda : fuijfet enim imperitum animal, ^Jine magna experientia rentm Homo, fi circumfcriberetur natali% foli fine. Dedit -ventos tit commoda cujufq; regionis fierent communia ; non ut legiones equilemq; geftarent, nee ut perniciofa gentibui arma tranfveherent. Seneca, ibid.

{e) Sea- Breezes commonly rife in the Morning about nine a Clock. • They firfi approach the Shore gently, as if they were

afraid to come near it. —— It comes in a fine, small, black Curie upon the Water, whereas all the Sea between it and thi shore {not 'jet reached by it) is as fmooth and even as Glafs ir, X Comparifon

Chap. IT. Of the Winds. 19

Places; the one ferving to carry him into his Harbour, the other to bring him out. But I should go too Far to take notice of all Particulars (/). Leaving therefore the Winds, I proceed in the next Place to the Clouds and Rain.

Comparifon. In half an Hours Time after it has reached the shore, it fans pretty briskly, and so encreafeth gradually till tzvelve a Clock; then it is commonly flrongefl, and lajis so till two or three, a very brisk Gale. — ^fter three it begins to die aivay again, and gradually withdrazvi its force till allis ffent ; and about five a Clock — — it is lulled ajleep, and comes no more till next Morning.

And as the 'Sca Breezes do blow in the Bay, And rest in the Kight; so on the contrary [The Land-Breezes] blow in the Hight, and rest in the Day, alternately fucceeding each other.

They spring up betzvecn fix and twelve at Night, and last

till fix, eight, or ten in the Morning. Dampier'f Difc. of Winds, ch. 4.

(f) One Thing 'more I believe some of my Friends will exped from me is, that 1 lliew the RefuU of compaing my own Obfcrvations of the Wmds, with others they know I have from Ireland, Switzerland, Italy, France, New-England, and some of our Parts of England. But the Obfcrvations being some of them but of one Year, and moll of the rest of but a few Years, 1 liave not been able to determme anygreat Matters. The chief of what I have oblerved i', that the Winds in all these Places feldom agree, but when they most certainly do so, it is commonly when the Winds are strong, and of long continuance in the same Quarter : And more 1 think in the Northerly andEafterly, than other Points. Alfo a strong Wind in one Place, is oftentimes a weak one in another Place, or moderate, according as Places have been nearer or farther diftant. Vid. Phil. Tranf N". zp?, and 3zr. But to give a good and tolerable Account of this or any other of the VVeaiher, it is nccefTary to have good Hiftories thereof from all Parts; which, as yet we have but few of, and they imperfed, for want of longer and fuflBicient observations.

C 1 CHAP,

^o ■- Bookie

CHAP. in.

Of the Clouds and Rain.

TH E Clouds and Rain {a) we shall find to be no less ufeful Meteors than the last mentioned 5 as is manifelt in the refrefhing pleafant Shades which the Clouds afford, and the fertile Dews and Showers which they pour down on the Trees and

Plants,

id) Clouds and Rain are made of Vapours raised from Water, or Moiilure only. So that I utterly exclude the Notion of Dry, Terrene Exhalations, or Fumes, talked much of by most: Philofophers ; Fumes being realty no Other than the humid Parts of Bodies refpedively Dry.

these Vapours are demonftratively no other than small Bubbles, or Veiiculse detached from the Waters by the Power of the Solar, or Subterraneous Heat, or both. Of which see Loch 2.. Chap. 5. I^lote {b). And being lighter than the atmosphere. are buoyed up thereby, until they become of an equal Weight therewith, in some of its Regions aloft in ths Air, or nearer the Earth ; in which those Vapours are formed into Clouds, Rain, Snow, Hail, Lightning, Dew, Mifts, and other Meteors,

In this Formation of Meteors the grand Agent is Cold, which commonly, if not always, occupies the fuperior Regions of the Air ; as is manifest from those Mountains which exalt their lofty Tops into the upper and middle Regions, and are always covered with Snow and Ice.

This Cold, if it approaches near the Earth, prefently precipitates the Vapours, either in Dews; or if the Vapours more copioufly afcend, and foon meet the Cold, they are then condenfed into Mifi'mg, or elfe into Showers oi small Rain, falling in numerous, thick, small Drops : But if those Vapours are not only copious, but alfo as heavy as our lower Air it self, (by means their Bladders are thick and fuller of Water,) in this Cafe they become vilible, swim but a little Height above the Earth, and make what we call a Mijl or Jog. But if they are a Degree lighter, so as to mount higher, but not any great Height, as alfo meet not with Cold enough to condenfe them, nor Wind to diffipate them, they then form aa heavy, thick, dark Skjf lafting oftentimes for several Weeks

without

Chap. Iir. Of theClouas and Rain. ^l

Plants, which would languifli and die with perpetual Drought, but arc hereby made Verdant and Flourifliing, Gay and Ornamental ; so that fas the

Pfalmifi:

without either Sun or Rain. And in this Cafe, 1 have scarce ever known it to Rain, till it hath been fi'rjl Fair, ami the?i soul. And Mr. Clarke, (an ingenious Clergyman of Norfolk, who in his Life-time, long before me, took notice of it, and kept a Regider of the Weather for thirty Years, which his learned Grandibn, Dr. Samuel Clarke put into my Hands, he, I say) faith, he scarce ever obftrved the Rule to fail inaJl that Time ; only he adds, // the Wind be in same of the eaflerly Points. But I have observed the same to happen, be the Wind where it will. And from what hath been said, the Cafe is eafily accounted for, "viz. vvhilfl the Vapours remain in the same State, the Weather doth so too. And such Weather is generally attended with moderate Warmth, and with little or no Wind to didurb the Vapours, and an heavy atmosphere to fupport them, the Barometer being commonly high then. But when the Cold appioacheth, and by condenfiiig drives the Vapours into Clouds or Drops, then is way made for the Sun-beams, till the same Vapours, being by further Condenfatidn formed into R;iin, fall down in Drops.

The Cold's approaching the Vapours, and consequently the Alteration of such dark Weather 1 have beforehand perceived, by some few small Drops of Ra!n, Hail, or Snow, now and then falling, before any Alteration hath been m the Weather; which I take to be from the Cold meeting some of the draggling Vapours, or the uppermoft of them, and condenfing them into Drops, before it arrives unto, and exerts it self upon the main Body of Vapours below.

I have more largely than ordinary infilled upon this part of the Weather, partly, as being fornewhat out of the way; but chiefly, because it gives Light to many other Phxnomens of the Weather. Particularly we may hence discover the Original of Clouds, Rain, Hail and Snow; that they are Vapours carried aloft by the Gravity of the Air, which meeting together so as to make a Fog above, they thereby form a Cloud . If the Cold condenfeth them into Drops, they then fal! in Rain, if the Cold be not intenfe enough to freeze then; : But if the Cold freezeth them in the Clouds, or in tjieir Fall through the Air, they then become Hail or Snciv.

As to Lightning, and other efikindled Vapours, I need say

little in this Place, and shall therefore only obfervc, that they

owe alfo their Rife to Vapours ; but such Vapours as are de-

C 3 tacb^d

%% Of the Clouds and Rain. Book I.

Pfalmift faith, Pfal Ixv. 12,13.) The little Hills reioice on every ftde^ and the Falleys Jhout for Joy^ they aljo fmg.

And,

tached from mineral Juices, or at least that are mingled with them, and are fired by Fermentation.

Another Ph&nomenon refolvable from what hath been said is, why a cold, is always a wet Summer, "viz.. because the Vapours rifing plentifully then, are by the Cold foon colleded into Rain. A remarkable Inft^nce of this we had in the Summer of 1708, part of which, especially about the Solfiice., was much colder than itfually. On June ii, it was so cold, that my Thermometer was near the Point of hoar Frott, and in some Places I heard there was an hoar Froft; and during all the cool Weather of that Month, we had frequent and large Rains, so that the whole Month's Rain amounted to above two Inches Depth, which is a large Quantity for Upm'tnjlerf even in the wetteft Months. And not only with us at Upminfier, but in other Places, particularly at Zurich in Switzerland, they seem to have had as unieafonable Cold and Wet as

"we. Fuit hie menfis pr&ter modum humidus, c* magna

quidem vegetabilibus hominihufque damno. Multum computruit Faenitmy &c. complains the induftriousand learned Dr. J. J, Scheuchzer : Of which, and other Particulars, I have given a larger Account in Phil. Tranf, N". 311.

In which TranfaSlion I have observed farther, that about the Equinoxes we (at Upminjier&i least) have oftentimes more Rain than at other Seafons. The reason of which is manifest from what hath been said, -viz. in Spring, when the Earth and Waters «,re loofed from the brumal Conftipations, the Vapours arife in great Plenty : And the hke they do in Autumn, when the Summer Heats, that both diffipated them, and warmed the fuperior Regions, are abated ; and then the Cold of the fuperior Regions meeting them, condenfeth them into Showers, more plentifully than at other Seafons, when either the Vapours are fewer, or the Cold that is to condenfe them is less.

The manner how Vapours are precipitated by the Cold, or reduced into Drops, I conceive to be thus : Vapours being, as I said, no other than inflated VeficuU of Water ; when they meet with a colder Air than what is contained in them, the contained Air is reduced into a less Space, and the watery Shell or Cafe rendered thicker by that means, so as to become heavier than the Air, by which they are buoyed up, and consequently inuft needs fall down. Alio many ot those

thickned

Chap. III. Of the Clouds and Ram. a 3

And, if to thcfe Ufes, we Ihould add the Origine of Fountains and Rivers, lu Vapours and the

Rains,

thickned VeficuU run into one, and so form Drops, greater or smaller, according to the Quantity of Vapours colkdcd together.

As to the Rain of ;difFcrcnt Places, 1 have in some of our Tr<j»/.jt//oMial]igncd the Quantities ; particularly in the last cited TranJacHon, I have alilgned thele, viz. tiie Depth of the Rain one Year with another, in Engltjlj Meal'urc, if it was to ftagnate on the Earth, would amount unto, at Tozvnely in Lancajhire, 41 -|- Inches ; at Upminjier in tpx rp-^- Inches; at Zurich in Switzerland^!. '^ Inches; at i^ //a in /f 4/^43 -^ Inches; at Paris in France 19 inches ; and at Lijle in Flanders 14. Inches.

It would be endlefs to reckon up the bloody and other prodigious Rains taken notice of by Hiliorians, and other Authors, as praeternatural and ominous Accidents; but, if ftndlly pried mto, will be found owing to natural causes : Of which, for the Reader's Satisfadion, I will give an Inlhnce or two. A bloody Rain was imagined to have fallen in France, which put the Country People into so great a Fright, that they left their Work in the Fields, and in great hafte flew to the Neighbouring houses. Feirifc (then in the Neighbourhood) Ihidtly enquiring into the cause, found it to be only red Drops coming from a sort of Butterfly that flew about in great Numbers at that Time, as he concluded from feeing such red Drops come from them ; and because these Drops were laid, Kon fupra Adificia, non in deve.xis lapidum fnperficiebus, uti dcbuerat contingere, fi e coelo fangtiine pluijfct ; Jedin fubcavis potim CT* in forarninibus. ■■■ Accifftt, quod parietes lis tingebantur, r.on qui in wediis oppidis, Jed qui agrorum vicini erant neque fecundum partes elattores, fed ad tnediocrem foiurn altitudinem, quantam volitare PapiUones folent. Gaflend in vit. Peiresk, L. i. p. 156.

So Dr. Merret faith alfo, Pluvia Sanguinis quam certijfime confiat ejfe tantitm Infetlorum e/crementa : Pluvia Tritici quam nihil aliud ejfe quam HederA hacciftrA grana a Stumis devorata excretaque comparanti liquidijjimepatet. Pinax rerum, ere. p. izo.

The curious Worm tells of the raining of Brimftone, An. 1646. Maii \6. Hie HafntA cum ingenti pluvia. tota urbs, cmnefque it a inundarentur plattA, ut grej]us hominum impediret, Sulphureoque odort aerem inficeret, dilapjis aliquantulum aquis, quibujdam tn locis colltgere licuit Sulphureum pulverem, cujus portion:m fervo^ colore, odore, v aliis verum Sulphur ferentem. Muf. Worm. L. I. c. II. Sed. I.

C 4 Togfthcx

14 Of the Clouds and Rain. Book I.

Rainsj as some of the moil eminent modern Philofophers

Together with the Rain we might take notice of other Meteors, particularly Snow ; which although an irkfome Gueft, yet hath its great Ufes, if all be true that the famous T. Barthol'm faith of it, who wrote a Book de Nhis ufu Medico. In which he fliews of what great Ufe Snow is in trudifying the Earth, preferving from the Plague, curmg Fevers, Colicks, Head-Aches, Tooth-Aches, Sore Eyes, Pleurifies, (for which Ufe he faith his Country- Women of Denmark keep Snow-Water gathered in March), alfo in prolonging Life, (of which he inftanceth in the Alpine Inhabitants, that Uve to a great Age,) and preferving dead Bodies ; Inftancesof which he gives in Ferlbns buried under the Snow in palTing the ^Z/);, which are found uncorrupted in the Summer, when the Snow is melted; which fad Spedlade he himself was an Eye-Witcefs of And at Spitz,berg m Greenland, dead Bodies remain entire and uncorrupted tor thirty Years, And lafily, concerning such as are so prelerv'd when flain, he faith they remain in the same posture and Figure : Of which he gives this odd Example, Vifum id extra urhem nofiram [Hafniam] quutn, II leb. i6^g. oppugnantes ho/les repellerenfur, magnaque flrage occumberent ; alii enim rigidi iratum ■vultum oftendebant, alii oculos elatos, alii ore didu6lo ringentes, alii brachiis extenfis Gladium minari, alii alio fitu projirati jacebant. Barthol. de ufu Niv c. 11.

But although Snow be attended with the Eifeds here named, and others fpecified by the learned Bartholin; yet this is not to be attributed to any peculiar Virtue in the Snow, but some other cause. Thus when it is said to fru6lif<^ the Earth, it doth so by guarding the Corn or other Vegetables against the intenfer cold of the Air, especially the cold piercing Winds; which the Husbandmen observe to be the moil: injurious to their Corn of all Weathers. So for Conferring dead Bodies, it doth it by conftipating such Bodies, and preventing all such Fermentations or internal Conflids of their Particles, as would produce Corruption.

Such an Example as the preceding is said to have happened some Years ago at Paris, in digging in a Cellar for supposed hidden Treafure; in which, after digging some Hours, the Maid going to call her Mafter, found them all in their digging postures, but dead. This beingnoifed abroad, brought in not only the People, but Magiftrates alfo, who found them accordingly ; llle qui ligone terrameffoderat, csf focius qui pala fjfoffam ierram removerat, ambo pedibus ftabant, quafi fuo quifquc op^ri affixHS incnhuijfet ; uxor unius qtiaji ab opere defejfn in fcamno^

folifm

I

Chap. in. Of the Clouds and Rain, 15fopheis {b) have done, \vc should have another Inftancc of the great Uleand Benefit of that Meteor. And now, if we reflect upon this neccfl'iry Appendage of the Terraqueous Globe, the Atmo[pherc j and consider the abfolute necessity thereof to many Ufcs of our Globe, and its great Convenience to the whole: And in a Word, that it anfwereth all the Ends andPurpofcs that we can fuppofc there can be for such an Appendage: Whocan butownthistobc the Contrivance, the Work of the great Creator ? W ho would ever (liy or imagine such a Body, so different from the Globe it fcrves, could be made by Chance, or be adapted so exa(!:tly to all those forementioned grand Ends, by any other Efficient than by the Power and wisdom of the infinite God! Who would not rather, from so noble a \Vork,

folicuo quodiim viihu, ferlebat, incUvato in palmam manits genibui innitentis capite; psierulus laxatis braccis tn margmeexcA'- •pat A fovea dcfixis tn terram oculis alvrim exonerabac ; omnes /» naturali fittty carneAtanqnam jlatuz rigiJi, apertis oculis o'vidtu viiarn qitafi rcfpirante, exanimes J/abant. Dr. Bern. Connor, Diffcrt. Med. Phyf. ;>. 15.

The Dodor attributes all thi? to Cold ; but I scarce think there couM be Cold enough to do all this at Paris, and in a Cellar too. But Is following Stories are not improbable, of Men and Cattle k.lled with Cold, that remained m the very same Pollure in which they died; of which he gives, from a Spanijli Captain, this Inflance, that happened two Yc:irs before, of a Soldier who unfortunately ftraggled from his Company that were foraging, and was killed with the Cold, but was thought to have fallen mto the Enemies Hands. But foon after their return to their Quarters, they faw their Comrade returning, fit'.ing on Horfeback, and coming to congratulate him, found him dead, and that he had been brought thither in the same Pcfturc on Horfeback, notwithRanding the jolting of the horse. Ibid.piS.

(b) Of this Opinion was my late molt ingenious and learned Friend, Mr. Ray, whose Reafonsfee in his Phyftco-Theclcg. Biffourfes, Difc. z. ch. z. p. 89, c~r. So alfo my no less learned and ingenious Friends, Dr HalUy, and the latp Dr. Hook, mapy of the French Vcrtuofo's alfo, and divers other very coniiderablc Men before them, too many to be fpecificd here.

readily

26 Of Light. Book I.

readily acknowledge the Workman {c) and as eafily conclude the atmosphere to be made by God, as an Inftrument wrought by its Power, any Pneumatick Engine, to be contrived and made by Man !

CHAP. IV.

Of Light.

THUS much for the first Thing miniftring to the Terraqueous Globe, the atmosphere and its Meteors 5 the next Appendage is X/g/-^/. ia) Concerning which I have in my Survey of the Heavens (^) ihewed what admirable Contrivances the infinitely vyife Creator hath for the affording this noble, glorious,

(c) An Polycletum quidem adm'irab'tmur propter parthtm StatuA—convenient'tam ac proportionem? Naturam autem nonmodo non laudabimus, fed omni et'tam arte privahimus, qua part'tum proportionem non foltitn extrinfecus more Statuariorum, fed in profundo etiam fervavit ? Nonne c* Polycletus ipfe NaturA eji itnitator, in quibus faltem earn potuit imitari .? Potuit autem in folis externispartibus in quibus artem confideravit. With much more to the like Purpole, Galen. deUf Part. I. 17. c. i.

{a) It is not worth while to enumerate the Opinions of the Artfiotelians, Cartefians, and others, about the Nature of Light, Arifiotle mzkingit zQn^lity; C4r«; a Pulfion, or Motion of the Globules of the fecond Element, Vid. Cartes Prin- (ip. p. 3. §. 55,crc. But with the Moderns, I take Li^^^tocon- M of material Particles, propagated from the Sun, and other luminous Bodies, not inftantaneoufly, but in time, according to the Notes following in this Chapter. But not to infift upon other Arguments for the Proof of it, our noble Founder hath proved the Materiality of Light and Heat, from adlual Experiments on Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Spelter, Iron, Tutenage, and other Bodies>^xpofed (both naked and closely (hut up) to the Fire: All which were constantly found to receive an Increment of Weight. I wifti he could have met with a favourable Seafon to have tried his Experiments with the Sunbeams as he intended, vid, Boyl Exp. to make Fire and Flame, ponderable.

{b) Aftro-Theol. Book 7.

{e) Gen.

Chap. IV. Of Light. If

rioiis, and comfortable Benefit to other Globes, as well as oursi theProvifionhe hath made by Moons, as well as by the Sun, for the Communication of it.

And now let us briefly consider the great Ncceflity and Ufe thereof to all our Animal World. And this we shall find to be little less than the very Life and pleasure of all those Creatures. For what Benefit would Life be of, what pleasure, what Comfort would it be for us to live in perpetual Darknefs? How could we provide our selves with Food and Neceflaries ? How could we go about thelcaft business, correfpond with one another, or be of any Ufe in the World, or any Creatures be the same to us, without Light, and those admirable Organs of the Body, which the great Creator \i\\.\i adapted to the Perception of that great Benefit?

But now by the help of this admirable, this firflmade (0, because most necellliry, Creature of God, by this, I fiiy, all the Animal World is enabled to go here and there, as their Occafions callj they can tranfacl their business by Day, and refrefliand recruit themselves by Night, with rest and Sleep. They can with Admiration and pleasure, behold the glorious Works of God j they can view the Glories of the Heavens, and see the Beauties of the flowry Fields, the gay Attire of the feathered Tribe, theexquifitc Garniture of many Qtiadrupcds, Infefts, and other Creatures i they can take in the delightfome Landskips of divers Countries and Places j they can with Admiration see the great Creator's wonderful Art and Contrivance m the Parts of Animals and Vegetables : And in a word, behold the Harmony of this lower World, and of the Globes above, and furvey God's exquifite Workmanfliip in every Creature.

(0 Gen. 1.3. jiKdCodja,d, Let there le Light, and /here wm Ui'nt.

To

2.8 Of Light. Book I.

To all which I might add the Improvements which the Sagacity of Men hath made of this noble Creature of God, by the Refradions and Refleftions of GlafTes. But it would be endlefs to enumerate all its particular Ufesand Benefits to our World.

3ut before I leave this Point, there are two Things concerning Light, which will deferve an efpecial Remark j and that is, its fwift and almost inftantaneous Motion, and its vast Extenfion.

I , It is a very great A6t of the Providence of God, that so great a Benefit as Light is, is not long in its Pafilige from Place to Place. For was the Motion thereof no fwifter than the Motion of the fwifceft Bodies on Earth, such as of a Bullet out of a great Gun, or even of a Sound {d) (which is the fwifceil Motion we have next Light), in this Cafe Light would take up, in its progress from the Sun to us above thirty two Years at the rate of the first, and above feventeen Years at the rate of the latter Motion.

The Inconveniencies of which would be, its Energy and Vigour would be greatly cooled and aba*

ted J

{i) It may not be ungrateful to the Curious, to take notice of the Velocity of these two Things.

According to the observations of Merfennas, a BuIIet-ftiot Q\^X of a great Gun, flies pz Fathom in a Second of Time, (vtd. Merfen.Balift.) which is equal 10589-! Feet Englijh, and according to the Computation of Mr. Huygens, it would be a 5 Years in passing from the Earth to the Sun. But according to my own observations made with one of her Majefty's Sakersy and a very accurate Pendulum- Chronometer, a Bullet, at its first Difcharge, flies 510 Yards in five half Seconds, which is a Mile in a little above 17 half Seconds. And allowing the Sun's distance to be, as in the next Note, a Bullet would be yr^ Years in flying with its utmoft Velocity to the Sun.

As to the Velocity of Sound, {ee Book i\. Chap. 1. Notei^. according to which rate there mentioned, a Sound would be near 17 v Years in flying as far as the difl:ance is from the Earth to the Sun. Confer here the Experiments of the 4i ead, dd Ciment, p. X40, &c» - ■ ■ ■' '■" . (♦) M^i

Chap. IV. Of Light. 19

ted i its Rays would be Ids penetrant ; and Darkncfs would with greater Difficulty and much Sluggiflincfs, be dillipatcd, cfpccially by the fainicr Lights of our Tublunary, luminous Bodies. Butpafling with such prodigious Velocity, with nearly the inllantaneous Swihnels of almoil: Two hundred thoufand En^UjJ) Miles in one Second of Tunc, {e) or (which is the same'i'hing) being but about levcn or eight Minutes of an Hour in coming from the Sun to us, therefore with all Security and Speed, we receive the kindly Eftc£ls and Influences of that noble and ufeful Creature of God.

2. Another Thing of great Confederation about Light is, its vail Expanfion, it's almoil incomprehenfible, and mconceivable Extenlion, which as a

(0 Mr. Romer's ingenious Hypothefis about the Velocity of Light, hath been ellabliQied by the Roy.il Acafnedy, and in the Obfervatory for eight Years, as our Phil. Iranf. i\°. 136. obfervc from the Joarn. des Scavans ; ourmoft eminent Allronomers alfo in England admit it : But Dr. Hook thinks with Moniieur Cartes, the Motion of Light Inllantancous, Hook Pojl. Works t pag. 77. And this he endeavours to explain, pag. 130, &c.

What Mr. Romer's Hypothefis is, may be seen in the Phil. TraTjJacl. before- cned : As alio in the before commended Sir J/aac Nezvton's Optichs : Light h propagated from luminous todies in time, and fpends about feven or eight Minutes of an Hour in pajfing from the. Sun to the Earth. This zvas first obfervcd by Romcr, and then by others, by means of the EcUpfes of the Satellites of Jupiter. For theje Eclipfes, when the Earth ts between the Sun and Jupiter, happen about /even or eight Minutes fooner than they ought to do by the Tables ; and 'cvhen the Earth is beyond the ©, they happen about feven or eight Minutes later than they ought to do : The reason being, that the Light of the Satellites hath farther to go in the latttr Cafe than in the former, by the Diameter of the Earth's Orbit. Newt. Opt. L. 1. Part. 3. Prop. 11.

Now forafmuch as the Dilhnce between the Sun and the Earth (according to the Computations in my Aflro-lheology^ B. I. ch. 3. Note z.) is 86051398 Englifj Miles ; therefore, at the rate of 7 4- Minutes, or 450 Seconds in palling from the Sun, Light will be found to fly above 1912Z5 Miles in one Second of Time.

late

50 Of Light. Book I.

late ingenious Author (/) faith, " Is as boundlefs *' and unlimited as the tJniverfe it self, or the Ex- " panfum of all material Beings : The vaftnefs of " which is so great, that it exceeds the Comprehen- " fiono of Man's understanding. Infomuch thatve- " ry many have aflerted it absolutely infinite, and " without any Limits or Bounds.

And that this noble Creature of God is of this Extent, ig) is manifest from our feeing some of the farthefl diftant Obje61:s, the heavenly Bodies, some

(/) Dr. Hook Poft. Works. Le<fi. of Li^ht, pag. 7 6.

{g) For the proof of this vafl: Extent of Light, 1 (liall take the Computation of the same great Man, pag. 77. If, faith he, we conjider first the vast Di/iance between us and the Suff, which from the hefl and lateft observations in Ajironotny^ is judged to be about loooo Diameters of the Earth, each of which is about 'jgt^ Enghfh Miles; therefore the Sun's difiance is "jgi^ooo Miles ; and if we consider that according to the observations, which 1 publiflud to prove the Alotion of the Earth, [which were observations of the Parallax of some of the fixt Stars in the Head oi Draco, made in 1699] the whole Diameter of the Orb, viz. 2.0000, made the Subtenfe but of one Minute to one of the fixt Stars, which cannot therefore be Icfs difiant than 3438 Diameters of this great Orb, and confec^uentlj 6876000Q Diameters of the Earth : And if this Star be one of the neareji, and that the Stars that are of one Degree lejfer in Magnitude (/ mean not of the Second Alagnitude, because there may be fnany Degrees between the first and fecond) be as much farther ; and another sort yet ^mailer be three times as far; and a fourth four times as far, and so onward, possibly to some 100 Degrees of Magnitude, such as may be discovered by longer and longer Telefcopes, that they may be 100 times as far; then certainly this material Expanfion, a part of which we are, must he so great, that 'tzvill infinitely exceed our fljallow Conception to imagine. Now, by what J la/i mentioned, it is evident that Light extends it self to the utmoft imaginable Parts, and by the help of Telefcopes we collefi the Rays, and make them sensible to the Eye, zvhich are emitted from some of thealmoft inconceivably

remote Obje6ls, &CC. Nor is it only the great Body of the

Sun. or the vast Bodies of the fixt Stars, that are thus able to difperfe their Light through the vafl Expanfum of the Uni' vcrfe ; but the smallest Spark of a lucid Body must do the very same Things even the smallest Glohnle ftrttck from a Steel by a Flintf &c.

with

Chap.V. Of Gravity. 31

with our naked Eye, fomc with the help of Optical Inftrumcnts, and others in all Probability farther and farther, with better and better Inlhuments: And had we Inlbuments of Power equivalent to the Extent of Light, the luminous Bodies of the utmort: Parts of the Univerfc, would for the same reason bevifiblc too.

Now as Light is of greatest Ulc to impower us to see Objects at all, so the Extenfion thereof is nolefs ufeful to enable us to see Objeds afui off. By which means we are afforded a Ken of those many glorious Works of the infinite Creator, visible in the Heavens, and can improve them to some of the noblefl Sciences, and mod excellent Ufes of our own Globe.

C H A P. V.

Of Gravity.

THE last Thing fubfervient to our Globe, that I (hall take notice of, is Gravity (a),, or that Tendency which Bodies have to the Centre of the Earth.

In

(a) That there is such a Thing as Gravity, is manit'est from its Mftedis here upon Earth ; and that the Heavenly Bodies attradt or gravitate to one another, when placed at due distances, is made highly probable by Sir Ifaac Newton, This attradive or gravitating Fewer, I take to be congenial to Matter, and imprinted on all the Matter of the Univerfe by the Creator's Flat at the Creation. What the Catife of it is, the Newtonian Philofophy doih not pretend to determine for want of Phaenomena, upon which Foundation it is that that Philofophy is grounded, and not upon chimerical and uncertain Hypothcfes : But v/hatever the cause is, that cause penetrates ezen to the Centers of the Sun and Planets, zvithont any Diminution cf its Virtue; and it aileth not according to the Superjicies of BO' dies {as Mechanical causes do) but in proportion to the Gluantity of their folid Matter ; and lastly, // a:hth all round it at immtnfe B'tjiances, decrtajing in duplicate proportion to those

Dijiances,

32, ^ Of Gravity, Book I.

In my Jflro-I'heology^ Book 6. Ch. l. I have shewn of what abfolute NecefTityj and what a

noble

D'lfiantes, as Sir Ijaac Newton faith, Prlncip. pag. ult. What uleful Dedudions, and what a rational Philofophy have been drawn from hence, may he fcen in the same Book.

This Attraction, or Gravity, as its Force is in a certain proportion, so makes the Defcent of Bodies to be at a certain rate. And was it not for the Refiiknce of the Medium, all Bodies would defcend to the Earth at the same rate; the lighteft Down, as fwiftly as the heavieft Mineral : As is manife-lHn the Air-Putnp, in which the lighteft Feather, Duft, er<r. and a piece of Lead, drop down feemingly in the same Time, from the top to the bottom of a tall exhaufted Receiver.

The rate of the Defcent of heavy Bodies, according to GaliUo, Mr. Hwygensy and Dr. Halley (after them) is i6 Feet one Inch in one Second of Time; and in more Seconds, as the Squares of those Times. But in some accurate Experiments made in St. Paul's Dome, June 9. 17 10, at the Height of 22LO Feet, the Defcent was scarcely 14 Feet in the first Second. The Experiments were made in the Prefence of some very considerable Members of the Royal Society, by Mr. Havjksbee, their Operator, with glafs, hollow Balls, some empty, some filled with Quick- filver, the Barometer at 297, the Thermometer 60 Degrees above Freezing. The Weight of the Balls, their Diameters, and Time of the Defcent is in this Table.

Bal

is filled with

?.

Empty Balls.

Weight.

1 )iainrt' r.

Time.

i'Secds.'

Weight.

Diameter.

Time.

Grains.

■f I'P :'CI^

Urams.

!nch.| Tenth.

4- Seeds.

b

I

8 less.

S

S

I

8 more.

SrS

5 nearly

1 64

8 '

5: nearly

8 more.

5 1 i

The reason why the heavy, full Balls fell in half the Time of the hollow ones, was the Refiftence of the Air : Which Refiftence is very ingeniouily and accurately alTigned by Dr. Wallts, in Philof. Tranf. N^. 1 86. And the cause of the Refiftence of all Fluids, (as Sir Ifaac Ne-vton, Opt. Q. lo.) is partly from the Fri£lion of the Parts of the Fluid, partly from the Lnia thereof. The Refiftence a fpherical Body meets with from Fiidion, is as the right Angle under the Diameter,

ana

Chap. V. Of Gravity. n

noble Contrivance this of Gravity is, for keeping the tcvcral Globes of the Univerfe from fhattcring to Pieces, as they evidently must do in a little Time by their fwifc Rotation round their own Axes {by The Terraqueous Globe particularly, which circumvolvcsac the rate of above icoo Miles an Hour (c)^

would

and the Velocity of the moving Body : And the Rcfidence from the Vu inertts, is as the Square of that Pre dudt.

For a farther Accoimt of the Properties and Proportions, CT-c. of Gravity in the Fall or Projection of Bodies, I <liail tcfer to the larger Accounts of (jaiiuus, Tornceliiit'., htrjgens. Sir IJaac Newton, 8cc. of to the fliurtir Accounts of Dr. Hatley in Philof. Tranf. abridged by Mr. Lorvthorp, Vol. T. p. 561. or Dr. Clarkr in his Notes on Rohaulr, Phy'.^. c. iS. §.13, 16. And for the Relilleiice of Fluids, I refer to Dr. IVallis before-cited, and the yld. Erndit. Lipf. May 1693. where there is a way to find the Force of Mediums upon Bodies of different Figures.

{b) That the heavenly Bodies move round their own Axe?» is, beyond all doubt, manifell to our Eye, in fqmc of them, from the Spots visible on them. The Spots on the Sun (eafily visible with an ordinary Glafs) do manifefl him to revolve round his own Axis in about 25-5: Days. The Spots on % and f prove those two Planets to revolve alfo from Eaft to Wcfl, as Dr. Hook discover'd in 1664, arxi i66j. And $ alfo (although near the strong Rays of the Sun) haili, uom some Spots, been discovered by Mr. Caffmt, in 1666, and X667, to have a manifelt Rotation. V. Lvwth. Ahndg.VoX. i. p. 381, and 4x3, 425. And futh Uniformity hath the Creator obl'crvd in the Works of Nature, that what is obfervable in one, is generally to be found in all others of the same kind. So that since 'tis manifefl the Sun, and three of his Planets whirl round, it is very reafonable to conclude all the rest do so too, yea, every Globe of the Univerfe.

(c) The Earth's Circumference being 150314- Miles, (according to Book II Chap. 2. Note a.) if we divide that into ^4 Hours, we ftiall find the Motion of the Earth to be nearly X043 Miles in an Hour. Which, by the by, is a far more teafonablc and less. rapid Rate, than that of the Sun would be, if we fuppofc the Earth to Hand flill, and the Sun to move round the Earth. For accordmg to the Proportions ia Note e, of the preceding Chapter, the Circumference of the Mafnut Orbis is 540686115 Kngitjl) Miles, which divided by ^2^ Hours, gives Z2JZ8364 Miles in an Hour- But what is

34 Q/* Gravity. Book I.

would by the centrifugal force of that Motion, be foon diffipated and fpirtled into the circumambient Space, was it not kept together by this noble Contrivance of the Creator, this natural inherent Power, namely, the Power of Attra6tion or Gravity.

And as by this Power our Globe is defended against Diffipation, so all its Parts are kept in their proper Place and Order. All material Things do naturally gravitate thereto, and unite themselves therewith, and so preferve its Bulk intire {d). And the fleeting Waters, the mod unruly of all its Parts, do by this means keep their conflant sequipoife in the Globe (if), and remain in float Place ivhichj the Pfalmift faith, God had founded fof ibem', a bound he had set^ ijuhich they might not pass j that they turn mt again to cover the Earthy Pfal. civ. 8, p. So, that even in a natural Way, by virtue of this excellent Contrivance of the Creator, the observation, of the Pfamjft is perpetually fulfilled, Pfal. Ixxxix, p. Thou rule ft the raging of the Sea j when the fVaves thereof arife^ thou fiilleft them.

To these, and an hundred other Ufes of Gravity that I might have named, I shall only juft mention another Thing owing to it, and that is Levity

I

this to the Rapidity of the fixt Stars, if we suppose themj,' not the Earth, to move ^ Which is a good Argument for the Earth's Motion.

(d) Nihil tnaJHS, quam quod it a ftabilis efl Mitndus, atque ita cohjiret ad permanendum, ut nihil ne excogitari quidem pofftt aptins. Omnes enim partes ejus undique medium locum cafejfe-iTteSy nitmitur dqualiter : maxim^c autem corpora inter fe junSla permanent, cum quodam qitafi vinculo circumdata colligantur : quod facit ea natura, quA per omnem mundum omnia Mente, osr Ratione conficiens, funditur, ZP" ad medium rapit, c?* convertit extrema, ClC. de Nat. Deor. 1.2. C. 45.

(e) Eadem ratione Mare, cum fupra terram fit, medium tamen terr& locum expetens, conglobatHr ttndique &qualiter, nequt rtdundat unqnam, neque effunditur. Id. paulo poft.

(/} that

Chap. V. Of Gravity, ^T

(/), that, whereby what we call liglit Bodies swim, a Thing no Icfs ufcful ro ihc World than its oppopoHcc, Gravity^ is inmanyRefpefts, to divers Tribes of Animals, but pai ticularly fcrviccablc to thcraifing up of Vapours {giy and to their Conveyance abouc the World.

(/) That there is no such Thing as pojitive Levity, but that Levity is only a less Gravity, is abundantly m:ifiitcl>cd by the acute Setg. Alph. Borelli He Mot. a Grnv. fetid, cap. 4. See alfo the Annotations of the learned and ingenious Dr. CUrk on Rohaultl Phyf. p. r. c, 1 6. Note 3. Alfo the Exper. of the Acad, dil Citncnto, p. 118, 8cc. Dr. Walla's Difc. of Gravity and GravitalioH before the Royal Society, Nov. 12. 1674. p. 28, err.

{g) 1 have before in Note a, Chap. 3. (lievi-n whit Vapours are, and how they are rais'd. That which I Hull here note, is their Quantity : Concerning which the before-commended Dr. Halley hath given us some curious Experiments in our Phd. Tranfat'i. which may be met with together in Mr. Loivthorp'% Abridg. Vol. II. p. 108. and Ii6. Mr. Sedilcau alfo at Paris observed it for near three Years. By all their Obfervationsit appears, that in the Winter Months the Evaporations are leall, and greatest in Summer, and rnoft of all in windy Weather. And hy Mcvfieur Sedileans observations it appears, that what is railed in Vapours, exceeds that which falleth in Rain. In the fcven lalt NIonths of the Year 1688, the Evaporations amounted to 22 Inches 5 Lines ; but the Rain only to Inches 6 j Lines : In 1689, the Evaporations were 32 Inches 10 \ Lines; but the Ram 18 Inches i Line : In 1690, the Evaporations 30 Inches 11 Lines; the Ram 11 Inchet-jof a Line. Vid. Mim. de Math. Phyf. Ann. 1692. p. 25.

If it be demanded, What becomes of the Overplus of Exhalations that defcend not in Rain .•* I answer, They are partly tumbled down and fpent by the Windr, 2nd partly defcend in Dews, which amount to a greater quantity than is commonly imagmcd. Dr. Halley found the delcent of Vapours in Dews so prodigious at St. Helena, that he makes no c'.oubt to attribute the Origine of Fountains thereto. And I my fclf have seen in a Hill, cool Evening, large thick Clouds hanging, without any Motion in the Air, which in two or three Hours Time have been melted down by Degrees, by the cold of the Evening, so that not any the Icaft Remains of them havcbee n left.

D z An4

B^ 0/ Gravity, Book I.

And now from this tranfient View of no other than the Out- works, than the bare Appendages of the Terraqueous Globe, we have so manifefta Sample of the V/ifdom, Power, and goodness of the infinite Creator, that it is cafy to imagine the whole Fabrick is oF a Piece, the Work of atleaft a skilful Artift. A Man that should meet with a Palace (/:?}, befet with plcafant Gardens, adorned with (lately Avenues, furniihed with v/ell-contrived Aquedu6i:s5 Cafcades, and all other Appendages conducing to Convenience or pleasure, would eafily imagine, that proportionable Architefture and Magnificence were within : But we should conclude the Man was out of his Wits that should afleit and plead that all was the Work of Chance, or other than of some wife and skilful Hand. And so when we furvey the bare Out-woiks of this our Globe, when we see so vast a Body, accouter'd with so noble a Furniture of . Aif, Light and Gravity 5 with every Thing, in iTiort, that is necessary to the Prefervation and Security of the Globe it fclf, or that conduceth to the Life, Health, and Happinefs, to the Propagation and Increafe of all the prodigious Variety of Creatures the Globe is flocked with 5 when we see nothing wanting, nothing redundant or frivolous, nothing botching or ill-made, but that everything, even in the very Appendages alone, exadtly anfwercth all its Ends and Occafions : What elfe can be concluded, but that all was made with manifest design, and that all the whole Strudure is the Work of some intelligent Being 5 some Artift, of Power and Skill equivalent to to luch a Work ?

(h) See Book II. Cba^. 3. i^ttt c, . f

Of the Terraqueous Globe it self in general,

j^^WS.^ ^^^ foregoing Book having difparch'J jgryi^j rhe Ouc-works, let us take a Survey of the ^LJpi Principal Fabrick, -viz. the terraqueous ^^^MB^ Globe it fclfi a most: Itupendious Work in every particular of it, which doth nolefsaggran-' dize its Maker (^), than every curious, complete Work, doth its Workman. Let us call our Eyes here and there, let us ranfack all the Globe, let us with the grcatell Accuracy infpc6t every part thereof, fearch out the inmoll Secrets of any of the Creatures J let us examine them with all our Gauges, mcafurc them with our nicefl; Rules, pry into them

(^a) Licet oculis quodammodo contemplari pulrhritud'metn

earum rcnitn, quas Divini Provide>itia dicimus coa/Iiruta!. Ac prir,cipio lerra univerfa cernatur, local a in t}iefiiA Tn::)hi: fede^

jolida, o" ^lobofa vcjlita florihus, herb'ts, ariori'oits, fru^tbui.

(S^ucnun 07nTnum incredtbilts mulntudn, jnjatiabiit vanetate difttnguitur. yldde hue Fontiutn gelidai perenr.itates , ILjuores ptrlucidos jimnium, Riparum vejiitns 'Vir'idifjnna, Spel',incaruM concavas ahitttdincs, Saxorum a/peritates, irni'ehdentiu7» A.'ontiutn altitudines, tnimenfiiatefque Camporum : Adde etiarn r;-

conditas ylnri venas- ..^—ffha verb, c quam vaiia genc'

rA Be/lifirun} ? ohtt Volttcrum lapjus, atijite lanrus ? (fjuk

Pecudiim paftus ? "iljtd de Homin:<7n gfnere .iicatn ' <-^ti

quaji ciiUores terrA conjiUnti, &:c. -■ ■ ■ ■ tiVy* /», nt animis, Jic oculis videre poffem^s, netno cunflAm iyttuens tfran, de D$- vinii Rafions dnbitartt, Cic. de Nat. Deor. l.i. c. 3?.

P 3 Witb

38 Of theTerr aqueous Globe^ Sec. Book II.

with our Microfcopes, and most exquifite Inflruments {b) still we find them to bear Teftimony to their infinite Workman 5 and that they exceed all humane Skill lb far, as that the most exquifite Copies and Imitations of the best Artifts, are no other than rude bungling Pieces to them. And so far are we from being able to efpy any Defe6t or Fault in them, that the better we know them, the more we admire them ; and the farther we see into them, the more exquifite we find them to be. And for a Oemonfiration of this ; I ihall,

I. Take a general Profpe6b of the Terraqueous Globe.

II. Survey its Particulars.

I. The Things which will fall under a general Profpcct of the Globe, will be its Figure, Bulk, Motion. Place, Dijiribution into Earth and Waters, and the ^reat Fariety of all Things upon it and in it.

yp) I cannot here omit the observations that have been made in these later Times, since we have had the Ufe and Improve- Pie?it of the MicTOkope, concerning the great Difference, vjhich by the helj? of that, doth appear betwixt Natural and Artificial Things. Whatever is Natural, doth by that appear adorned with all imaginable Elegance and Beauty. •• Whereas the 7noft iurious Works of Art, the Jharpeji, fineji Needle doth appear as a blunt, rough Bar of Iron, coming from the Furnace or the Jorge. The 7noft accurate Engravings or Emboffments seem such rude, bungling, deformed Works, as if they had been done with a Mattock, or a Trowel. So vast a Difference is there betwixt ■the Skill of Nature, and the P.udenefs and Imperfe^ion oj Art. Bp, Wilk, Nat. Rel. L. i. Ch. 6.

Of the Figure of the Terraqueous Globe.

TH I S I fuppofc I may take for granted to be Spherical, or nearly so [a). AnJ this muflbc allowed to be the moll commodious, apt Figure for a World on many Accounts •, as it is moll capacious, as Its Surface is equi-diilant from the Center,

noc

{a) Although the Terraqueous Globe be of an orbicular Figure, yet it is not ftrirtly so, i. On account of its Hills and Vallies. But thefeare inconfiderabie to the Earth's Semidiameter; for they arc but as the Dufl upon a common Globe. But, z. Our modern Allronomers allign a much greater Variation from a globous Form, namely, that of a prolate Sphaeroid, making the Polar about 34 Miles (horter than the E!quatorial Diameter. The cause of which they make to be the centrifugal Force of the diurnal Rota;ion of the Globe,

This Figure they imagme is in '[Jupiter, his Polar being to his Equatorial Diameter, as 39 \- to 40 i. But: wheiher it be so or no, I confel's I could never perceive, alihough I have often viewed that Planet through very good, and long GlafTes, particularly a tolerable good one ui 71 I'eet in my Hands: And although by reason of cloudy Weather, and (at present) ^Jupiter ^ Proximity to the Sun, I have not been oi late able to take a reviev/ of that Planet ; yet Saturn (so far as his Ring would permit,) and Man appear perfectly round thro' Mr. Huygens'slong Glafs of ii6Fcct, which by Will lie bequeathed, with its whole Apparatus, to our R. S. by whose Favour ir is now in my Huids. And moreover, I believe it difTicuIr, next to impofiiblc, to measure the two Diameters to a 40*'^ Part, by reason of the fmallnefs of Jupiter's apparent Diameter, and by reason he is movmg all ihc time of meafuring him.

As to what is alledged from lengtliening the Pendulums of Clocks, to make them keep the same Time under the Fquator, as they do in our Climes ; 1 have fliewn from the like Variations in the Air-Pump, that this may arife from the rarirv of the Air there, more ihan here. V. Phil. Tranf. N°. 104. But if the Degrees of a Meridian grow larger, the more we go towards the Line, (as Mr, Caijini affirms they do, by an i:iy^

U 4 i'«l

4^ The Figure of the Book II,

not only of the Globe, but at leafl (nearly) of Gra-? vity and Motion too, and as son^e have thought, of the central Heat and Waters. Butthefe, and divers other Things I shall pass over, and infift only upon two or three other Benefits of thisglobous Figure of the Earth and Waters.

I . This Figure is the most commodious in regard of Heat, and 1 may add of Light alfo in some measure. For by this means, those two great Benefits are uniformly and equally imparted to the World : They come harmonioufly and gradually on, and as gradually go off again. So that the daily and yearly Returns of Light and Darknefs, Cold and Heat, Moill and Dry, are Regular and Workman-Uke, (we may say,) which they would not be, especially the former, if the Mafs of Earth and Waters were (as some fancied {b) it) a large Plain j or as others,

like

Part in every Degree, in Phil. Tranf No. 178.) then there is great reason to conclude in behalf of this Sphseroidal Form.

The natural cause ot this Sphericity of our Globe, is (Recording to Sir Ifaac Wezy/o»'s Principles) that Attra^lion, which the infinite Creator hath ftamp'd on all the Matter of the Univerfe, whereby all Bodies, and all the Parts of Bodies mutually attraft themselves and one another. By which means, as all the Parts of Bodies tend naturally to their Center, so they all betake themselves to a globous Figure, unless some other more prevalent cause interpofe. Thus Drops of Quick-filver put on a fpherical Form, the Parts thereof Itrongly attracting one another. So Drops of Water have the same Form, when falling in the Air; but are Hemifphencal only when they lie on a hard Body, by reason their Gravity doth so far over-power their self-attrading Power, as to take off one half of their Sphericity. This Figure is commonly attributed to the PrelTure of the circumambient Air :, But that this can't be the cause, is manifest from the Air- Pump ; the cafe being the very same in an exhauited Receiver;, as in the open Air, and not any the least Alteration of tjie Figure that I could pevceivc, in all the Trials I have made.

{b) It would be frivolous as vrell as cndlefs to reckon up the various Opinions of the Ancients about the Figure of theTerlamiepHs Globes fqmeQf them n^ay be seen in Varen,Geogr,

Chap. I. Terraqueous Globe. 41

like a large Hill in the mid ft of the Ocean j or of a multangular Figure j or such like.

2. This Figure is admirably auapted to the commodious and equal Diftnbution of the Waters in the Globe. For since, by the Laws of Gravity, the Waters will poflcfs the loweft Place j thcrefoic, if the Mafs of the Earth was cubick, prifmatick, or any other angular Figure, it would follow, that one (too vafta Part) would be drowned j and another be too dry. But being thus orbicular, the Waters arc equally andcommodioufly diftnbuted here and there, according as the Divine Providence faw moftficj of which I shall take notice by and by.

^. The orbicular Figure of. our Globe, is far the most: beneficial to the Winds and Motions of the atmosphere. It is not to be doubted, if the Earth was of some other, or indeed any other Figure, but that the Currents of Air would be much retarded, 'H not wholly flopped. We find by Experience what Influence large and high Mountains, Bays, Capes, and Head-lands have upon the Winds > how ihey flop some, retard many, and divert and change (near the Shores ) even the general and coujlaut

J. I. c. 3. init. or Jon [ton's Thaum^. c. i. Artk. 3. But among the variety of Opinions one of the principal was. That the visible Horizon was the Bounds of the Earth, and the Ocean the Bounds of the Horizon, that the Heavens and Earth above this Ocean, was the whole vilible Univerfc ; and that all beneaih the Ocean was Hades, or the mviJthU WorU. Hence, when the Sun fct, he was said t'ni^ere je Occauo ; and when any went to Hades, they mult firfl pass the Oce-m. Of this Opinion were not only the ancient Poets, and others among the Heathens, but some of the Chnllian Fathers too, pixucuhrly Latinntms, St. jiu^tijitne, and others, who thought their Opinion was favoured by the Pfalmift, in Pfal. xxiv, i. and cxxxvi. 6. SceB/. VjJur's Anf.to a Jef. Chall. p. 366.

irinds

42. The Figure of the^ &c. Book II.

JVinds (r), that blow round the Globe in the Torrid Zone. And therefore, since this is the efFe6t of such little Excrefcences, which have but little Proportion to oar Globe, what would be the Confer quences of much valler Angles, which would equal a Quarter, Tenth, or but an Hundredth Part of the Globe's Radius? Certainly these must be such a Barricade, as would greatly annoy, or rather absolutely flop the Currents of the atmosphere, and thereby deprive the World of those falutiferous Gales that I havefaid keep it fweetand clean.

Thus the Figure of our Globe doth manifeftit to be a Work of Contrivance, inafmuch as it is of the moit commodious Figure j and all others would be liable to great and evident Inconveniences.

(c) Neither do these conflant Trade-Winds ufuaUy blozv near the Shore, but enly on the Ocean, at least 30 or 40 Leagues ojf at Sea, clear from any Land ; especially on the Weft Coaft, or Side of any Continent : For indeed on the Eaft Side, the Eafterly Wind being the true Trade- Wind, blows almost home to the Shore, so near as to receive a check from the Land-Wind. Darapier'i Winds, Ch. i.

And not only ih^general Trade-Winds, but alfo the conflant coafting Trade-Winds, are in like manner afFeded by the Lands. Thus, for instance, on the Coaft of Angola and Peru. But this, faith the curious Captain Dampier., the Reader must take notice of. That the Trade-Winds that blow on any Coaft, except the North Coaft of Africa, whether they are constant, and blow all the Year, or whether they are ftiifting Winds, do never blow right in on the Shore, nor right along Shore, but go ftanting, making an acute Angle of about zi Degrees. Therefore, as thi Land tends more Eaft or Weft, from North or South on lh? Coaft i so the Winds do after accordingly. Ibid/ Ch. 2,.

CHAP, i>«

CHAP. II.

Of the Bulk of ths Terraqueous Globe,

THE next Thing remarkable in the Terraqueous Globe, is the prodigious Bulk thereof (^). A IVlafs of above 160 Thoufand Million of Aliles so- Jid Content. A Work too grand for any thing Icfs than a God to make. To which in the next Place we may add,

{a) It is not difficult to make a pretty near (-omputation of the Bulk of the Terraqueous Globe, from tliofo accurate Ob- Ifervations of a Degree made by Mr. Norwood in England, and Mr. Picart, and Mr. Cajfini in France. whose measures I do in a furprizing manner agree. But Mr. CaJJlni's feeming to be the melt accurate (as I have fiie n in my j^Jlro-Theology, B. I. Ch. z. Note a.) 1 have there made ule of his Determinations. According to which the Di.imetcr ot the Earth Ibeing 7967, 7Z Englijh Miles, its Ambit will be 25031 4 Mjles; and (fuppofing it to be Spherical) its Surface will be 199444120 Miles ; which being Fnultiplied into j of its Semidiameter, ;ives the Solid Content, viz. 164856000000 Miles.

CHAP, III.

The Motions of the Terraqueous Globe.

H E Motions the Terraqueous Globe hath, arc round its own Axis, and round its Fountain of .ightand Heat, the Sun {a). That so va(l a Bo- \y as the Earth and Waters should be moved ai

{a) With the Copemicans, I take it here for granted, that ^iie Diurnal and Annual Revolutions are the Motions of the

'crraqueous Globe, not of the Sun, c/c but for the Proof khereof 1 fnall refer the Reader to the Preface of my jljiroyhteh^y, and B. 4. Chap. 3.

44 Motions of the Book II.

a!l (^), tliat it ihould undergo two such different Motions, as the Diurnal and Annual are, and that these Motions should be so constantly and regularly [c) performed for near 6000 Years, without any the least Alteration ever heard of (except some Hours which we read of in Jojlo. x. 12, 13. and in Hezekiah's Time, which, if they cannot be accounted for fomc other way, do greatly ^ncreafe

(h) Ever'j thing that is moved, tntifl of Necefftty be mor'ed hy _ femething elfe ; and that thing is moved by Jomething that is m tnoved either by another Thing, or not by another Thing. If it be ■ moved by that zvhich is moved by another, we mufi of Necejfiiy come to Jome prime Mover, that is not moved by another. For it is impcjfible, that vjhat moveth, and is moved by another, Jhould proceed in infinitum, Ariftot. Phyf. 1. 8. c. 5.

Solum quod feipfitm jnovet, quia nunquam deferitur a fe, ntujquam ne moveri qnidem definit : quinciiam ceteris qui mo- ij ventiir, hie fons : hoc principium est movendi. Principii a:item%^ nulla est origo : nam ex principio orinntur omnia ; ipfum autem Kullii ex re alia nafci*poteft : nee enim est'et id principitim, quod ^igneretur aliunde. Cicer. Tufc. Quell. 1. I. c. 23.

Cogitemus qui fieri pojjlt, ut tanta magnitudo, ab aliqiia pof-r fit natura, tanto tempore circumferri ? Ego igitur ajjero Denm caufam ejj'e, nee aliter pojfe fieri. Plato in Epinom.

(c) Among the causes which Cleanthes is laid in Tally to sfiign for Men's Belief of a Deity, one of the chief is, JEq'jabilitatem motus, convctftonem Coeli, Solis, Lun&, Siderum- i que omnium diftintlionem, varietatem, puichriludincm, ordi-' nem : quarumrerum afpetTus ipfe]fatis indicaret, nonejfe eaforttiita. Vt fiquis in domum aliquam, aut in gymnaftum, ant irt \ forum venerit; cum videat omnium rerum rationem, modum^ difciplinam, non pojfit ea fine causa, fieri judicare, fed ejfe all' quem intelligat, quipnfit, ijr cui pareatur : mtilto magisin tan-- sis motibus, tantifque viciffttudinibus, tarn mult arum rerum at^ que tantarum crdinibus, in quibus nihil unquam immenfa C;^ /»r finita veiuftas mentiia fit, ftatuat neceft'e est ab aliqud Mente\ tantos naturA motus gubernari. Cic. de Nat. Deor. 1. 2»

Homines ccsperunt Deum agnofcere, cum viderent Stellas, tan- • tarn concinnitatem efiicere; ac dies, no^efqtie, <state, cy hyetne^ fttos fervars ftatos onus, atque obitus, Plutarch de placit. 1. \.,; c.C. I

the

Chap. III. Terraqueous Globe. 4^

the Wonder (^) 5 these Things, I fiy,) lio manifcflly argue some divine infinite Power to be concerned therein {e)\ But especially, if to all this we add the wonderful Convenience, yea abfolute Ncccllity of these Circumvolutions to the Inhabitants, yea all the Produ6ts of the Earth and Waters. For to one of these we owe the comfortable Changes of Day and Night \ the one for business, the other for Rcpolci (/) the one for Man, and moll other Ani-

{il) We need not be follicitous to elude the Hiftory of these Miracles, as it they were only poetical Strains, ^%MaimoiiideSy and some others fancy ^^y/jw/i's Day to have been, v'lx,, only aij ordinary Sunimei's D.iy; but such as had the Work of many Days done in it; and therefore by a poetical Stretch made, as if ilic Day had been lengthened by the Sun standing Itill. Bur in the Hillory they are fcriouily related, as real Matters of Fad, and with such Circumftances asmanifelt them to have been miraculous Works of the Almighty ; And the Prophet Hahakkuk, lii. II. mentions that of Jojhua as such. And therefore taking them to be miraculous Perverfions of the course of Nature, inllcad of being Objedlions, they are great Arguments of the Power of God: For in Hezekiah's Cafe, to wheel the Earth it self backward, or by some extraordinary Refusions, to bring the Sun's Shadow backward loDegrees: Or in JoJIma's Cafe, to flop the diurnal course of the Globe for some Hours, and then again give it the same Motion; tQ do, I say, these Things, required the same infinite Power which at first gave the Terraqueous Globe its Motions.

{e) Nam cum dtfpofitl quififfem faedera Mundt^ PrAfcriptofque Marts fines, Annique meatus^ Et Lucis, No^ifque vices : tunc omnia rebar ConfiUo firmata Dei, qui lege moveri Sidera, qui fruges diverfo tempore nafci, Gjut variam Phoeben alteno jnjferit igne Compleri, Solemque fuo ; porrexerlt undit Littora ; Tellurem medio librarjerat axe, Claudianin Rufin. L. i. initio,

(/) Diet noaifque vicijfitudo confervat animantes, tribuem cliud agendi ttmpus, aliud quiefcendi. Stc undique omni ratione concluduur, Mente, Ctnfilioque dtvino omnia tn hoc mundo ad falutem omnium, confervat ionemqu$ admirabilitcr adminijlrari. Ciccr.de Nai. Dcor^l. z. c. 53

mals

I

46 T lace and Situation^ oCc. 600k It

mals to gather and provide Food, Habitation, and other Neceflaries of Life 5 the other to re(t, refrefh, and recruit their Spirits (g)^ wafted with the Labours of the Day. To the other of those Motions we owe the Seafons of Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumn, together with the beneficial instances and EfFe6ts which thcfe have on the Bodies and State of Animals, Vegetables, and all other Things, both in the Torrid, Temperate, and Frigid Zones.

(£) The acute Dr. Cheyne, in his ingenious P^i/o/ Pr'tnc, of Natural Religion, among other Ufes of Day and Night, faith,- the Night is most proper for Sleep; becaufewhen the Sun is above the Horizon, Sleep is prejudicial, by reason the Perfpirations are then too great. Alfo that Nutrition is moftly, if not altogether, performed in Time of rest ; the Blood havingtoo quick a Motion in the Day : For which reason, weak Perfons, Children, zs^c are nouriftied most, and recruit best by Sleep.

CHAP. IV.

Of the Tlace and Situation of the Terraqueous Globe^ in ref(e6i of the Heavenly Bodies,

ANother Thing very considerable in our Globe^ is its Place and Situation at a due distance from the Sun (^), its Fountain of Light and Heat j

{a) It is a manifest Sign of the Creator's Management and Care, in placing the Terraqueous Globe at that very distance it is from the Sun, and contempering our own Bodies and all other Things so duly to that distance. For was the Earth farther from the Sun, the World would be ftarved and frozen with Cold : And was it nigher we fnould be burnt, at least the moftcombuftible Things would be so, and the World would be vexed with perpetual Conflagrations. For we see that a few of the Rays of the Sun, even no more than what fall within the Compafs of half an Inch or an Inch in a Burning-Glafs, will fire combuftible Bodies, even in our ovyn Climate.

and

Chap.V. ^ijlribtion of^ &;c. 47

and from fts neighbouring Planets of the folar Syftem, and from the fixe Stars. But thcfc Things I have fpokcn more largely of in my Survey of the Heavens (/'), and therefore only barely mention them now } to infill more largely upon,

ih) Jftro-Theology, Book vii. Chap. 7.

CHAP. V.

The T>iftr'ibut'ion of the Earth and fFaters.

TH E Diflribution of the Waters and the dry Land, although it may seem rude and undefigned to a carelefs View, and is by some taxed as such (^), yet is admirably well adjufted to the Ufes r.nd Conveniences of our World. For

{a) The most eminent Author 1 have met with, that finds

fault with the Dilliibution of the Earth and Wareis, and indcijd with the whole prcfent Strucfluie of the Globe, is the

Ic.-ii lied and eloquent TJieorift, Dr. Burnet, who frequently ex-

' ins on this Point, TelUs fjo/lra, ji tot ain funtd cowrie claw nr,

ijl ortiinata ar venujla rerum com^'ages fed moles aggef.a.

:o, incertoquc fiii* parthimy nulla, crdiuts aut venujlatis ha-

■ ratio)ie. 1 hcor. Sacr. 1. r. C. 7. t.cquis autem a Deo h&c

i:u faJlu? c-:c. lb. §}joauiem Herculeo labore cpus efj'et ad excavandam tcrmm in tantum htaium ? ii imwtdiat): a. causa

fr'tma ejf'eclus fuijjet hie alveus, aliquctn hliem ordineM, jnenfuram, u' proportionem notare voluijjct in ip/ius fotma, o* partium dijpcjitione ; — fed confuja anma, &c. ib. c. 8. Tellus noflra cu>n exigua fit, ejl etiatn rudis : Kt in ill^ exiguitnte multa fgnt fuperfiua, multa inclegantia. Ditnidiam ttrrd fiiperficiem mundat Oceanus; magna ex parte, ut mihi videtur, inutiUs. And then he goes on to Anew how this Part of the Creation ighibe mended, ib. c. 10. Ail this is tome liirprizing from an Author of great Ingenuity, who seems in his Book to have a juft Opinion of, and due Veneration for God, But certainly such Notions are very inconfiltent with the Belief of God's creating, cfpecially his governing and ordering the World. Sut fuppofc the Terraqueous Globe was such a rude, confufd» inconvenient Mafs, as he pretends, yet it is well enough for a flnful World, But bcfides, what others have long ago abundanily I

48 T>iftrlbutton of th^ Book IT-

For in the firfl Place, the Diftribution is so well made, the Earth and Waters so handfomely, io Workman-like laid, every where all the World over, thatthereisa juftasquipoifeof the whole Globe. The Northern balanceth the Southern Ocean^ the Jtlantick the Pacifick Sea. The American dry Land^ is a Counterpoife to the European^, Afiatick and African.

In the next Place, the Earth and the Waters are so admirably well placed about in the Globe, as to be helpful to one another, to minifter to one another's Ufes. The great Oceans, and the lesser Seas and Lakes, are so admirably well diftributed throughout the Globe [h)^ as to afford sufficient Vapours {c) for

Clouds

bundantly answered, the following Survey, will, I hope, fufficiently manifest it to be the Work of a wife and beneficent, as well as omnipotent Creator.

{b) Some have objeded against the Diftribution of the Earth and Waters, as if the Waters occupied too large a part of the Globe, which they think would be of greater Ufc, if it was dry Land. But then they do not consider that this M'ould deprive the World of a due Quantity of Vapours and Rain. For if the Cavities which contain the Sea, and other Waters, were deeper, although the Waters were no less in Quantity, only their f Surfaces narrower and lesser, the Evaporations would be so much the less, inafmuch as those Evaporations are made from, the Surface, and are, consequently, in proportion to the Surface, not the Depth or Quantity of Water.

(c) I took notice before in Book I. Cha^, 3. i<lote {a). That the Vapours conftituting Clouds and Rain, are VeftcuU of Water detached by Heat. The manner of which I conceive to be thus; Heat being of an agile Nature, or the lighteft of all Bodies, eafily breaks loofe from them; and if they are humid, in itsPaflage, carries along with it Particles, or httle Cafes of the Water; which being Ughter than Air, are buoyed up thereby, and fwimin it; until by knocking against one another, or being thickened by the Cold, (as in the Note before-cited,^ they are reduced into Clouds and Drops.

Having mentioned the manner how Vapours areraifed, and there being more room here than in the Note before- cited, I jlhall, for the Illuftration of Nature's process, take notice of three Things obfervable to our purpose, in Water over the Fire. I. That the Evaporations are proportional to the Heat

afcending

Chap.V. Earth and JVaters. 49

'Clouds rind Rains, to temperate the Cold {c) of the Northern frozen Air, to cool and mitigate the

Heats

afcending out of the Water. A small Heat tlirowsuff but few Vapours, scarce vilible : A greater HeAt, and afctndtng in greater Quantities, carries off grolTer, larger, and more numerous VtficuLi^ whi>.h we call a Steam : And if the Heat breaks through tlie \yater with such a Fury, as to lacerate and ift up great Quantities or Bubble of Water, too heavy for he Air to ca;iy or buoy up, it caufeth what wc call Boyli;?^. And the Particles of Water thus mounted up by the Heat, are visible Spherules of Water, if viewed with a Microicope, as hey swim about in a Ray ot the Sun let into a dark Room, /ith warm Water underneath ; where some of the Vapours ppear large, toine Ima^ler Sphaerules, according (no dcubt) o the larger and leffer Quantities of Heat blowing them up nd carrying them off. i. If ihefe Vapours be intercepted in heir Af.cnt by any Context, elpecially cold Body, as Giafs, Vlarble,crc. they are thereby reduced into Drops, and Mafles f Water, like those of Rain, c?c. 3. these Vapours in their \fcent from the Water, may be oblerved, in cold frolly iVeather, either to rife i)ura little above the Water, and there 0 hang, or to glide on a little above its Surface : Or if tha iVeather be very cold, after a little afcent, they may be lien

0 fall back again into the Water ; in their Ajccnt and Decent delcribing a Curve fomewhat like that of an Arrow' rom a Bow. But in a warmer Air, and still, the Vapours

Ilfcend more nimbly and copioufly, mounting up aloft, tiil Jiey are out of Sight. But if the Air be warm and windy 00, the Vapours are fooner carried out of Sight, and m.ikc; »ay forothers. And accordingly I have often oblerved, that ot Liquors, if not set too thin^ and not frequently llirrcf^,

001 flower in the grcateft Froils, than in temperate Weather, fpecially if windy. And it is manifest by good Experiments, Wt the Evaporations are !efs at thole times than these; lels y far in the Winter than the warmer Months.

(c) As our Northern Iflands arc observed to be more tenicrate than our Continents, (of which we had a notable Inatice in the great Froll in 170", which Ireltjnd and Scotland ;lt less of, than most Parts of t'urope hefides ; of which see ookiV. Chap. II. Note c.) so this Temperature is owing to le warm Vapours afforded chiefly by the Sea, which by the receding Note must necefTarily be warm, as they Sre Vaours, or Water inflated by Heat.

The cause of this Heat I take to be partly that of the U0| and partly Subterraneous. That it is not wholly that of

li the

so l^iflrihutton of the Book IL

Heats {d) of the Torrid Zone, and to refrelh the Earth with fertile Showers i yea, infomemeafureto niinifler frcfli Waters to the Fountains and Rivers. Nay, so abundant is this great Blefling, which the moll indulgent Creator hath afforded us by means of this Dillribution of the Waters T am fpeaking of, that there is more than a fcanty, bare Provifion, or mere Sufficiency j even a Plenty, a Surplufage of this u^'eful Creature of God, (the frefh Waters) afforded to the World ; and they so well ordered, as not to drown the Nations of the Earth, nor to llagnate,. liink, and poifon, or annoy them 5 but to be gently carried through convenient Chanels back again

il

the Sun. is manifcft from Vapours, being as, or more copi' ouily raised when the Sun Beams are vvealceft, as when strong ^ e'll, there being greater Rains and Winds at the one time thaiMJ the other. And that there is luch a thing as Suhterraneom Heat, (whether Central,, or from the meeting of Mineral Juices ; or such as is Congenial or Connatural to our Globe, : 1 have not Time to enquire ; but I say, that such a Thing is,) is evident not only from the Hot-Baths, many fiery Erruptions and Exploiions, o'c. but alfo from the ordinary Warmth of Cellars and Places under Ground, which are not barely comparatively warm, but of sufficient Heat to raise Vapours alio: As is manifest from the fraoking of perennial Fountams jn frofly Weather, and Water drawn out of Pumps and open Wells at such a Time. Yea, even Animals themfelvesare (en- • iihle of it, as particularly A/u/e;, who digbetore a Thaw, and Jj against some other Alterations of the Weather; excited, naj doubt, thereunto by the inv.t warm Vapours ariiing in ther: Earth, which animate them, as well as produce the fucceed-?, ■ mg Changes of the Weather.

id) Beiides \\\t Irade-Wlnds, which serve to mitigate the exceflive Heats in the Torrid Zone ; the Clouds are a good Screen against the fcorching Sun-Beams, especially when the Sun j pa iP.'th their Zenith; at which Time is their V/inter, or cool-, ell Seafon, by realbn they have then most Clouds and Rain. | For which Service, that which Varene takes notice of, is a great Providence of God, 'u'lx.. Pleraque loca Zons. Torrida v't* cinum ha'hcKt mare, Ht India, bifuU IndicA, Lingua Afria, Guinea, Braflia, Peritvia, Mexicana, Hifpania : Pauca loca Zon& Torrids. funt Mediierranea. Varenii. Geogr. 1, 2. c. 2(5. Prop. 10, §. 7, '

to

Chap. V. Earth and JVaters. 5-1

to tlieir grand Fountain {c) the Sea; and many of them through such large Trails of Land, and to I'ucli prodigious Diftanccs, that it is a great Wonder the

Fountains

(f) Th.u Springs have their Origine from the Sea, and not from Rains and Vapours, among many other strong reasons, I conclude from the Percnnity of divers Springs, which always afford the same quantity of Water. Of this sort there are many to be found every where. But I shall, for an Inftancc, finglc out one in theParifli of Vpminfter, where I live, as being very proper for my purpose, and one that Iliave had better Opportunities of making Remarks upon above twenty Years. This in the grcatelt Droughts is little, if at all diminiflied, that 1 could perceive by my Eye, although the Ponds all over the Country, and an adjoining Brook have been dry for many Months together ; as particularly in the dry Summer Months of the Year 170J. And in the wetted Seafons, such as the Summer and other Months were, preceding the violent Storm in November 1703. {Vid. Phibf.Tranf. N". 189.) I say, in such wet Seafons I have not oblerved any Increment of its Stream, excepting only for violent Rains falling therein, or running down from the higher Land into it; which difcoloureth the Waters oftentimes, and makes an increafe of only a Day's, or foraetimes but a few Hours Continuance. But now, if this Spring had its Origine from Rain and Vapours, there would be an increafe and decreafe of the one, as there should happen to be of the other : As adually it is in such temporary Springs as have undoubtedly their Source from Rain and Vapours.

But befides this, another considerable Thing in this UpminJ Jlcr Spring (and Thoufands of others) is, that it breaks out of so inconfiderable an Hillock, or Eminence of Ground, that can have no more hifluence in the Condenfation of the Vapours, or flopping the Clouds, which the Maintainers of this Hypothefis suppose) than the lower Lands aboiu it have. By some Critical observations I made with a very nice portable Barometer, 1 found that my house Hands between 80 an J 90 Feet higher than the Low-Water Mark in the River of Thames, neareft me ; and that part of the River being I'carce thirty Miles from the Sea, I guefs, (and am more confirmed from some later Experiments I made nearer the Sea) that we cannot be much above 100 Feet above the Sea. The Spring I judge nearly level with, or but little higher than where my house Hands ; and the Lands from whence it immediately iffues, I guefs about 15 or ro F'eet higher than the Spring; and the Lands above that, of no very remarkable Height.

E a And

51 ^iftributlon of the Book IL

Fountains should be high enough (/), or the Seas low enough, ever to afford so long a Conveyance. Witnefs the Danube {£) and Wolga of Europe^ the

And indeed, by adtual measure, one of the higheft Hills I have met with in Effex, is but 363 Feet high; {Vid. Phil. Tranf. ^°' l^l- P- ^^■) ^^^ ^ guefs by some very late Experiments I made, neither that, nor any other Land in Ejjex, to be above 400 Feet above the Sea. Now what is so inconfiderable a rife of Land to a perennial Condenfation of Vapours, fit to maintain even so inconiiderable a Fountain, as what I have mentioned is ? Or indeed the High-lands of the whole large County of Ejfex, to the maintaining of all its Fountains and Rivulets?

But I (Irali no farther profecute this Argument, but refer to the late learned, curious and induftrious Dr. Plot's Tentamen Ph'd. deOrig. Tont. in which he hath fully difcuiTed this Matter.

As to the manner how the Waters are raised up irtto the Mountains and higher Lands, an eafyand natural Reprefentation may be made of it, by putting a Httle Heap of Sand, Aflies, or a little Loaf of Bread, Zy'c, in a Bafon of Water ; where the Sand will reprefent the dry Land, or an Ifland, and the Bafon of Water the Sea about it. And as the Water in the Bafon rifeth to, or near the top of the Heap in it, so doth the Waters of the Sea, Lakes, crc life in the Hills. Which cafe I take to be the same with the afcent of Liquids in capillary Tubes, or between contiguous Planes, or in a Tube filled with A flies : Of which the induftrious and compleat Artificer in Air-Pumps, Mr. Hawk/bee, hath given us some, not contemptible Experiments, in his Phyf. Mech. Exp. pag. 139.

Among the many causes aflTigned for this afcent of Liquors, there are two that bid thefaireft for it, viz.. the Prejfure of the atmosphere, and the Newtonian Attraction. That it is not the former, appears from the Experiments fucceeding, as well, or better in Vacuo^ than in the open Air, the afcent being rather fwifter in Vacuo. This then beingnot theCaufe, I shall suppose the other is ; but for the Proof thereof, I (hall refer to lome of our late Engli(li Authors, especially some very late Experiments made before our mod famous R. S. which will be so well improved by some of that illuftrious Body, as to go near to put the Matter out of doubt.

(/) See BookUl. Chap. 4.

(^) The Danube in a fober Account y performs a course of ahove 1 500 Miles, (/. e. in a ftrait Line) from its Rife to its Fall. Bohun'j Geogr.Didt,

me

Chap. V. Earth and TV at ers. 53

Nile (h) and the Niger (i) of y^fric-k, the Ganges (k) and Euphrates of Afia^ and the Amazons Rr^er [I) and Rio de la Plata of America^ and many others which might be named; some of which arc said to run above fooo Miles, and some no less than 6000 from their Fountains to the Sea. And indeed such prodigious Conveyances of the Waters make it munifelt, that no accidental Currents and Alterations of the Waters themselves, no Art or Power of Man, nothing less than the Fiat of the Almighty, could ever have made, or found, so long and commodious Declivities, and Chancls for the Pafllige of the Waters.

{h) TraHas fc. Lo7JgitHdo [Nili] ejl m'dUarittm circiter 630 Germ, fiie Ital. 1520, pro qutbus ponere licet 3000 propter curvaturas. Varcn. Geogr. 1, I. c. 16. p. Z7.

(>) Varene reckons the course of the Niger, at a middle Computation, 600 German Miles, that is 1400 Italian.

{k^ That of the GatTges he computes at 300 German Miles. But if we add the Curvatures to these Rivers, their Chariels are of a prodigious Length.

(/) Oritur, Jinmen (quod plerumque Amaz^onum, &c.) haui frocul ffh/ito in montibus -■ Cum per leucas Hifpanicas I3>6. curfum ab occidente in orientem conttnudrit, cflio 84 leucas lato in Oceanum prAcipitatur. Chr. D'Acugna Rchlio dc

flumine Amaz. in Aft. Erud. Aug. 1683.

CHAP. VI.

The great Variety and ^tantity of all Things upon^ and in the Terraqueous Globe, provided for theUfes of the World,

TH E last Remark I shall make about the Terraqueous Globe in general is, the great Variety of^ Kinds, or Tribes, as well as prodgious Number lOf Individuals of each various Tribe, there is of all

E $ Crea-

5'4 Variety of Things Book II.

Creatures {a). There are so many Bcafts, To many Birds, so many Inre61:s, so many Reptiles, so many Trees, so many Plants upon the Land j so many Fiflies, Sea-Plants, and other Creatures in the Waters J so many Minerals, Metals, and Fofliles in the Subterraneous Regions; so many Species of thcfe Ge- 77era^ so m^ny Individuals o( those Species^ that there is nothing wanting to the Ufe of Man, or any other Creature of this lower World. If every Age doth change its Food, its way of Cloathing, its way of Building; if every Age (b) hath its Variety of Difeafes; nay, if Man, or any other Animal, was minded to change these Things every Day, Hill the Creation would not be cxhauiled, still nothing would be wanting for Food, nothing for Phyfick, nothing for Building and Habitation, nothing for Clcanlineis and Refreihmenr, yea, even for Re-

(a) Non dat Deus henejicia ? Unde ergo ijla qus. poffdcs ? ——— XJnde hue innumerab'tlia, oculos, aurcs ZP' animum tnulcentU ? Vnde ilia luxuriam quot^ue inftruens copla ? Neqae emm tiecejfitatibus taniummodo no^ris provifum est- ufque in delicins amatrnir. Tot arbufta, non uno modo fritgifera, tot herbs, fain tares, tot varletaies ciborum, per tottim annum digeftA, ut inerti quo- .que fcrtiiiia. tcrr& aitmcnta pr&bercnt. 'Jam animalia ornnis

generis, alia in ficco, ike. ut omnis rermn natiir& pars tri~

hut urn aliquod nobis conferret. Senec. de Benef. 1. 4. c. 5. ubi plura vide.

H'lc, ubi kabitamtts non intermittit fuo tempore Ccelum nitefeere, arbores frondefcere — — turn multitudinem pccttdum parti-rn ad vefcendum, partim ad cultus agrorum, partim ad i-ehendiim, fartim ad corpora veftienda ; hojninemque ipfum quafi contemplatorem cosli ac deorum, ipforumque cnltorem. H&c igitur, cr alia inmimerabilia clim cernimus, pajfumufne dnbitare, quin his pr&fit aliquis vel Effe^for, ft h^c nata funt, ut Platoni tidetur : z'el ft femper fuennt, ut Ariftoteli placet. Moderator tanti operis e^ muneris ? Cicer. Tufc. Quaeft. ]. i. c. 28, 29.

(h) Sunt cy gentium differentia non mediocres qu£ contemplatio aufert rurfus nosad ipforutn animalium naturas, ingenitafatte its 'i^el certiores morborum omnium mcdicinas. Enim 'vcro rcrum omnium Parens, nullum animal ad hoc tantum ut fafceretur, aut alia fatiaret nafci volnit : arte/que falutares lis inferMrit. Plin. N. H. I, z?. c. 13.

creation

I Chap. VI. in the Terraqueous Globe. SS"

creation and Plcafurc. But the Munificence of the Creator is such, that there is abundantly enough to supply the Wants, the Convcniencics, yen, almoil the Extravagancies of all the Creatures, in all Places, all Ages, and upon all Occafions.

And this may fervc to anfvveran Objcflionagainfl: the Excellency of, and wisdom fhev/cd in the Creation i namely. What need of so many Creatures {c) ? Particularly of so many Inic61:s, so many Plant?, and so many other Things? And cfpccially oi some of them, that are so far from being ufeful, that ■they arc very noxious j some by their Ferity, and others by their poilbnous Nature, (yc?

To which I might answer, that in greater Variety, the greater Art is seen j that the fierce, poisonous, and noxious Creatures (crve as Rods and Scourges to chalUfe us (d), as means to excite our

wisdom

(f) This was no very eafy Queftion to be answered by such as held, thac all ihings vjere made for Ma?i, as mult oH the Ancients did ; zi Jirijlotle, Seneca, Cicero ^nA Pliny, (to name .only fomc of the chief^. And C;«r<? cites it as the celebrated ChryfibpUi's Opinion, Pnclare tnitn Chryfippus, Cetera nam ije Horfiinnm Causa, c/ Deorum. JDe Jin. bon. cr tnal. I 3. And in his Dc Nat. Deor. I. i. fin. he ferinufiy proves the World it self to h.n'e been made tor the Gods and Man, and all Things m the World to have been made and contrived for the Benefit of Man (parata cr inwnta ad fruihim Hcwinuff:^ arc his Words). So Plmy in his Preface to his 7^*^ Book faith, Nature made all Things for Man ; but then he makes adoubr, whether flic ihewed her self a more indul^^cnt Parent, or cruel Step-Mother, as in Book IV. Chap. 12.. Note i. Butfmce the Works of God have been more difcovercd, and the Limits of the Univerfe have been found to be of infinitely greater Extent than the Ancients supposed them ; this narrow Opinion haih been exploded. And the answer will be found eafy to thcfc Queflions, Why so many ufelels Creatures.'' In the Heavens, Why so many fixt Stars, and the greatcllparr of them fcarcc vifiblc ? Why such Syfiems of Planets, as in Jupiter, Saturn, &c. {Sttmy jifiro-Theology.) In the harthand Waters^ Why io many Creatures of no ufe to Man .-'

{d) Kic mir.iis clara exitii docutncnta funt etiam tx contemnendis animaiihus, M. Varro author f/?, a ctmtCHlis JujfoJJUrn

E 4 ii6

$6 Variety of Things Book II.

wisdom, Care, and Induftry, with more to the same purpose. But these Things have been fully urged by others j and it is sufficient to say, that this

great

in Hifpania cpidum, a talpts in Thejjalia : ab ranis civitatem in Gallia pulfam, ab locuftis in Africa. : ex Gyaro, Cycladum infula, ir/colas a nturibus fugatos ; In Italia Amyclas a fcrpentibus delatas. Cura Cynamolgos JF.thiopas late dejcrta regio ejl^ a fcorpionibus CT" folptigis gente fublata : e? a jcolopendris aba^os Trenenfes, author est Theophraftus. Plin. Nat. Hlit. 1.8. C.xg.

To these instances may be added, the Plague they fometimes suffer from a kind of Mice (they call Leming, Leminger, Lemmus, &c,) in Norway, which eat up every green Thing. They come in such prodigious Numbers, that they fancy them to fall from the Clouds; but Ol. Magnus, rather thinks they come from some of the Illands. hist. I. 8. c. ^. If the Reader hath a mind to see a large Account of them, with a Difpute ?ibout their Generation, a handfome Cut of them, with the Prayers, and an Exorciim against them ufed in the Church of Rome, 1 tliall ref^-r him, (it being too tedious to recite in these Notes) to Mnf&um Wormian. 1. 3. c. 2,3.

6h4are patimur multa mala a creatura quam fecit Beus, nifi quiaojendimm Deum ? — De pxna tud peccatum tiium accttfa^ non jiidicern. Nam propter Superbiam i)iftttuit Beus creaturam iftam minimam zjr abjeiliffimam, ut ipfa nos tcrqueret, ut cum fuperbus fierit homo, cjr fe jaciaverit adverfus Deum, — cum feerexerit, PuUcibus fubdatur. <§}»ideft, quid te infias humanA fifperbia ? — Pulicibus refifte, ut dormias. Cognofce qui fis. Nam prot-tcr fupc-biam noftram domandam — — creata ilia qn£. molefia funt : populum Pharaonis fuperbum potuit Deus d.mare de Urfis, de &c. Mufcas z^ Ranas illis immiftt, ut rebus vtliffimis

fuperbia domaretur. Omnia ergo per ipfum — ■ fa^a funt ;

a' fine jpfo fa£l:tm est nihil Auguft. Trad i. in S. Johan.

But although the infinitely wife Creator hath put it in the Pov/er of such vile Animals to chaftife us, yet hath he Oicwed no less wisdom and Kindnefs in ordering many, if not molt of them so, as that it shall be the in Power of Man, and other Creatures to obviate or efcape their Evils. For, befides the .noble Antidotes aft(:>rded by Minerals, Vegetables, crc. many, if not most of our European venemous Animals carry their Cure, as well as Poifon, in their own Bodies. The Oil, and I doubt not, the Body of Scorpions too, is a certain Remedy at'ainft its Stroke. A Bee, iVafp, or Hornet cruflied and rubbed, and bound upon the Place, I have always found to be a certain Cure for the Sting of those Creatures. And I queftion not, but the Flefli, especially the Head of Vip>ers, would be found a P>.emedy for their Bites.

Chap. VI. in the Terraqueous Globe, 57

crcat Variety is a mod wife Provjlion for all the UTcs of the World in all Ages and all Places. Some tor i'ood, some lor Phyfick (f), fomc for Ii:ibitation, feme for Utenlils, some for Tools and liilhuincntsof Work, and some for Recreation and Plcafure, ci'thcr to Man, or to fomc of the inferior Creatures thtmfclves i even for which inferior Creatures, the liberal Creator hath provided all Things ncccllary, or any ways conducing to their happy, comfoi tabic living in this World, as well as for xVlan.

And it is manifeil, that all the Creatures of God, Beails, Birds, lnfe6ls, Plants, and every other GV««i

Our Viper-Catchers have a Remedy in zvhich they place so great Ccnfidencc, as to be no more afraid of the Bite [ot a Viper], than of a common Puncture, immediately curing themselves by the Application of their Specif ck. This though they hce^ a great Secret, 1 have upon ftritt Encjuiry found to be no other than Axungia Viperina, prcfcntly rubbed into the Wound. 'I'his Remedy the learned Dodor tried himself with good Succefs in a young Dog that was bitten in the Nole. I'ld. Mead of Poifons, p. 19.

And as to the means to efcapc the Mifchief of such noxious Animals, bclldes what may be efiec^ed by the Care, Indullry and Sagacity of Man ; some of them are so contrived and made, as to give Warning or Time to Creatures in danger from them. Thus, for instance, the Rattle- Snahe, the molt poifonous of any Serpent, who darts its poifonous Vapours to Ibme dillance, and m ail Probability was the BafiUji of the Ancients, said to kill with its Kyes, this involuntarily gives warning by the Rattle in its Tail. So the Shark, the molt ra- - pacious Animal of the Waters, is forced to turn himself oa his Back, (and thereby gives an Opportunity of Hfcape) before he can catch his Piey.

{e) Hic fcla Nature placuerat ejfe remedia parata vuho, in- •ventu factlia, ac fine impendio, ex quiOus vivimus. Pofea fraudes hotninum cr ingeniorum capturti offcmai invenire iflas, in quibus fua cuique h^mini voenaiis profnitiitur vita. Statim ccmfojitiones ZS" mtfur& inexplicabtles dccantantur. Aral -a atque India in medio ^[limantur, ulcerique purvo mciicina d Rubra mari imputatur, cutn rtmedia vera quotidie pauperrimus quifque ccenet. Plin. 1. ^4. c. i.

Non fponte fud ex tcllure germinant Herb<i, qut contra quoftunaue morbos accommods. funt ; fed a voluntate OpifJcis, ad fiojiram utiUtatem produiU funt. Bafil. Afcct. Tom. i. Confult here, hock X. Kote z, aa, bo.

have

5^ Variety of Things Book IT.

have, or may have, their fcveral Ufes even among Men. For although in one Place many Things may lieneglefted, and outof Ufe, yet in other Places they may be of great Ufe. So what hath feemed ufelefs in one Age, hath been received in another 5 as all the new Dilcovcries in Phyfick, and all the Alterations in Diet do fufficiently witnefs. Many Things alio there are which in one Form may be pernicious to Man 5 but in another, of great Ufe. There are many Plants (/), many Animals, many Minerals, which in one Form delboy, in another heal. The Cajfada

Plant

(f) Among poifonous Vegetables, none more-famous of old than Hemlock, accounted at this Day alfo veiy dangerous to Man, of which there ate Ibme difmal Examples in our Phil. Tranf. IVepfor, &c. But yet thisPlant is Food for Gc^/;, and us Seeds to Bnfiards; and as Gd/^w faith, io Starlings Mo. Neither is this, so pernicious a Plant, only Food, but alfo Phylick to .some Animals. An horse troubled with the Farcy, ■4nd could not be cured with the raofl: famed Remedies, cured himself of it in a fiiort Time, by eating Hemloch, of which he eat greedily. Vid. Phil. Tranf. N^. 231. And a Woman which ivits cured of the Plague, but wanted Sleep, did vjith very good Effebi eat WtvcAozX^ for same time; till falling ill again of n Fef«r, and having left ojftheUfe of this Remedy, he [Nic. Fontanus] endeavoured to procure her rest by repeated Dofes of Opium, ^v hie h had no Operation, till the Help 0/ Cicuta was again called in zvith defired Succefs. Mead of Poif. p. 144.

And not only Hemlock, but many other, if not most Plants accounted poifonous, may have their great Ule in Medicine: Of which take the Opinion of an able Judge, my ingenious and learned Friend Dr. Tancred Robinfon, in a Letter I have of his to the late great Mr.Ray^ of Nov. 7. 1604, viz. According to my Promife, I here fend you a Jezu observations concerning fume plants, feldom ufed in Medicine, being efteemed poifonous, ivhich if truly corretled, or exabll") dofed, may perhaps prove the mojl fovjerful and effectual Medicines yet known. Having then given an Account of some of their Corredlives, he gives these following Examples, w^:. I. The Hellebores incorporated ivith a Safe, or Alkaly-Salts alone, are fuccefsfid Remedies in Epilepfe:, Vertigo's, Palfies, Lethargies, and Mania s. Dof a ^j. to 2/5. 2. TJ?e Radic. AJJari, Cicuta, and the Napellus, in Agues and periodical Pains. Dof. ^j. to tl^. 3. The Hyofcyamus in H£- morrhagiesy "Jiolent Htats and Perturbation of the Bloody and al-

■ "\ ^ ■ ~ ' fi.

Chap. VI. in theT err aqueous Globe. 59

Plant unprepared poifoncth, but prepared, is tl" : very Bread oF the IVeft-Indics [g). Viper i and Scorpicyjs, and inany Minerals, as dcflrudivc as they aic lo Man, yet afford himfomeof his bell Medicines.

Or if there be many Things of httle, immccha : Ui'etoMan, in this, or any other Arc ; yettootl^.c/ Creatures they may afford Food or Phylick, or be or some neccffary Ufc. How many Trees and Plants, nay, even the very Carcafes of Annuals, yc.i, the very Dull: of the Earth (/j), and the mollrefufe, contemptible Things to be met with j I say, how many such I'hings are either Food, or probably Mcdicmc to many Creatures, afi'ord them Retreat, arc Places ot Habitation, or Matrixes for their Generation, aslhall be Ihewed in proper Place? The prodigious Swarms of Infeds in the Air, and in the Waters, (many of which may be perhaps at present of no great JJic to Man) yet are Food to Birds, Fiflies, Reptiles, Infccls themklvcs, and other Creatures (/'), for whose happy and comfortable Subfiftencc, I have Hiid the bountiful Creator hath liberally provided, as well as for that of Man.

jo in all-great Injlamtnatitns. Dof. ^j. ro^fi. 4. The tei?ien6lra~ tnoni* is a very good Anodyne^ ufeful in I'igilia's, llheumattjins^ Hyflerick Cafes, in all the Orgajms of the Blood or Spirits^ and zvhere-ever there is an Indication for a Paregorick. T)of.-^].to'^. 5. Elaterium thtu corrected, may be given from gr. x.to xv. i» Jtiydropical Cafes, -..vithottt any ferijible Evacuation or Difiurbance. So may the Soldanella and Gratiola in greater Dojes. 6. Opium corretled as afore-mentioned, lojes its Narcotick faculty, and may be given very fafely in great Dofes, and proves more than ufually prevalent in Convulflve Cafes, Fluxes, Catarrhs, ar.d all painful Paroxyfms, &C.

(g) It is of the most ge^c'-al Ufe of any Provifion all over the Weft- Indies, especially m t/.e hotter Parts, and is ufedto ViClual Ships. Dr. Sloan'; Nat. hist. oi Jamaica, Vol. i. Chap. 5. §. iz.

(h) 1 have Cliewn in the Phil. Tranf. that the Pediculus fatidtcus, Mortifaga, Pulfatorius, or Death-lVatch there deicnbcd, feedeth upon Dull ; but that this Dull they eat, is powdered Bread, Fruits, or such like Duft, not powdeied Haitli ; as is maniteft from their great Diligence aiid Curiofity in hunting amongthe Duft. See more in Phil. Tranf. N^. 291.

(i) nd. Book IV. Chap. II.

BOOK

6o

BOOK III.

Of the Terraqueous Globe m particular^ more efpec'mlly the Earth,

^^^Aving thus taken a general Profpeft of our Terraqueous Globe, I shall in this Book

come to its Particulars. But here we have such an immenfe Variety prefenting it self to our Senfes, and such amazing Strokes of Power and wisdom, that it is impofTible not to be at a Stand, and very difficult to know where to begin, how to proceed, or where to end. But we mufl however attempt.

And for the more clear and regular proceeding on this copious Subjcdl, I shall diftribute the Globe into its own grand conlHtuent Parts.

I. The Earth and its Appurtenances.

II. The fVaters and Theirs.

The first of thefeonly, is what at prefcnt I shall be able to take into this Survey.

And in Surveying the Earthy I intend,

1. To confidents conltituent Parts, or Things peculiar to its self.

2. The Inhabitants thereof, or the several Kinds of Creatures that have their Habitation, Growth, or Subfiftence thereon.

I . As to the Earth it self, the mod: remarkable Things that present themselves to our View, are,

J. Its

Chap. I. Of the Soils. 6t

1. Its various Moulds and Soils.

2. Its fcvcral Strata, or Beds.

3. Its very Subterraneous Paflliges, Grotto's and Caverns.

4. Its Mountains and Vallies.

C H A P. I.

Of the Soils and Moulds in the Earth.

THE various Soils and Moulds are an admirable and nunifcfl: Contrivance of the All-wife Creator, in makmg tl)is Pro\ ifion for the various Vegetables (^), and divers other Ufes of the Creatures. For, as some Trees, some Plants, fomc Grams dv/ indie and die in a difagreeable Soil, but: thrive and flourifli in others i so the All-wife Crea* tor hath amply provided for every Kind a proper Bed. It fomc delight in a warm, some a cold Soilj

{a) V is not to be doubted, that although Vegetables delight in peculiar Soils, yet they owe not their Life and Growth to the Earth it fch, but tu some agreeable Juices or Salts, c^c refiding in the Earth. Of this the great Mr. iJoy/ hath given us some good Experiments. He ordered his Gardener to dig up, and dry in an Oven some Earth fit for the purpose, to weigh it, and to set therein some Squajl) Seeds, (a kind of Indian Pompion). The Seeds when fovvn were watered with R.iin or Spring-water only. But although a Plant was produced in one Experiment of near 3 /. and in another of above 14 /. yet the Earth when dried, and weighed again, was fcarcc diminiflied at all in its Weight.

Another Experiment he alledges is of Helmont's, who dried 200 /. of Earth, and therein planted a Willow weighing 5 /. which he watered with Rain or diiliiled Water: And to fccure it from any other Earth getting in, he covered it with a perforated Tin Cover. After five Years, weighing the Tree with all the Leaves it had born in that time, he found it to weiiih 169 I. 3 Ounces, but the Earth to be diminilhcd only about 1 Ounces in its weight. Vid. Boyl's Scij^t, Chym. Part ^' pag. 114.

fomc

k

6% Of the Soils. Book III.

some in a lax or Tandy, some a heavy or clayie Soil ; feme in a Mixture of both, some in this, and that and the other Mould, some in moill, some in dry Places {h) j ilill we find ProviUon enough for all these purposes : Every Country abounding with its proper Trees and Plants (t), and every Vegetabl;^ flourifliing and gay, fomewhere or other about the Globe, and abundantly anfwering the Almighty Command of the Creator, when the Earth and Waters were ordered to their peculia'. Place, Qen. i. ii. And God said^ Let the Earth bring forth Grafs^ the Herb yielding Seed^ and the '2''ree yielding Fruit after bis kind. All which we aftually see is so.

To this Convenience which the various Soils thac coat the Earth are of to the Vegetables, we may add their great Uie and Benefit to divers Animals, to many Kinds of Quadrupeds, Fowls, Infefts, and Reptiles, who make in the Earth their Places of Repofe and rest, their Retreat in Winter, their Security from their Enemies, and their Nefts to repofe their Young ; some delighting in a lax and pervious Mould, admitting them an eafy Paflage ; and others delighting in a firmer and more folid Earth,

S'ev^^coi, 8CC. TflC fj^'j yi 0(A« |>;;»5> t* 'j i^vS'^H<;, roc. 5 y:.<:^y.se/i~ %^c, T« j ^^o-;j>i4i?, TH J) 7r«A(rxi»s, >^ dXc>)<;y Tec so^ o^hvui;, ret j

jjj rot y.i^'i' — ' nx/']u ^ Tati/Tfle, en jj rcc ofioict ^vrei ts 'oft.oietj >^ 7i» iiiou.oix f^yi T omtiv, ot«v »i rn 7r»ocf.XXxy^ t? ^t/ff-{«s« Iheophrafi. de Cauf. Plant. 1. i. c. 9.

{c) Nee vero Terr& ferre omnei omnia pojfnnt. llmninihus Salicesy crajjif'que paludibus Ain't Nafcuntitr; ftenles faxofis montibHs Orn't : Littora Alyrieiis Ut'tjfitna : Jenique aperios Bacchus amat colles : Aqnilonem (:y frigora Taxi, A [pice er extremis domitum cultoribus orbctn, Eoafque domos Arabnmt piilofque Gelonos : Divifd arboribus pMriiy i^c, Vir. Georg. L. 2.

that

Chap. n. Of the Strata of, &c. 6^

that will better fccure them againll Injuries from without.

CHAP. 11.

Of the various Strata or Beds obfervahle in the Earth.

TH E various Strata or Eeds^ although but little different from the lall, yet will deferve a diltinft consideration.

By the Strata or Beds , I mean those Layers of Minerals (c?)^ Metals (^), Earth, and Stone (c), lying under that upper Stratum^ or Tegument

of

{a) AUho' Minerals, Metals and Stones lie in Beds, and have done so ever since Noah's Flood, if not from the Creation ; yet it is greatly probable that they have Power of ^r^u'- vi^ in iheir refptdive Beds : That as the Beds are robbed and emptied by Miners, so after a wiiile they recruit again. Thus Viiriol, Mr. Be-}/ thinks, will grow by the Help of the Air. So ^//.'w doth the same. We are ajfured (he faith) by the experitnccd Agricola, That the Earth or Ore of Alum, being robbed of its Salt, will in trait of Time recover it, by being expofed to the Air. Boyl'f Sufpic. about some Hid. Qual. in the Air, p. i8.

(b) As to the Growth of Metals, there is great reason to fufpeift that alfo, from what Mr. Boyl hath alledged in his Ob^ ferzations about the Grozvth of Metals : And in his Scept. Chym, Part 6. pag. 361. Compare alfo Hakezvil's Apol. pag. 164.

And particularly as to the Growth of iron, to the Inllanccs he gives from Plmy, Fallopius, Cxfalpinus, and others; we may add, what is well known in the Fore/i of Dean in CLincelicrjhire : That the belt Iron, and most in Quantity, that is found there, is in the old Cinders, which they melt ovcr again. This the Author of the Additions to Gloucefler' fl)iie in Cambd. Brit, of the last Edition, p. 145. attributes to the RemilTnefs of the former Melters, m not exhauilmg the Ore : But in all Probability it is rather to be attributed to the new Impregnations of the old Ore, or Cinders, from the Air, or from some fcminal Principle, or plaftick Quality ia the Ore it self.

(c) As for the Growth of Stone, Mr. Boyl gives two InlUnccs. One is that famous Place in France, called i.es Caret

Coittieies •

^4 Of the Strata of Book III.

of the Earth last spoken of, all of a prodigious Ufe to Mankind : Some being of great Ufe for Building; some ferving for Ornament j some furnifliing us with commodious Machines, and Tools to prepare our Food, and for Veflels and Utenfils, and for multitudes of other Ufcs ; some ferving for Firing to drefs our Food, and to guard us against the Infults of Cold and Weather ; some being of great Ufe in Phyfick, in Exchange and Commerce, in manuring and fertilizing our Lands, in dying and colouring, and ten thoufand other Conveniences, too many to be particularly spoken of : Only there is one grand Ufe of one of these Strata or

Coutieres ': Where the Water falling from the upper Parts of the Cave to the Ground, doth prefently there condenfe into little Stones, of such Figures as the Drops, falling either feveraUjy or upon one another , and coagulating prefently into Stones , chance to exhibit. Vid. Scept. Chym. pag. 360.

Such like Caves as these 1 have my self met with in England ; particularly on the very Top of Bredon-Hill in Worcefterjlitre, near the Precipice, facing Perjhore, in or near the old Fortrefs, called Bembfiury-Camp; I law some Years ago I'uch a Cave, which (if 1 mil-remember not) was lined with those Stalailical Stones on the Top and Sides. On the Top they hung like Icicles great and small, and many lay on the Ground. They feemed manifeftly to be made by an Exfudation, or Exftillation of some petrifying Juices out of the rocky Earth there. On the Spot, I thought it might be from the Rains foaking through, and carrying with it Impregnations from the Stone, the Hill being there all rocky. Hard by the Cave is one or more vast Stones, which (if I miftake not) are incruftated with this Sparry, Staladlical Subftance, if not wholly made of it. But it is so many Years ago fmce I was at the Place, and not being able to find my Notes about it, I cannot say whether the whole Stone is (in all Probability) Spar, (as I think it is,) or whether I found it only cafed over with it, notwithftanding I was very nice in examining it then, and have now some of the Fragments by me, consisting, among other (liining Parts, of some transparent angular ones.

The other instance of Mr. Boyl, is from Linfchoten, who faith, that in the Eafi-lndies, when they have cleared the Diamond Mines of all the Diamonds, In a few Tears Time they fini in the same Place nezv Diamonds produced. Boyl, Ibid.

Bed?,

, Chap IT. the Earth. G<y

Beds, that cannot cafily be omitted, and that is, those fubtcnancous Strata of Sand, Gravel, and laxci Earth that admit o\\ and facihtate tlie Pafla/;c of the fwcct Waters (r/), and may probably be the Colanders whereby they arc fwectcncd, and tlicn ac the flimc time alfo convey 'd to all Parts of the habitable World, not only through the temperate and torrid Zones-, but even the farthcll l^cgions of the frozen Poles,

That these Strata are \.ht prtncipal PaJJageso^ the sweet Fountain- Waters, is, I think not to be doubted, confidering that in them the Waters are well known to p.ifs, and in them the Springs are found by those that feck for them. I fiiy, the principal Paflligcs, because there arc other lubtcrraneous Guts and Chanels, Fiflures and Pallagcs, through which many Times the Waters make then- way.

Now that which in a'particular manner doth fcem to me to manifcil a fpecial Providence of God in

the

{^) It is not onV agreeable to Rcifon, bui I am tolti by Perf jns coiiverfant in digging of Wells throii^^hout this County of Effex, wlisre I live, that the fureil Beds in which they find Water, are Gravely and a co.ufe, dark coloured Sand ; which Beds feldom faii to yield Plenty of sweet Water; But for Clay, they never tind Water therein, if it be a llrong, ftitf Cla-j ; but ir it be lax and fandy, Ibmetimes Springs are found in it; yet so weak, that they will scarcely serve the U;cs of the fmailefl Family. And fometimcs they meet with thole Beds lying next, under a looCe, black Mould, (which, by their description, I judged to be a sort of oazy, or to have the resemblance of an ancient, ruQiy Ground,) and in that Cafe the Water is always naught, and Uinks. And laflly, Another sort of Bed they find in J-fjcx, in the clayie- Lands, particularly that part called the Rodings, which yields Plenty of sweet Water, and that is a Bed of white Earth, as though made of Chalk and white Sand. This they find, after they have dug through forty, or more Feet of Clay ; and it is so tender and moill, that it will not lie upon the Spade, but they arc forced to throw it into their Bucket with their Hands, or with Bowls ; but when it comes up into the Air, it loon becomes an hard white Stone.

F Jiiuj

^($ Of the Strata of Book III.

the rcpofining these watery Beds is, that they (hould be difperfed all the World over, into all Countries, and almoO: all Tra6ls of Land : That they Ihould so entirely, or for the most part, consist of lax, incohering Earth, and be fofeldom blended with other impervious Moulds, or if they are so, it is commonly but accidentally j and that they are interpofed between the other impervious Beds, and so are as a Prop and Pillar to guard them off, and to prevent their finking in and fhutting up the PafTages of the Waters.

The Time when those Strata were laid, was doubtlefs at the Creation, v^hcn God /aid (Gen.i.p.) Let the Waters under the Heaven be gathered together unto one Place, and let the dry Land appear ; or elfe at the Deluge", if, with some fagacious Naturalifis^ we suppose the Globe of Earth to have been difibl- Ved by the Flood {e). At that Time (whatever it was) when the terraqueous Globe was in a chaotick State, and the earthy Particles fubfided, then those several Beds were in all Probability repofitedin the Earth, in that commodious Order in which they now are found j and that, as is afferted, according to the Laws (/) of Gravity.

Thus much for the Variety of Beds wherein the Waters are found. That it is in these Beds only or chiefly the Springs run, is farther manifest from the forcible Eruption of the Waters fometimes out of those watery Beds. Of which see chap. 4. Note (k). This Eruption ftiews, that the Waters c-ome from some Eminence or other, lying at a distance, and being ciofely pent up within the watery Stratum, by the clayie Strata, the Waters with force mount up, when the Strata above are opened.

(f) V. Dr. Woadward'% Effay, Part 1. Steno's Prodr. ^c.

If) Id. ib. pag. z8. and 74. But Dr. Leigh in his Nat. Hiftory of Lancaflj'ire, fpeaking of the Coal-pits, denies the Strata to lie according to the Laws of Gravitation, faying the Strata are a Bed of Marie, afterwards Free-Stone, next iron- Stone, then Coal, or Kennel- Mine^ tkea some other Strata, and again Coal, v<^

But

Chap. III. the Earth, 67

But upon a ftri<flcr Enquiry into the Matter, finding 1 Iiad rcafon to fufpecft that few, if any, adtually had tried the Experiment, I was minded to brmg the Thing to the Tcft of Experiment my fcif; and having an Opportunity, on ylpr'tl II. 1711. I cauled divers Fhues to be bored, laymg the levcral Strata by themselves ; which afterwards I weighed with all Stricftnefs, first in Air, then in Water, taking C^are that no Air-bubbles, cs-c. might obllruci the Accuracy of the Experiment. The result was, that in my Yard, the Strata were gradually fpscifically heavier and heavier, the lower and lower they went; and the upper which was Clay, was confiderably fpecifically lighter than the lower Stratum; which was firfl a loofe Sand, then a Gravel. In which stratum principally the Springs run that supply my Well.

But in my Eields, where three Places were bored (to no great Depth) I found below the upper (fuperficial Stratum) si deep Bed ot Sand only, which was of diflcrent Colours and Conlillence, which I weighed as before, together with the Virgin-Mould; but they were all of the same, or nearly the same fpecirtck Gravity, both out of the same Hole, and out of different Holes, although the Sand was at lall To gravelly, that it hinder'd our boring any deeper.

Upon this, fearing lelt fomc Error might be in the former Experiments, I try'd them over again ; and that with the same SucceTs.

After this, I made some Experiments in some deep Chalk- Pits, with the Flints, Chalk, o-c. above and below; but the Succefs was not so uniform as before.

Acquainting our juflly renowned B, S. with thefc Experiments, they ordered their Operator to experiment the Strata, of a Coal-Pit; the Succefs whereof may be seen in PbiloJ. Tranf. Nr. 336,

CHAP. III.

Of the Subterraneous Caverns^ and the Vulcand's.

I Shall take notice of the fubterraneous Caverns, Grotto's and Vulcano's, bccaufe they arc made an Objc6lion {a) againit the prefcnt Contrivance and

Stru6lure

{a) Nemo dixerit terram pulchrierem ejfc quod cavernofa fitf quid dchijcat in muliis locis, quod dtfnipta caveis o" fpattis tn-

6% The Cave ffis and Vulcano^s. BookllL

Strufture of the Globe. But, if well considered, they will be found to be wife Contrivances of the Creator, ferving to great Ufes of the Globe, and Ends of God's Government. Befides many fecret, grand Functions and Operations of Nature in the Bowels of the Earth, that in all Probability thcfe Things may minider unto, they are of great Ufe to the Countries where they are {b). To instance in the very worfl of the Things named, 'viz. the Vulcano's and ignivomous Mountains ; although they are some of the most terrible Shocks of the Globe, and dreadful Scourges of the fmful Inhabitants thereof, and may serve them as Emblems, and Prefages of Hell it self; yet even these have their great Ufes too, being as Spiracles or Tunnels {c) to the Countries where they are, to vent the Fire and Vapours that would make difmal Havock, and oftentimes a6lually do so, by dreadful Succuffions and Convulfionsof the Earth. Nay, if the Hypothefis of a central Fire and Waters be true, these Outanibiis ; iifque mitto ordine difpofitis, nulla forma : nee qua. alitid contincant quam tenebras cr Jordes; unde graves ojr peftlfer& exhalationes, terra motus, &c. Buruet ubi fupr. c. 7.

(h) The Zirchmtzer Sea in CarnloU, is of great Ufe to the Inhabitants of that Country, by affording them Fifli, Fowls, Fodder, Seeds, Deer, Swine, and other beasts, Carriage for their Goods, o'c. Vid. Phil. Tranf. Nr. 191, Sec. or Lozvth-, uibrldg. Vol. z. p. 306, &c. where you have put together in one View, what is difperfed in divers of the Tranfadions. This Sea or Lake proceeds from some fubterraneous Grotto, or Lake, as is made highly probable by Mr. Valvafor, ibid.

The Grotto Podpetfchio may be another instance, that the very fubterraneous Lakes may be of Ufe, even to the Inhabitants of the Surface above : Of which see Lo~vth. ubi fupr. fig' 3n- Sturmius alfo may be confulted herein his Philof Ecletl. Exercit. 11. de Terr& mot. particularly in Chap. 3. some of the most: eminent Specus's are enumerated, and some o£ their Ufes.

(c) Crebri fpeciis [remedium] pr^bent. PrAconceptum enlm fpintum exhalant : quod in ccrtis notatur oppidis, qu£ minus quatiuntur, crebris ad elnviem cuniculis cavata, Flin, Hill, Nat. iib. I. cap. 81.

lets

Chap. III. The Caverns andVulcano^s. 6<)

lets fccm to be of grcatefl: Vic to the Peace and Q^iict of the terraqueous Globe, in venting the fubterraneous Heat and Vapours > vhich, if pent up, would make dreadful and dangerous Commotions of the Earth and Waiters.

It may be then accounted as a fpecial Favour of the divine Providence, as is observed by the Author before praifcd (r/), " That there are scarcely any " Countries, that are much annoyed \vith Earth- " quakes, that have not one of these fiery Vents. '' And these, (fiith he) are conflantly all in Flames " whenever any Earthquake happens, thcydifgorg- " ingthat Fire, which whilll underneath, was the " cause of the Dilaller. Indeed, (faith he,) were " it not for these i^ix^a/zV///^, whereby it thus gain- " eth an Exit^ 'twould rage in the Bowels of the " Earth much more furioufly, and make greater *' Havock than now it doth. So, that though " those Countries, where there are such P''idca},o\^ " are ufually more or less troubled with Earih- " quakes j yet, were these Vulcano's wanting, they '' would be much more annoyed with them than " now they are j yea, in all Probability to that Dc" '' gree, as to render the Earth, for a valt Space *' around them, perfe6lly uninhabitable. In one " word, (laith he) so beneficial are these to the " Territories where they are, that there do not " -want Indances of some which have bcenrefcued, " and wholly delivered from Earthquakes by the " breaking forth of anew Vulcano there j this con- " tinually difcharging that Matter, which being till " then barricaded up, and imprifoned in the Bowels " of the Earth, was the occalion of very great and " frequent Calamities". Thus far that ingenious Author.

{f) Woodward's Effay, Part 3. Cof.'fctl. 13.

F 2 CHAP,

70 Book IIL

CHAP. IV.

Of the Mountains and Valleys,

H E last Thing I shall take notice of relating to the Earth, shall be the Hills and Valleys. these the eloquent Theorift owns to " contain fomewhat " augull and flately in the beholding of them, that '' infpircth the Mind with great Thoughts and Paf- '' fion?, that we naturally on such OccaGons think *' of God and his Greatnefs". But then, at the Ame Time he faith, " The Hills are the greatcd " Examples of Ruin and Confufion ; that they have '' neither Form nor Beauty, nor Shape, nor Order, ''• any more than the Clouds in the Air 5 that they *' confilt not of any proportion of Parts, referable " to any design, nor have the leafl; Footrteps of " Art or Counfel ". Confequcntly one grand Part of this lower Creation, even the whole present Face of our terraqueous Globe, according to this ingenious Author, is a Work of mere Chance, a Structure in which the Creator did not concern himself.

Part of this Charge I have already briefly answered, and rny Survey now leads metofhew, that the Mountains are so far from being a Blunder of Chance, a Work without design, that they are a noble, ufeful, yea, a neccflary part of our Globe (a).

And

(a) Though there are some that think Mountains to be a Deformity to the Earth, Bzc. yet if xvell considered, they will be found as much to conduce to the Beauty and Conveniency of the Vmverfe, as any of the other Parts. Nature (faith Pliny) puf ■pofely framed them for ynany excellent Ufes ; partly to tame the Violence of greater Rivers, to Jirengthen certain Joints within the Veins and Bozvels of the Earth, to break the Force of the. Sea's Inundation, and for the Safety of the Earth's Inhabitants^ whether Beafls or Men. That they make much for the Proteilion of beasts, the Pfalmifi teflifies. The higheft Hills are a Refuge for the wild Goats, and the Rocks for Conies. The

Kingly

Chap. IV. The Mountainside. yx

And in the firll Place, as to the Bufincfs of Ornament, Beauty, and Plcalurc, 1 may appeal to all Alcn's Senlcs, whether the grateful Variety of Hills and Dales, be not more plcafing than the lur^eil continued Planes. Let those who make it their Buiinefs to vifit the Globe, to divert their Sight with the various Profpefts of the Earth j let thclc, I say, judge whether the far dillant Parts of the Earth would be so well worth vifiting, if the Earth was everywhere of an even, level, globous Surface, or one large Plane of many looo Miles j and not rather, as now it is, whether it be not far more plealing to the Eye, to view from the Tops of the Mountains the fubjacent Vales and Streams, and the far diltant Hills > and again from the Vales to behold the furrounding Mountains. The elegant Strains and lofty Fliglns, both of the ancient and modern Poets on these Occalions, are Tcib'monies of the Senfc of Mankind on this Configuration of the Earth.

But be the Cafe as it will as to Beauty, which is the leall valuable consideration, we shall find as to Convenience, this Configuration of the Earth far the moil commodious on i'cveral Accounts.

I. As it is the most (alubrious, of great ufe to the Prefervation or Relloration of the Health of Man. Some Conflitutions are indeed of so happy a Strength, and so confirmed an Health, as to be

Kindly Prophet had likewife learnt the Safety of those by his own Experience^ when he alfo zvas fain to make a Mountain his Refuge from the Fury of his Mafler Saul, who profecuted him in the IVildcrnefs. True indeed, such Places as these keep their Neighbours poor, as being mofi barren, but yet they prefervt them fafe, as being mojl firong ; witnefs our unconquered

Wales and Scothnd. Wherefore a good Author doth rightly

call them Nature's Buhvarks, cajl up at God Almighty's Charges, the Scorns and Curbs of -jiCiorious Armies ; which made iht Barbarians in Curlius so confident of their own Safety, 6cc. Bi- (bop iVilkia's World in the Moon, f>ag. 114.

^ ^ indifTercnc

72- The Mount ahs Book III.

indifferent to almod: any Plnce or Temperature of the Air : But then oihers are so weakly and Feeble, as not to be able to bear one, bur can live comfortably in another Place. With some, the finer and more fubtile Air oF the Hills doth belt agree, who are languifliing and dying in the feculent and grofler Air of great Towns, or even the warmer, and vaporous Air of the Valleys and Waters : But contrary wife, others languifh on the Hills, and grow lufty and strong in the warmer Air of the Valleys.

So that this Opportunity of fliifting our Abode from the warmer and more vaporous Air of the Valleys, to the colder and more fubtile Air of the Hills, or from the Hills to the Vales, is an admirable Eafernent, Refrefhment, and great Benefit to the valetudinarian, feeble part of Mankind, affording those an eafy and comfortable Life, who would otherwife live mifcrably, languiFh and pine away.

2. To this lalutary Conformation of the Earth, we may add another great Convenience of the Hills, and that is, in affording commodious Places for Habitation > " ferving (as an eminent Author (c*) wordeth it) " as Skreens to keep off the cold and nip- '' ping Blads of the northern and ealterly Winds, *' and reflecting the benign and cherifhing Sun- " Beams, and lb rendering our Habitations both " more comfortable and more chcarly in Winter 5 " and promoting the Growth of Herbs and Fruit- " Trees, and the Maturation of the Fruits in Sum- " mer.

3. Another Benefit of the Hills is, that they serve for the Produftion of great Varieties of Herbs and Trees {c). And as there was not a better Judge of

those

(^) Ray'; wisdom of God, &c. pa^. 2,51. Dijfolution of th$ World, pag. 35.

(c) Theophrafius having reckoned up the Trees that delight moil in the Hiils, and others in the Valleys, obferveth, "Airuf

Chap. IV. afid Valleys, 73

those Matters, so I cannot give a better Account of this Convenience, than in the Words of the lall cited Famous Author, the late moll eminent and learned Mr. Ray (^), (who hath so fully difcuHed this Subjcft I am upon, that it is fcarcc pofliblc to tread out of his Steps therein). His observation is, " That the Mountains do efpccially abound with " different Species of Vegetables, bccaufe of the " great Diverfity of Soils that arc found there, cvc- " ry Vertex or Eminence almoil, affording new " Kinds. Now these Plants, (f;ith he,) serve part- " ly for the Food and Suilcnance of luch Anmials '* as are proper to the Mountains, partly for medi- " cinal Ufcsj the chief Phyfick, Herbs and Roots, " and the bell in their Kiiids growing there : It bc- *' ing remarkable, that the grcatell and moll luxu- " riant Species in moil Genera of Plants are native '' of the Mountains.

4. Another Convenience which my laff named " learned Friend observes {e) '\^ " That the Moun- " tains serve for the Harbour, Entertainment, and " Maintenance of various Animals j Birds, Beads " and Infcdts, that breed, feed and frequent there. " For, (faith he) the highcft Tops and Pikes of *' the Alps themselves are not delUtute of their In- '' habitants, the Ibex or Stein-buck^ the Rupicapra " or Chamois.^ among Quadrupeds > the Lagopus a- " mong Birds. And 1 my self (faith he) have ob- " served beautiful Papilws^ and Store of other In- " fefts upon the Tops of some of the Alpine Moun- " tains. Nay, the highell Ridges of many of thefc

see 3 OTX X.0I1CC T o^av xj T Trehur, fini^u ^" y^ xxWitu ri) o-^ei rx c* T«~i 7r£<J(«/{ Vi»f3- t^HTiU i) TTiTf jc?^'""^ ^ |Ja<uii y^ t k*^- 9r<?», T<* o^Hvci. Theoph. Htft. Pi. I. 3. C. 4. "AtxiIx 3 ci> to^j iixHoii TiVfl/s x«AA('<w '/'".^ '^ .M(iAA«» e j;o9-fvH' — — T« fi^ yi ^if4. c. I.

i^d) IVtfdom of Gcdy p. 251, {t) Ul>i fiipra,

^^ Mountains

74 ^^^s Mount ains Book III.

*' Mountains, serve for the Maintenance of Cat- " tie, for the Service of the Inhabitants of the " Valleys.

f. Another Thing he observes is, " That those " long Ridges and Chains of lofty and topping " Mountains, which run through whole Continents " Eaft and Weft (/}, serve to Itop the Evagation of *' the Vapours to the North and South in hot Coun- *' tries, condeniing them like Alembick Heads into " Water, and so (according to his Opinion) by a " kind of external Diftillation giving original to *' Springs and Rivers j and likewife by amailing, " cooling and conftipating of them, turn them into " Rain, by those Means rend ring the fervid Regi- " onsofthe torrid Zone habitable.

To these might be added some other Ufes and Conveniences {g)\ as that the Hills serve to the

(/) M.iny have taken Notice, that some of the greatest Eminences of the World run generally Eaft and Weil, of which take the late ingenious and learned Dr. Niehols's Account, ^Confer, zvith a The'ifty Part l. pag. 191.] To go no fartker than our oivn Conntr'^, all our great Ridges of Hiils in Eng' land run Ealt and Welt; so do the Alps in Italy, and in [ome measure the Pyrenees ; so do the Mountains of the Moon in Africk, and so do Mount Taurus and Caucafus. This he fauh is a wife Contrivance to prevent the Vapours, which ivould all run Northwards, ar.d leave no Rains in the Mediteiranean Countries.

{g) That the Generation of many of the Clouds is owing to the Hills, appears from the observations of the ingenious and learned Dr. 'Jch. Jam. Scheuchzer of Zurich, and Mr. ^oach. Frid. Creitlovius cited by him. They observed at Sunriling, divers Clouds detached by the Heat of the Sun, from some of the Tops of the ^llps, ckc. upon all which their observations, the Conclulion is, Mirati fummam Creatoris fap'tentiam, qui o' id quod paulo ante nulli nobis ufui effe videbatur, maxitnis rebus defimaverat, adeoque ex illo tempore dubitare coefi, num Nubes ejfent future, ft ifliufmodi Monte s v Petr& nort darentur. Hypothefi hac (iante, elucefceret pertnagna utilitas^ imo necejfttas, quani Helviticae Alpes non nobis tantitm accolis fed CT* -vtcinis aliis regionibus pr&flant, difpenfando, quas gignunt Niibesy Ventosy Aquas. Schcuch. Iter. Alpin. 2. p. zq.

Generation

Chap. IV. and Valleys. 75-

Generation of Minerals and Metals [h"^.^ and that in them principally arc the moll ufeful Follllcs found; or if not found and generated only in them, yet at lead all thcfe fubterrancous Treafures are mod cafily come at in them : Alfo their Ufe to fcvtrai Nations of the Earth, in being Boundaries and Bullwarks to them. But there is only one Ulc more that I shall infill on, and that is,

G. And ladly, That it is to the Hills that the Fountains owe their Rile, and the Rivers their Conveyance. As it is not proper, so neither shall 1 here enter into any Difpute about the Originc of Springs, commonly afhgned by curious and learned Philolophers. But whether their Originebe from condenfed Vapours, as some think (/) > or from Rains falling, as others-, or whether they are derived from the Sea by way of Attradion, Percolation, orDidillationj or whether all thefc causes concur, or only some. Hill the Hills arc the grand Agent in this prodigious Benefit to all the Earth : those vail Mafles and Ridges of Earth ferving as so many huge A- Umhicks or Cula in this noble \Vork of Nature.

But be the Modus^ or the Method Nature takes in this great Work as it will, it is sufficient to my purpose, that the Hills area grand Agent in this so noble and neceffiry a Work : And confcquently, that those vail Maflcs and lofty Piles are not as they are charged, such rude and ufelefs Excrefcences of our ill-formed Globe j but the admirable Tools of Na-

(/;) l^et us take here O/. Mag. Obfervanon ot his Northera Mountains, Monies excelfi funt, fed pro majori parte fienlcs^ cr andi ; in quibus fere nil aliud pro tncoUrum commodttate er conftrvatione g'tgnitur, quam inexhaujla pretioforum Metalhrum uhertas, qua fata opulenti, fertiUfque funt in omnibus viu neceji'driis, forfiran cr fuperfims aliunde fi lilei conquirendis, unanimique robore, ac virtbus, ubi -vis contra hxc nature dona intentara fuerit, defendendis. Acre enhn genus hotntnuT7t est, &C. Ol. Mag. hist. L. 6. Praef. See alio Sir Robert Sibbald's Frodr. Nat. hist. Scot. p. 47.

ij) See Book 1. Chap. 3. Note [I).

ture

7<5 I'he Mountains Book III.

ture, contrived and ordered by the infinite Creator, to do one of its mod ufefLil Works, and to diTpenfe this great Blefling to all Parts of the Earth j without which neither Animals could live, nor Vegetables scarcely grow, nor perhaps Minerals, Merals, or Foffiles receive any Increafe. For was the Surface of the Earth even and level, and the middle Parts of its Iflands and Continents, not mountainous and high, (as now it is) it is moit certain there could be no Defcent for the Rivers, no Conveyance for the Waters i but instead of gliding along thcfe gentle Declivities which the higher Lands now afford them quite down to the Sea, they would (lagnare, and perhaps flink, and alfo drown large Tracts of Land,

But indeed, without Hills, as there could be no Rivers, so neither could there be any Fountains, or Springs about the Earth > because, if we could fup^ pofe a Land could be well watered (which I think not poflible) without the higher Lands, the Waters could find no Defcent, no Pafilige through any comniodious Out-lets, by Virtue of their own Gravity j and therefore could not break out into thole commodious Pallages and Currents, which we every v/here almoll find in, or near the Hills, and feldom, or never in large and fpacious Planes ; and when we do find them in them, it is generally at great and inconvenient Depths of the Earth j nay, those very fubterraneous Waters, that are any v/here met with by digging in these Planes, are in all Probability owing to the Hills, either near or far diftant : As among other Inllances may be made out, from the forcible Eruption of the fubterraneous Waters in digging Wells, in the lo'wer jinfiria^ and the Territories of Moclena^ and Bologna in Jtaly^ mentioned by my fore-named learned Friend Mr. Ray {k). Or if there be any fiich Place

found

(k) ^f(3wy;£«r Blundel, related to the Parifian Academy, what Device the Inhabitants of the lower Aultria, [which is enccm-

Chap. TV. aud Valleys. yy

found throughout the E.irth, that is devoid of Mountains and yet well watered, as perhaps fomc fmull lilmus m.iy i yet in this very C.ife, that whole JMafs oF Land is no other than as one Mountaia delcending, ('though unperceivedly) gently down from the iVJid-land Parts to the Sea, as moll other Lands do ; as is manirell from the Dcfccnt of their Rivers, the Principal of which in moll Countries have generally their Rife in the more lofty Midland Parts.

And now confidcring what hath been said concerning this lall Uie of the Hills, there are two or three Ads of the divine Providence obfervable therein. One is, that all Countries throughout the whole World, should enjoy this great Benefit of Mountains, placed here and there, at due and proper Diltances, to afford thefc several Nations this excellent and moil nccefTiu-y Element the Waters.

pajfsd ZL'ith the Mountains o/Stiria"! are wunt to u^e to Jill their IVclli xvith Water. They dig in the Earth to the Depth of i^ and lo Fett, till they conte to an Ai\r'dla. [clammy liartli]— — zi'hich they bore through so deep, till the Waters break forcibly out ; which Water it is probable comes from the nei'^hbouring Mountains in fubterranecus Chanels. And Caiiiniis obfervedy that in many Places of the Territory of Modena and Bologna in Italy, thcj make themfclves Wells by the like Artijice, ike. By this Means the same Seig. Caflini tnade a Fountain at the Ca~ file of Urbin, that cajl up the Water five Foot high above the level of the Ground. Ray'i Difc. i. pag. 40. ttli plma.

Upon Enquiry of fomc Ikilful Workmen, whole Biifmcfs it is ro dig Wells, crc. whether they had ever met with the like Cale, as these in this Note, they told me they had met with it in Ejfcx, where after they had dug to 50 Foot Depth, the Man in the Well observed the clayie Bottom to fwell and bepm to fend out Water, and ftamping with his Foot to ilop the Water, lie made way for so fuddain and forcible a Flux of Water, that before he could get into his Bucket, he was above his Waltc in Water; which foon afcended to 17 Feet: height, and there flayed : And although they often with great Labour endeavoured to empty the Well, in order to finilh their Work, yet they could never do it, but wcie forced to kavc it as it was.

For I

73 The Mountains Book III.

For according to Nature's Tendency, when the Earth and Waters werefepavated, and order'd to their several Places, the Earth rnufl have been of an even Surface, or nearly so. , The several component Parts of the Earth, mufl: have fubfidcd according to their several fpecifick Gravities, and at lall have ended in a large, even, fpherical Surface, every where equidiftant from the Center of the Globe. But that instead of this Form, so incommodious for the Conveyance of the Waters, it should be jetted out every where into Hills and Dales, so necefTary for that purpose, is a manifefl Sign of an efpecial Providence of the wife Creator.

So another plain Sign of the same efpecial Providence of God, in this Matter, is, that generally throughout the whole World, the Earth is so difpos'd, so order'd, so well laid j I may fiy, that the Mid-land Parts, or Parts fartheft from the Sea, are commonly the higheft; Which is manifefl, I have said, from the Defcent of the Rivers. Now this is an admirable Provifion the wife Creator hath made for the commodious Paflages of the Rivers, and for draining the several Countries, and carrying off the fuperfluous Waters from the whole Earth, which would be as great an Annoyance, as now they are a Convenience.

Another providential Benefit of the Hills fupplying the Earth with Water, is, that they are not only inflrumcntal thereby, to the Fertility of the Valleys, but to their own alfo (/) 5 to the Verdure of the Vegetables without, and to the Increment

and Vigour of the Treafures within them.

Thus

(/) As the Hills being higher, are naturally difpofed to be drier than the Valleys; lb kind Nature hath provided the greater Supplies of Moifture for them, such at least of them 2S do not afcend above the Clouds and Vapours. For, befides the Fountains continually watering them, they have

more

Chap. IV. dnd Valleys. 79

Thus having vindicated the prefcnt Form and Fabrick of the Earth, as dilbibutcd into Mountains and Valleys, and thereby flicwn in Ibmc Mcafurc the Ufe thereof, particularly of the Mountains, which are chiefly found fault with : I have, I hope, made it in some Mcafure evident, that God was no idle Speftator (w), nor unconcerned in the ordering of the terraqueous Globe, as the former bold Charges againll it do infer ; that he did not fuffcr so grand a Work, as the Earth, to go unfinifh'd out of his almighty Hand ; or leave it to be ordered by Chance, by natural Gravity, by cafual Earthquakes, ^c. but that the noble Strokes, and plain Remains of wisdom and Power therein, do manifest it to be his Work. That particularly the Hills and Vales, though to a peevifh weary Traveller, they may ieem incommodious and troublefome; yet are a noble Work of the great Creator, and wifely appointed by him for the Good of our fublunary World.

And so for all the other Parts of our terraqueous Globe, that are prefumed to be found fault with by some, as if carelelly order'd, and made without any Dcfign or End j particularly the Dillribution of the

more Dews and Rains commonly than the Valleys. They are more frequently covered vvith Fogs; and by retarding, flopping, or comprcflingihe Clouds, or by iheir greater Colds condenfing them, they have larger Quantities of Rain fall upon them. As I have found by atflual Experience, in comparing my observations with those of my late very curious and ingenious Correfpondcnt, Richard Tozvnley, Efq; oi LancaPure, and some others, to be met with before. Chap. z. Not€ (a). From which it appears, that above double the Quantity of Rain falleth in Lancajlj'ire^ than doth at Upminfler. The reason of which is, becaulc LancaJJure hath more, and much higher Hills than /'.■j!/^x hath. See Book II. chap. 5. Note (e).

(m) yicctifandi fane mei fentent'iA hic funt Sophtftt, qui ciwt nondttm invenire, neque exponere Optra Naturs, queant, earn taffjen iKerti.i at que in/citia coffJemnanr, 6cc. Galen, dc Uf. fart 1,1. 10. c, 9.

dry

i

8o The Mountains Book III.

dry Land and Waters j the laying the several Strata, or Beds of Earth, Stone, and other Layers before spoken of i the Creation of noxious Animals, and poifonous Subftances, the boifterous Winds j the Vulcano's, and many other Things which Tome are angry with, and will pretend to amend : I have before shewn, that an infinitely wife Providence, an almighty Hand was concerned even in them ; that they all have their admirable Ends and Ufes, and are highly inftrumental and beneficial to the Being, or Well-being of this our Globe, or to the Creatures reiiding thereon.

So alfo for humane Bodies, it hath been an ancient (»), as well as modern Complaint, that our Bodies are not as big as those of other Animals j that we cannot run as fwift as Deer, fly like Birds, and that we are out-done by many Creatures in the Accuracy of the Senfes, with more to the same purpose. But these Objeftions are well answered by Seneca (o), and will receive a fuller Solution from "what I shall observe of animal Bodies hereafter.

But indeed, after all, it is only for want of our knowing these Things better, that we do not

admire

(») vide qiiam miqui Jint divinorum munerHtn &jl'tmatores, et'lam quidam profejft Japientiam. <^eruntur quod non magn'itudine corporis aquetnus Elcphantes, -velocitate Cervos, levitate A" ves, inipettt Tauros ; quod fol'.dior fit cutis Belluis, decentior Damis, denfior Urfis, mollior Fibris ; quod fagacitate nos nariutn Canes vincant, quod acie luminum AquiU, fpatio atatis Cor- 'vi, tnulta Animaliat'nandi facilitate. Et cum quidam ne coire quidem in idem Natura patiatur, ut -velocitatem corporis cr vires pares animalibus habeamus ; ex diverfis cr dijfdentibus bonis Hominem non ejj'e compofitum, injuriam vacant ; cr in negligentes nojiri Deos querimoniamjaciunt, quod non bona valetudo, CT" I'itiis inexpugnabdis data Jit, quod non futuri fcientia. Vix fibi tetnperant qutn eoufque imbudenti& provehantur, ut Naturam oderinty quod infra Deos fumus, quod non in Aquo illis Jietimus. Seneca de Benef. 1. ^■ c. 2.9.

(q\ Gjuanto fatius est ad contemplationem tot tantorum^ue heneficiorum reverti, ct* agere gratias, quod nos in hoc pulcherri- ^ — ' - faa

Chap. IV. The Cone In [ion. 8i

admire (/)) them enough j it is our own Ignorance, Dulncfs or Prejudice, that makes us charge those noble Works oF the x^lmighty, as Defects or Blunders, as ill-contriv'd, or ill- made.

It is therefore fitter for such finite, weak, ignorant Beings as we, to be humble and meek, and confcious of our Ignorance, and jealous of our ow.i Judgment, when it thus confrontcth infinite Wifdoni. Let us remember how few Things we know, how many we err about, and how many we arc ignorant of: And those, many of them, the molt familiar, obvious Things ; Thmgs that we see and handle at Plcafurej yea, our own very Bodies, and that very P.irt of us whereby we undcrlland at all, our Soul. And ihould we therefore pretend to cenfure what God doth ! Should we pretend to amend his Work! Or to advife infinite wisdom ! Or to know the Ends and purposes of his infinite Will, as if we were of his Council! No, let us bear in JVlind, that these Objeftions are the Produ6ls, not of Reafoi), but of Peeviflinefs. They have been incommoded by Storms and Tempells j they have been terrify'd with the burning Mountains, and Earthquakes i they have been annoy'd by the noxious Animals, and fatigu'd by the Hills j and therefore arc angry, and will pretend to amend these Works of the Almighty. But in the Words of St. Paul (^), we may lay, Nay^ hut O Man, ivbo art thou that

mo domicilio voluerunt (Dii) fecundos sort'tri , quod terrenis frifecerunt. Then having reckoned up many of the Privileges and Benefits, which the Gods, he f.iich, have conferred upon U5, he concludes, Ita est .- cariffimos ncs habuerunt Dii nnmortalest haventque. Lt qui inaxitnus trihul honos potu'tt, ah ipfis proximos collccaverunt. I>lagna accepimus , tnajora )ion cepimus. Senec. Ibid.

ip) Naturam tnaxim\' adtniraberis, ft omnia ejus Optra peilu' firaris. Galen, de Uf. i*art. 1. ii. concluf.

(q) Roin, ix. ZO, ZI.

G re^Iiefl

^z 77je Conch fion. Book III.

repUefl agalnjl Go J? Shall the Thing formed say ta him that formed it^ M'''hy haft thou made me thus ? Hath not the Potter power o-ver the Ciay, of the same hump to make one Vcffe] to honour^ and another to difloonour ? If the Almighty Lord of the World, had for his own pleasure, made this our World more inconvenient for Man, it would better become us ta fit still, and be quiet j to lament our own great Infirmities and Failings, which deferve a worfe Place, a more incommodious Habitation, than we meet with in this elegant, this well contriv'd, well formed World; in which we find every Thing neccflary for the Sullentation, Ufe and pleasure, both of Man, and every other Creature here below j as well as some Whips, some Rods to fcourge us for our Sins (f). But yet so admirably well temper'd is our State, such an Accord, such an Harmony is there throughout the Creation, that if we will but purfue the Ways of Piety and Virtue, which God hath appointed ; \\ we will form our Lives according to the Creator's Laws, we may efcape the Evils of this our frail State, and find fufScient Means to make us happy whilft we are in the Body. The natural Force and Tendency of our Virtue, wili

(r) Neiihgr are they [noxious Creatures] of less I'fe to amend our Minds, by teaching us Care and Diligence, and more Wit. And jo much the more, the worje the Things are we Jecy and jJjoiild avoid. VVeezels, Kites, and other mifchievous A' Tiimals, induce us to a IVatchfulnefs : Thiftles and Moles to . good Hujbandry ; Lice oblige us to CleanHxefs in our Bodies ; Spiders in our Hoafes ; and the Moth in our Clothes. The Defortuity and Tdthinefs of Swine, make them the Beauty-Spot of

the Animal Creation, and the Emblems of all Vice The

truth is. Things are hurtful to us only by Accident ; that is, Tiot of Necejfity, but through our own Negligence or lAifiaks. Hoiifes decay. Corn is blafted, and the Weevel breeds in Mault% fooneft totvards the South. Be tt so, it is then our otvn Vault, if we ufe not the Means which Nature and Art have provided! againfi these Inconveniencies. Grew's Cofmol. c. z. §.49,50.

prevenj

Chap. IV. The Concltifion. %^

prevent many of the Harms {f)^ and the watchful Providence oF our Almighty Bcnciailor, will be a Guard againll others j and then nothing is wanting to make us happy, as long as we are in this World, there being abundantly enough to entertain the Minds of the molt contemplative j Glories enough to pleafc the Eye of the mod curious and inquilirive i Harmonics an J Conforts of Nature's own, as well as Man's making, fuflicicnt to delight the V.xx of the mod harmonious and muhcal 5 All Sorts of plcalant Gulto's to gratify the I'aUe and Appetite, even of the moll luxurious j And fragrant Odours to pleafc the nicelt and tendered Smell : And in a Word, enough to make us love and delight in this World, rather too much, than too little, confidering how nearly we are aliy'd to another World, as well as this.

(/) Kun efl gtmendus, nee gravi iirgendus nece, Virtute quifcjuis aljiulit fails tier.

Senec. Hercul. Oct. Ad. 5. Car. 1833,

Hunquatn Stygias fertur ad utnhras Inclyia virius. Id. Ibid. Car. 1981.

G2 BOOK

BOOK IV.

Of Animals in general,

^^^pjN the last Book, having furvey'd the ^fTT^J Earth, it self in Particular, 1 shall next Kl__.Jpl take a View of the Inhabitants thereof 3 feS^ffiSi Oi* the several Kinds of Creatures {d)^ that have their Habitation, Growth, or Subfiilence thereon.

- ThHe Creatures are either Senfltive, or Infenfitive Creatures'.

In fpeaking of those endow'd with Senfe, I {hall consider :

J. Some Things common to them all.

II. Things peculiar to their Tribes. A

I. The Things in common, which I intend to take Notice of, are these Ten :

1. The five Senfes^ and their Organs.

2. The great Inilroment of Vitality, respiration, 5. The Motion^ or Loco-motive Faculty of Animals.

(a) Princ'tpio civktm, ac terras, campofque liquentes, Lucentemque globum Lnn&, TttantaqHe ajlra Spirinis inttis alit, totamqtte jnfufa per artus Mens agitat moiem, cjr magna fe corpore mifcet. Inde hominum, pecHdmnque genus, vit&que volantunfy Et q'i& marmoreo fert monftra fub Aquore ponlus. Igneus est illis 'vigor, cr roelejiis origo Seminibus.

Virgil. iJ^neid. L.6. Carm. 714.

4. The

Chap. I. Survey of Animals, 85

4. The Place^ in which they live and a(5l. f . The B dance of their Numbers.

6. Their Food.

7. Their G loathing.

8. Their houses^ Nefts or Habitations. p. Their Methods of Self-Prefcrvation.

10. Their Generation^ and Conjcr'uation of their Species by that Means.

CHAP. I.

0/ ^/j^ /^'^ iy^7//^j /;/ general.

THE firfl: Thing to be consider'd, in common to all the Scnficive Creatures, is, their Faculty of Seeing., Hearing., Smelling., 'Tajiing and Feeling', and the Organs mmiilring to these five Senfcs.^ together with iheexad; Accommodation of those Senles, and their Organs, to the State and Make of every Tribe of Animals (^0- The consideration of wiiich Particulars alone, were there no other Demonibations of God, is abundantly (Ijfficient to evince the infinite wisdom, Power and Goodncis, of the great Creator. For, Who can but iland amaz'd at the Glories of these Works ! x^t the admirable Artifice of them I And at their noble Ufe and Performances ! For suppose an Animal, as such, had Breath and Life, and could move it self hither and thither j yet how could it know whither to go, what it was about, where to find its Food, how to avoid thou-

\d) Ex fenfibiis ante c.aera Hornini Ja6lus, ricinJe Cufiatus ; reliquis fuperatur a tnultis. AqniU clarths tertiunt : I'ultHres fagaclUs ordorantur , liqut.iius uttdinnt TalpA jbrute terr.i, tarn d«n[o 4ftque furdo natuneUtvento. P)in. Nac. Hill. ). lo. c. 69,

G 5 fands

8^ Senfes of Animals. Book IV.

fands of Dangers (^), without Sight ! How could Man, particularly, view the Glories of the Heavens, furvey the Beauties of the Fields, and enjoy the pleasure of beholding the noble Variety of diverting objects, that do, above us in the Heavens, and here in this lower World, present themselves to our View every where j how enjoy this, I say, without that admirable Senfe of Sight (J) ! How could alfo the Anin)al, without Smell and T^afte.^ diilinguifh its Food, and difcern between wholfome and unwholfome j befides the Pleafures of delight^ ful Odours, and relifhingGufto's ! How, without that other Senfe of Hearings could it difcern many Dangers that are at a distance, understand the Mind of others, perceive the harmonious Sounds of Muiick, and be delighted with the Melodies of the winged Choir, and all the rest of the Harmonies the Creator hath provided for the Delight and pleasure of his Creatures ! And lastly. How could Man, or any other Creature diflinguifh pleasure from Pain, Health from Sicknefs, and consequently be able to keep their Body found and entire, without the Senfe of Feeling / Here, therefore, we have a glorious OEconomy in every Animal, that commandeth Admiration, and deferveth our Contemplation : As will better appear by coming to Particulars, and diftin6lly confidering the Provilioq which the Creator hath made for e^ch pf thefs Senfes.

{b) Subjacent OchU, pars corporis pretiofijftma, ^ quilucis uffi 'vitam diftinguant a morte. Plin. Nat. Hiit. 1. ii. c. 37.

(c) FxminA aliqu& Megarenfes foits oculis difcernere 'valebant inttr Ova qud ex Galltnd nigra, ct* quA ex alba nata funt, 13 what is affirmed (how truly I know not) by Grimald, ds Li^-^ tnin. ^ Color, Pr. 42. §. (5o.

V li A P,^

Chap. II. *7

CHAP. 11.

Of the Eye.

FOR our clearer Proceeding in the Confidcration of this nohle Part (rf), and underllanding its OEconomy, I iliall conlidcr;

1 . The Form of the Eye.

2. Its Situation in the Body.

3. Its Motions.

4. Its Size.

f. Its Number.

d. Its Parts.

7. The Guard and Security Nature hath provided for this so ufeful a Part.

As this eminent Part hath not been pretermitted by Authors, that hnve made it their particular design and business to fpcak of the Works of God ; so divers of the aforefaid Particulars have been touched upon by them. And therefore I shall take in as httle as polllble of what they have ^■.■■\ and as near as I can, mention chiefly what they have omitted. And,

{a) In BiJfcHionibus anatom'iciiv'tx alieiu'td ad'in'trabilius, ant artificiyfius jtruCiurJi OchU humani, fneo quidetn judicia, occurrit : ut merito, per excillcntiam, Crcatoris appeUetur Aliraculum. Gui. Fabr. Hi'.dan. Cent. z. Oblerv. i.

So likewife that accurate Surveyor of the Eye, Dr. Brl^S', whok Ophthalmography Ih^ivc met wth since my penning ihis jtart of my Survey. His Chararter of this curious piece of Cod's Work is, Inter prxcip'tas corpoi is animati partes, qu^t tna^- ni Conditoris noftri japientiaTJi oJiendu?it, nulla fafie reperitur, qm ffjajori powpii elucet qu.'im ipj'e Oculiis, atit quf. cleT^antiori fortfiJi concinnatur. Deurn enim ait.i partes 'vel mlnori fatellhto fiipantur, vel in t ant am vennjlatem haud affurguht ; Ocelli pcculiarem honorem cjr decus a fupremo Num'/?ie e^atufn rcftrunt, cr nunquam non fiupends ftu Potentii charailcra repnjentatit, iiulla jane part tarn Jivino artifcio c^ordine, &;c. Cap. i. §• i.

G 4 I , For

08 Of the Eye. Book IV,

I. For the Torm of the Eye j which is for the mofc part Globous, or fomewhat of the fphseroidal Form : Which is far the mofb commodious optical Form, as being fitteft to contain th.e Humours within, and to receive the Images of Objeds from without {b). Was it a Cube, or of any multangular Form, some of its Parts would lie too far off (<:), and some too nigh those lenticular Humours, which by their Rerractions cause Vifion. But by Means of the Form before-meniioned, the Humours of the Eye are commodioufly laid together, to perform their Office of Refratlion j and the Retina^ and every other Part of that little darkned Cell, is neatly adapted regularly to receive the Images from without, and to convey them accordingly to the common Senfory in the Brain,

ib) It is a good Real'on Imr Bacon affigns tor the ;iph3e:ricity of the Eye: Nam fi ejfet planx figHr£, /pedes ret majoris

oculo non pojjet cadere perpendicularirer fuper eum Cum

er^^ Oculus videt magna corpora, ut jere quartam cceli uno afpe£tHy man'-ifefium efi, quod non. poteji ejj'e planA figure, nee alicujus nifi fphAricA, quoniam fuper fph&ram parvan* pojjunt cadere perpendiculares infinite, quA a magno corpore veniunt, cr tendiint in centnim Sphs.r& : Et fie magnum corpus potejl ah oculo parvo wderi. For the Demonltration of which he hath given us a Figure. Rog. Bacon. Perfpedl. B;fi':r.ii. 4. Cap. 4.

Dr. Br'tggs faiih, Pars antica, (five Cornea,) con-jexicr efi pcfiicd : hdc emm ratione radii melius in pupillam detorqucntur, cr Ocuit fundus ex altera parte in majorem (propter imafines rernm ibidem delineandos) expanditur. Ibid. §.2.

(c) Suppofe the Eye had the Retina, or back part flat for the Reception of the Images, as in Fig. i. ABA: it is manifest, that if the Extremes of tlie Image AA were at a due focal diitance, the middle B would be too nigh the Crylialhr.e, and consequently appear confufed and dim ; but all Parts of the Retina lying at a due focal distance from the Cryflalline, as at ACA, therefore the Image painted thereon is ieen dillimft and clear. Thus in a dark R.oom, with a Lens at a Hole in the Window, (which 5r;/rw/«^ calls his Artifici.il Eye, in his Exerc'.i. Acad, one of which he had made for his Pupils, to run any where on Wheels). In this Room, I say, if the Paper that receives the Images be too nigh, or too far off the Lens, the Image will be confufed and dim; but in the Focus of the Gi.^fs, diftinft, dear, and a pleafant Sight.

To

Chap. IT. Of the Eye. ^

To this \vc mny add the aptitude of this Figure to the Motion of the Eye, for it is ncccnaiy for the Eye to move this way, and that way, in order to adjull it fclf to the Objcfts it would view > io by this Fiourc it is well prepared for such Motions, Jo that itcan with great Facility and Dexterity dircft it fclf as occalion requires.

And ns the Figure, so no less commodious is, 2. The Situation of the Eye, namely in the Head (^/), the moil cre(5l, eminent Fart of ihc Body, near the moll sensible, vital Parr, the Brain. By its Eminence in the Body, it is pvepai'd to take in the more {e) ObJLfts. And by its Situation in the Held, belidcs it Pioximity to the Brain, it is in the moil convenient Place for Defence and Security. In the Hands, it might indeed (in Man) be render'd more eminent than the Head, and be turned about here and there at ple.illire. But then it would be expofed to many Injuries in that adtivc Part, and the Hands (/) render'd a Icfs aftivc and ijfcful Part. And the like may be said to its Sight, in any other Part of the Body, but where it is. But in the Head, both of Man, and other Animals, it is placed in a Part that lecms to be contrived, and made chiefly for the Action of the principal Senfes.

Another Thing obfcrvabls in the Sight of the Eye, is the Manner of its Situation in the Head, in

{d) Blemmyis tradnntur capita ahcffv, Ore o" Ocuiis pf5lorl affixis. Plin. Nat. hist. 1. y. c. 8. Outd.ntcmve.sifi quofd^xm (ine cervice Oculos inhumcm habcr.tcs. lb.!, y.c. i. iroiinlieic, and other luch like Fable?, in this \?A\ cited Chapter of PLay^ no doubt our famous Romancer Sir 'J. MmidnvUe, had his Romantick Stories relatedin his Travels.

(e) See Book V, Chap. r. Note {e.)

(/) Galen defcrves to be here confultcd, who in liis Cook De Ufa Partium, from many Coiifider-Uions of the Hand, such as what is here mentioned, as alfo its Structure, Site and Ufe, largely proves and reflccf^s upon the VVifdum and I'rovidcnce of the Contriver and Maker of that I'art,

the

so Of the Eye, Book IV.

the Fore-part, or Side-part thereof, according to ehe particular Occafions of particular Animals. la Man, and some other Creatures, it is placed to look diredtly forward chiefly j but withal it is so order'd, as to take in near the Hemifphere before it. In Birds, and some other Creatures, the Eyes are so feated, as to take in near a whole Sphere, that they may the better feek their Food, and efcape Dangers. And in some Creatures they are feated, so as to see beil behind them (^), or on each Side, whereby they are enabled to see their Enemy that purfues them that way, and so make their Efcape.

And for the Affillance of the Eyes, and some of the other Senfes in their Adions; the Head is ge- Bcnily made to turn here and there, and move as Occaiion requires. Which leads me to the

5. Thing to be remarked upon, the Motions of the Eye it self. And this is generally upwards, downwards, backwards, forwards, and every way (/j), lor the better, more eafy, and diltind: Reception of the vifual Rays.

But where Nature any way deviateth from this Method, either by denying Motion to the Eyes, or ihe Head (/), it is a very wonderful Provilion Hie

hath

{g) Thus in Hares and Conies, their Eyes are very protuberant, and placed so much towards the sides of their Head, that their two Eyes take in nearly a whole Sphere : Whereas i:i Dogsy (that purfue them) the Eyes are set more forward in the Head, to look that way more than backward.

(h) Sed htbrkos Oculos fecit [Natura] z^ mobiles, ut z^ decli' sarentfiqiiid noceret ; zy afpe£him, qua vellent, facile converts-- rent. Cicer. de Nat. Deor. 1.1.0.57.

(i) The E'^es of Spiders, (in some four, in some fix, and in same eight) are placed all in the fore-front of their Head, {which is round, and without any Neck) all diaphanous and transparent, like a Locket of Diamonds, &c. neither wonder why }>r evidence flwuld be so anomalous in this Animal, more than in any other we know of. For, I. Since they wanting a Neck, i,amot move their Head, it is reitiijit$ that Defe^ JJjould be

Chap. II. Of the Eye. 91

h;iih made in the Cafe. Thus for a Remedy of this Inconvenience, in fomc Crc;uuits tlicir Eyes are set out at a Diitance {k) from the Head, to be circumvolvcd here and there, or one this, the other that way, at pleasure. And in CJrcaturcs, n-hofc Eyes are without Motion, as in divers Inftdsj in this Cafe, either they have more than t^^'o Eyes, or their Eyes are nearly two protubeiant Hcrmlphcics, and each Hemifphcrc often confilling of a prodigious Number of other httle Segments of a Sphere il). By which Means those Creatures arc so far hom being deny'd any Benerit, of that noble anu moil necelFary Senfe of Sight, that they have probably

fupplied by the multiplicity of Eyes. r. Since i hey were to live by catchmg so ni??ible a Prey as a Fly is, they oughr ti see her every way, and to take her per lahum, (as they do J without any Motion of the Head to discover her: Which Motion would Lave feared away so timorous an insect. Power"; Microl'. Oly'.crv, pag. ir.

The Eyes of the Cnmeleon refemlle a Lens, or Convex GWs, set in a zer/atilc globular Socket, ivhich flie turncth backboard, or any way, without wovir^ her Head ; and ordinarily the one a contrary, or quite d.jferent way from the other. Dr. Coddar.i in Phil. Tran. N^. 137.

But what is more extraordinary in this Motion ''of the Ca^ pjeleon's Fye] is to see one of the Eyes move, whdfl the other remains immoveable ; and the one to turn forward, at the same time that the other Icoheth behind; the one to look up to the Sky, when the other is fixed on the Ground. And these Motions to be so extreme, that they do carry the Pupilla undtr the Creji which makes the Eye-brow, and so fur into the Canthi, or Corners of the Eyes, that the Sight can difcern whatever is done jujl behind it, and direcVy before, ivithout turning the Head, which is faftned to the Shoulders. Mem. for a Nat. Hlft. in Anatom. DilTedt. at Parif. Dill', of Camel, pag. li.

(A-) Snails lend out their Eyes at a diHancc, thry bein" contained in their four Horn?, like atramentous spots, fitted tl the end of their Horns, or rather to the end: of those black Filaments or optick Nerves, which are finathed' in her Horns, as Dr. Pozver wordeth it. Obf 31. pag. 36. So the ingcniou; Pr. Lifier. Exercit Anat. Cochl, ij' Liltiac

(/) Viii I. 8. f, 3. Note ;aj.

more

92. Of the Eye. Book IV.

more of it than other Creatures, anfwerable to the Rapidity of their Flight, and brisk Motion j and to their Inquefis after Food, Habitation, or Repofitories of Generation, or such other necessity of the Animal.

4. Aijother admirable Provifion in the Eye, is, its Size 5 in some Animals large, in feme little. It would be endlefs here to enumerate Particulars j as those of Qiiadrupeds, Birds, Jnfc6ts, and other terrertrial Animals. And as for Fifhes, ihcy will fall under another Part of my Survey.

1 shall therefore only take Notice of its Size m one Creature, the Mole {m). As the Habitation of

thac

(m) Sever jnus is of Ari/lotle's, Pliny's, and Ml^. Magnus'^ Opinion, that the Alole hath no Sight; G. Seger denies any Humour to be therein, but thinks they may probably see, because Nature made nothing in vain. But Borrichius faith, their Eyes have appendiculam nerveam in cerebrum euntcm, cuius benejicio globuii Ml [the little Eyes] extra pellem facile tolerant exferi, rerrahiqtie pro arbitrio — — In iUis oculorum globulis humor aqneus copiose fatis natahat; c&terorum non nijs tenue vefiigium. Blaf. Anat. Anim. c. 35.

lit quoniam Nntura hoc vitA genus ipfi defiinavit, etlam perauatn exiguos Ocalos dedit eo concilia, ut ii, pretiofijfi/na

corporis pars, a terrs, pulvere ne affUgerentur. ft infuper ptlis teiii, ^vC. Bumores illis oculis infunt, e?" tunica nigra, uvea, fe prcdit. Ad hos tramiie alio nervus vcnit. Schneider iu 131aY. ibid.

Some time since I rnxde divers accurate DifTefiions of the j^yes of Aides, with the help of Microfcopes, having a doubt whether what v/e take to be Eyes, were such or no. And upon a drift Scrutiny I plainly could diltinguifti the Vitreous and Cry/Ialline Humours, yea, the Ligajnentum Ciliarc, and the atr'^mentaceous Mucus. The Pupil I could manifeilly difcern to be round, and the Cornea copped, or conical : The Eye is at a great uiftance from the Brain, the Optick Nerve very flender and long, reaching from the Eye through the intermediate Flefli, apd so paffeth to the Brain, along with the pair of Nerves reaching to the nose, which are much the'largelt that are in all the Animal. these Creatures, I imagine, have the Faculty of withdrawing their Eye.s

if

Chap. II. Of the Eye. 9j

that uncouth Animal is wholly fubteirancous, its Lodging, its Food, its Exercifcs, nay, even all its Paltinics and Plcafurcs, arc in those fubtcrraneous Recedes and Riflagcs, which its own Indulhy hath made for it felfj lo it is an admirable Provifion made in the Size of the Eye of that little Creature, to answer all its Occafions, and at the same time to prevent Inconveniences. For as a little Light will lliffice an Animal living always under Ground j so the fmallell Eye will abundantly supply that Occafion. And as a large protuberant Eye, like that of other Animals, would much annoy this Creature in its principal Bufincfs, of digging for its Food and Paifagei so it is endow'd with a very small one, commodioully fcatcd in the Head, and well fenced and guarded againlt the Annoyances of the Earth.

f . Another Thing remarkable in this ncble Part of Animals, is, its Numbers -, no less than two («) in any Inllance, that I know of j and in some Animals more, as 1 have already hinted {o).

Now this is an admirable Proviiion ; first, for the Convenience of taking in the larger x^ngle or Space : And in the next Place, the Animal is by this Provifion, in some measure prcpar'd for the

if not quite into the Head, (as Snails) yet more or less within the Hair, as they have more or less Occalion to uTc or guard their Eyes.

Galea faith, Aides have Eyes, the CryJialUne and Vitreous Humours, encompalTed with Titnicks. De Vf. Part. I. 14. <. 6. So accurate an Anatomift was he for his Time.

(») Plmy tells us of a fcrt of Heron with but one Eye, but 'twas only by hear-say. Inter Aves Ardcolarum genertf quos Lencos vacant y altera oculo carere tradunt. Nat. Hill. 1. ri. c. 37. So the King of the Nigr& that hath but one Eye, and that in his Forehead, /. 6. c. 30. Which Fables I take notice of more for the Reader's Diverfion, than any Truth in them.

(0) Su^ra, Note (i}.

Misfortune

94 Q/" ^^^^ Ey^' Book IV.

Misfortune of the Lofs of one of these noble, and necefTary Organs of its Body.

But then befides all this, there is another Thing considerable in this multiplicate Number of the Eye 5 and that is, that the Ohjc6t seen is not multiplied as well as the Organ, and appears but one, though seen with two or more Eyes (/>). A manifest

{f) The most celebrated Anatomids diiFer greatly about the Realbn why we see not double with two Eyes. This Galeriy and others after him, generally thought to be from a Coalition or Deciurition of the Optick Nerves, behind the Os Spheno'ides. But whether they deculTate, coalefce, or only touch une another, they do not well agree. The Barthol'tnes expreffly alTert they are united, non per fimplkem comactumvd interfe^ionem in homme, fed totalem jnbftantu confufioneWf Anar. 1. 3. c. 1. And whereas Ve'^alius, and some others had found some instances of their being difunited; they say, fed in plerifque ordinarte confunditur interior fubjiantia, ut accuratd difquifitione deprehendi.

But our Learned Dr. Gibfon, {Anat. I. 3. c. 10.) faith, they are united by the clofefl Conjun^ion, but not Confufion of their fibres.

But others think the'reason is not from any Coalefcence, Contadt, or croffing of the Optick Nerves, but from a Sympathy between them. Thus Monfieur C<zr/« is of Opinion, that the FibrilU conftituting the medullary Part of those Nerves, being fpiead in the Retina of each Eye, have each of them correfponding Farts in the Brain; so that when any of those FibnlU are ttruck by any part of an Image, the correfponding Parts of the Brain are thereby afFedted, and the Soul thereby informed, ct'c but see more hereafter under Note {00), from Cartes himself.

Somewhat like this is the Notion of our judicious Dr. Briggs, who thinks the Optick Nerves of each Eye consist of Homologous Fibres, having their rife in the Thalamus Nervorum Opticorum, and thence continued to both the Retina, which are made of them ; And farther, that those FibrilU have the same Parallelifm, Tenlion, ct-c in both Eyes; and consequently when an Image is painted on the same correfpondmg, fympathizing Parts of each Retina, the same Effefts are produced, the same Notice or Information is carried to the Thalamta, and so imparted to the Soul, or judging Faculty. That there is such an 'Oy.onvci6ei* between the

Re tin A,

Chap. 11. Of the Eye. 95nifcil Sign of the infinite Skill of tlie Coritrivcr of this so noble a Part, and of thecxquifitc Art hecmploycd in the Formation thereof. But the design and Skill of the infinite Workman, will bcfl be let forth by

6 Surveying the Parts and Mechamfin of this admirable Organ the Eye. And here indeed wc cannot but iland amazed, when we view its admirable Fabrick, and consider the prcdigious ExaftncG, and the exquifite Skill employed ^in every part miniibing to this noble and necessary Scnfc, To pass by its Arteries and Veins, and such other Parts common to the red of the Body, let us call our Eye on its muscles. these wc shall find exaftly and neatly placed for every Motion of the Eye. Let us view its Tunicks, and these we shall find so admirably feated, so well adapted, and of so firm a Texture, as to fit every Place, toanfwcr every Occafion, and to be Proof againfl: all common

RctiriA, Sfc. he makes very probable from the enfuing of double Vifion upon the Interruption of tlie Parallclifm oi the Eyes ; as when one Eye is dcprefled with the Finger, or their Symphony interrupted by Dileaie, Drunkenncfs, vc And lail'.y, That liniple Vilion is not made in the former way, viz,, by a Decutration or Conjundion of the Optick Nerves, he proves, bccaule those Nerves are but in few Subjed? deculTated, and in none conjoined otherwiie than by a bare Contaft, which is particularly manifeU in Fillies; and in some Inltanccs it hath been found, that they have been fcparatcd without any double Vifion enfuing thereupon. Vid. Brig. Ophthalmogr. cap. ii. & 5. and Nov. Vif. Jheor. palftm.

Wlidt the Opinion of our julily eminent Sir Ifaac Newton is, may be seen in his Optichs, Qu. 15. ^re not the Species oj OhjecU [ten zviih Both Eyes, united where the Optick Nerves Meet Before they come into the Br^in, the. Fibres on the right jide of both Nerves uniting there, &:c. For the Optick NervtT cf such Animals as look the same way with both Eyes, (as of Men, Dogs, Sheep, Oxen, &CC. J meet before they come into the Brain; but the Optick Nerves of Juch Animals as do not lock the same way with both Eyes, (as of Fijhes ard of the Camele- •n) do not meet y if I am rightly injormed. Newt. Opt.

Inconvc-

9^ Of the Eye. Book IV.

Inconveniences and x^nnoyances. Let us examine its three Humours^ and thcfe we ihall find all of exquifire Clcarnefs and Tranfparency, for an eafy Admiffion of the Ray;;j well placed for the refrading of them.j and fonn-d (particularly the Crystalline Humour) by the nicell Laws of Opticks, to coiled the wandring Rays into a Point. And to name no more, let us lock into its darkned Cell, where those carious Humourslie, and into which the Glories of- the Heavens and the Earth are brought, and exquifitely pittured j and this Cell we shall find, without, well prepared by Means of its Texture, Aperture, and Colour, to fence off all the ufclcfs or noxious Raysj and within, as well coated with a dark Tegument, that it may not reflect, difiipate, or any way confufe or diilurb the beneficial Rays {q).

But to ^Q.^ctV'A to Particulars, although it would be a great Demonftration of the Glory of God, yet would take up too much Time, and hath been in some measure done by others that have written of God's Works. PafTmg over therefore what they have observed, I shall under each principal Pare take a tranfient Notice of some Things they have omitted, or but flightly spoken of.

And my firil Remark shall be concerning the muscles of the EyCy and their Equilibration. Nothing can be more manifeflly an a6t of Contrivance and design, than the muscles of the Eye, admirably adapted to move it an)', and every way> upwards, downwards, to this side or that, or how-

(o) Nigra est [Uvea] ut radios (ah Ocult fundo ad anteriorem ejus partem refiexos) obumbret; ne hi (ut air clar. Cartefius) ad Oc:ili fandum retorti ibidem confufam vifionem efficerent. Alia forfan ratio hujus nigredinis ftatuatur, quod radii in '■jifio?ie Jhperfini, qui ah objeblis lateraltbiis provenitint hoc rttu abforbeantur. Ita cnim e hco obfcuro interdiu ohjetla optinte intueninr, quia radii tunc temporis circumfujo Uinine non dUuuntur. Biigg's Ophthal. c. 3. §. 5.

foever

Chap. ir. Of the Eye, 97

focvcr we plcafe, or thciv is occaflon for, so ns ro alwiiys keep that Par.illclilm or the ICve, which is nccefTiry co nuc Vifion. For the Pciformancc of which Service, the Form, the Policion, and the due Strength oF each Mulcle is admirable. And here I might Inltance the peciili;ir and artificial Stru6turc o\ the Trochkaris^ and the Augmentation of its Power by the 'trochlea {r) j the Magnitude and Strength of the Attollent muscle^ fomewhut exceeding that of its Anragoniii ; the peculiar Mulcle, called the Seventh^ or Sufpenfory Mnfcle (/), given to Brutes, by reason of the prone Pofturc of their

(r) Admrand:tm Dei artijlc'f.itn ex diierforum annn-Jium comparatione indies evadit tnanifcjit:is. Mirantur omr.e% Jrochlearem in oculis Hominum c/ o)jadrupedum, cr quidem jure : fed admirati^nem omnem fuperat^ quod fine Trochlea oculutn movens in Avib:is novatu genus Trochles, longe artificiofius Nictitandi Mtmbrans, dedent. Blaf. Anat. Animal, p. i. c. 4. ex Stenon.

[Mufculum Trochlcircm] per intermedium troch'ejm tradutium, nunquam intueor, c^titn admirabundtis nncum, 'O ©£<;?, exclamem, «' ^ovov ein ytcjix'.l^ii , d^?iOi y^ dn iA.^y^»i!ij. I. C. Sturmii Exercit. Acad. 9. dt Vif. Org. cr R-H. C. 3. §. 4. p. 446.

(/) Ohfervare est quod oluadrupedcs, qui oculos in tcrraifi pronos, ac pendulos gerunt, Mufculum peadiarem habent, quo Oculi globus fufpenditur ——— Hoc Mufculo Bos, Equus, Ovis, Lepus, Pjrais, 6ZC. pruditi funt : hoc etiam Canis i}:jlrui[ur, fed alto modo conformatnm habtt. Willis de An. Brut, p i. c. 15.

Of this Opinion alio was BarthoUne Anat. 1. 3. c. 8. and divers other eminent Anatomills.

But Dr. Briggs is of Opinion that the Adn.tta, and the other muscles latficienily answer all those Ends afcribcd to that muscle by former Anatomills, and thinks ProbabiUhs iiaquc effe hunc Mufculum tiervi Optici aHionem (per vices ) confirmare, n"e k prono Brutorum incefj'u CT" copiofo ajjl.ixu humorum debiittetur, Ophthal. c. z. §. i.

The Mufculus Sufpenforius being in the Porpefs, as well as Brutes, Dr. T'^son thinks the Ufe of it is not to fufpend the Bulk of the Eye ; but rather by its equal Gontraftion of the Sclerotis, to render the Ball of the Eye more or less S ^heri-. cal, and so fitter for Vilion. Tyfon's Anat. of the Porpefs, P- 39.

H Bodicg,

98 Of the Eye. Book IV.

Bodies, and frequent Occafions to hang down their Heads : And I might speak alfo of the pecuhar Origine and Infertion of the loisjer Oblique muscle (/), which is very notable, and many other Things relating to these Parts •, but it would be tedious to defcend too much to those admirable Particulars. And therefore to close up these Remarks, all I shall farther take Notice of, ihall be only the exquifite Equilibracionof all these Opposite and Antagonift MuJcks, affefled partly by the Equality of the Strength 5 which is the Cafe of the Adducent and Abducent Mi'ifcles ; partly by their peculiar Origine, or the Addition of the Trochlea^ which is the Cafe of the Oblio^ue muscles (u) : and partly by the natural Pollurc of the Body, and the Eye, which is the Cafe of the Attollent and Depriment muscles. By this so curious and exa£t a Libration, not only unfcemly Contortions, and incommodious Vagations of the

(?) Mtifculas obl'iquus inferior oritur a peculiari quodam fonnum in lattre Orbits, ocularis faflo, (contra qukm in cAteris, &ZC. ) quo fit ut ex una parte a Mufcub trochleari, ex altera vera ab hujus Mufculi cotnmodijftmd pojitione, Otulus in Aquilibrio quodam ccnftitutus, irretorto obtutu njerfus objetla feracur, nee plus juflo accedat verfus internum externumve canthuvii ; quit, quidem Libratio omn'mo nulla fuiffety abfque hujus Mufculi peculiari originatione (ciijus ratio omnes hucufque Anatomicos latuit). And (o this curious Anatoraift goes on to fliew farther the ilupendous Artifice of the great Creator ia this Polition of the Oblique muscles. Brigg'i Nova Vif. Theor. p. I r. meo libro.

(«) Befides those particular Motions which the Eye receives from the oblique muscles, and I may add its Libration alfo in feme measure, some Anatomifts afcribe another no less conlidervible Uie to them; namely, to lengthen and fliorten the Eye (by fqueezing and comprefllng it) to make it correfpond to the distances of all Objects, according as they are nigh or far off. Thus the ingenious Dr. Keil; The Aqueous Humour being the thinnefi and tnojl liquid, eafily changeth its Figure^ •when either the Ligamentum Ciliare contracts, or both the Oblique muscles fqueez.s the middle of the Ball of the Eye, to render it Oblong when ObjeHs are tot near m, Keil'f Anat. Chap, 4. Se^. 4. See Note (y).

Eye

Ghap. ir. Of the Eye. 99

Eye are prevented, but alfo it is able with great Rcadincfsund Exadtncfs to apply it fclF to every Objea.

As to the Tunicks of the Eye, many Things might be taken notice of, the prodigious Finencfs of the Arachfioidci^ the acute Scn!c of the Retina^ the delicate Tranlparency of the Cornea (ct;), and the firm and Ibong Texture of that and the Scleru*iC(^ too i and each of them, in thcle and every c^th'^r refpc6t, in the mod accurate manner adapted ^o the Place in which it is, and the business it is there to perform. But for a Sample, 1 shall only take notice of that part of the Uvea which makes the PupiL It hath been obfervcd by others, particularly by our Honourable Founder (x), That as we are forced to ufe various Apertures to our Opticlc GlaOes, so Nature hath made a far more compleac Provilion HI the Eyes of Animals, to fliut out too much, and to admit fufficicnt Light, by the Dilatation and Contraction of the Pupil {y). Butitdefervcth our efpccial Remark, that thefc Pupils are in divers Animals of divers Forms, according to their

(iv) iS}u'ts verb opifex prater Naturani, cjnA nihil potcji ejfe

callidius, tantam JcUrtum perficjHi pntHiJjei in Senfibus } qua.

frimum Oculos membrAnis tenuijftmis -vefttvit, cr [epiit ; quas

fnmum perlucidas fecit, ut per eas cerni pojj'et : firmai auitm,

\ ut corttinerenttir. Cic. de Nat. Ueor. 1. i. c. 57.

(x) Bo'jl ot Final causes.

(y) It is eafy to be obfcrved, that the Pupil openeth in dark Places ; as alfo when we look at tar diftant Objeds, hut contradts by an Increafc of Light, and when the Objeds are nigh. This Motion ot the I'liptl feme say, is cffcded by the circular and (bait Fibres of the Uvea, and some artributc it to the Ligamentiim Ciliare. Yet I have no great doubt bit that they both concur in that Adion, and that the Li^ame).", turn Ciltare doth, at the same time the Pupil opens or lliuts, dilate or comprefs the Cry/fallint, and bring it nighcr unto, or carry it faither otF the Ketina. For the Strudturc of the Li^amentum CiLare, and irs two Sorts of Fibres, drawn with the Help of a Microfcope, 1 shall refer to Mr. Cowper's Anaf. T. XI.

H z peculiat

too Of the Eye, Book IV.

peculiar Occafions. In some (particularly in Man) it is round J that being the moll proper Figure for the Pofition of our Eyes, and the Ufe we make of them both by Day and Night. In some other Animals it is of a longiHi Form 5 in some Tranfverfe (2;}, with its Aperture large, which is an admirable Provifion for such Creatures to see the better laterally, and thereby avoid Inconveniencies, as well as help them to gather their Food on the Ground, both by Day and Night. In other Animals the Fiffure of the Pupil is ere£t (aa)^ and alfo capable of opening wide, and fhutting up close. The latter of which ferveth to exclude the brighter Light of the Day, and the former to take in the more faint Rays of the Night, thereby enabling those Nodurnal Animals (in whom generally this ere61: Form of the Pupil is) to catch their Prey with the greater Facility in the dark (l;h), to see upwards and downwards, to climb, £5"^. Thus much for the ^unicks.

The

(^) In Bove, Caprd, Equo, Ove, z^ qti'tlufdam al'iis elllptica est (Pupilla} ut eo magis in hlfce for fan ammalibus, qiu prono incejfii vicium in agris qu&ritant, radios laterales ad mala ct" income moda utrinque devitanda admittat. Briggs'5 Ophthal. c. 7. §. 6.

Homini eretlo, aliifque, &c. caput erigere, ct* quaqnaverfus circumfpicere folifis, plurima fifnul ol/jedla, turn fupra, turn infra, turn e latere utroque vifu excipittntur ; quapropter Oculi Pupilla rotunda ejfe debet. Attamen hovi, Sec. caput fere

femper pronum gerentibus, tanthm qua coram, zj' paulo a latere obverfantur, intuitu opus est : quapropter Pupilla oblofiga eji, &c. Willis de Anim. Brut. p. i. c. 15.

{aa) Thus Cats (their Pupils being ered, and the ftiutting of their Eye-hds tranfverfe thereunto) can so close their Pupil, asto admit of, as it were, one only fingle Ray of Light; and by throwing all open, they can take in all the fainteft Rays. Which is an incomparable Provifion for these Animals, that have occafion to watch and way-lay their Prey both by Day and Night.

(bb) There is befides this large opening of the Pupil, in some nofturnal Animals> another admirable frovilion, enabling

them

Chap. IT. Of the Eye. loi

The next Thing I {hall take notice of, will relate to the Humours of the Eye, and that only o^ncerning the mechanism of the Cryjla!li/je Humour i not its incomparable Tranfparcncy j nor its exa6t lenticular Form •, nor its curious arancous Membrane (a)y that conftringeth and dilatcth ir, and

so

them to catch their Prey in the Dark; and that is a Radiation of the liyes : Ot which Dr. Willis thus; Hujus uft4s eji Oculi Ptipillatn, quafi jubare infito, illuminate, ut re^ notlu, cr in te~ nebris pofitas confpicere valeat : quare in Fele plunmum illujlrit efi : at Homini, Aviius, u- Pifcibus deeft. This llluminatioa he speaks oF, is from the Tapetum, in the Bottom of the Eye, or the fliinmg of the Retina, round the optick Nerve.

Befides which, he faith, the Iris hath a Faculty alfo, in some, of darting out Rays of Light, so as to enable them to see in the Dark: Of which he tells this Story ; Novi quendam cerebro calidiori priditum, qui poft uheriorem -vini pencraft pctum in noHe atratd, five tenebns profundis, literas difiin6tc legere potuit, Chjhs ratio videtur efje, quid fpiritus animates lelut accenfi, adeoque ah hac Iride irradtantes, jnbare nifito Medium illummabant. Willis Ibid.

Such another Thing, Pliny tells us, was reported of Tiberius Cafar : Ferunt Tib. C^f. nee alii genitorum mortalium, fuijj'e na~ turam, ut expergefaHus no^ii paulifper, haud alio modo quam luce clara, contueretur omnia. Nat. Hiff. 1. 1 1. c. 37.

So Dr. Briggs : Virtimfane calid& indolis novi in Ccmitatu Bedfordienfi degentem, qui oculis felineis donatus efl : adeo ut epificlam—'—mire admodum in loco obfcuro ubi eadem mihi vix apparuit) perlegtf. Hujus vera Oculi (nifi quod PupilLts i>ij:gni~ ores obtinuere) ab aliorum formatione neutiquam difcrepabant. Ophthal. c. 5. §. IX.

(cc) The Tunica Aranea is taken notice of by Trier Bacon, who calls it, Tela Aranea, and faith, in hac contmetur—— glaciate vel Cryfiallinum. Rog. Bacon'j Perfpeil. Difitnft. 2. c. 3. The wrinkling of this, and the Cornea (as the Skin is of old Perfons) he thinks is the cause of the Obfcurity of the Sight in such Perfons. Bacon lb. par. z. cap. 2. But this T«- nick some deny, and others allovv of: Dr. A. M. of Trinity- College, Dublin, (in his Relat. of Anat. Obf. in the Eyes of Animals, in a Letter to Mr. Boyl, Ann. 1681. annexed to his Anat. Account of the Elephant burnt in Dublin, p. 57.) affirms the Tunica Aranea, and faith, / have often seen it before 'twas expofed to the Air one Minute, notwithjlanding -juhat Dr. BriggS faiik to the contrary, &c. But Dr. Bri^s lus Opinion is, Hu-

H 3 mor

I02, Of the Eye. Book IV.

To varieth its Tocus^ (if any such Variation there be, as some affirm with great Probability,) nor lall^

ly

mor CryftaUtriHs, nifi aeri diutius expofitus, vel lemur co5ius (inftar la^is) cuticulam non acquirit : qn£ vera Improprie, Tunica Aranea d'icitur, chm fi tanthm adventitia, ut in OchIo Bq' vis recens exeffo appareat. Briggs'i Ophthalm. c. 3.

The Cryflalline Humour being of a double Subftance, outwardly like a Gelly, towards the Center as confident as hard Suet, upon occalion whereof its Figure may be varied ; which Variation may be made by the Ligamentum Cilia- e ; Dr. Grew doth, upon these Accounts, not doubt to afcribe to the Liga- K^entum Ciliare, a Power of making the Cryfialiine more Convex, as well as of moving it to, or from the Retina. See Gre-iv's CojmA'g. Sacr. 1. r. c. 4 Now it is certain by the Laws of O^cicks, thac foiTiewhat of this is ahfolutely necelTary to diliincl Vifion, inafmuch as the R.iys proceeding from nigh Objeds do more diverge, and those from diftant Objects less: Which requires eith.-r that the Cryflalime Humour lliould be made more Convex, or more flat; or elfe an Elongation, or fhortning of the Eye, or of the distance between the CiyJ^aHine Humr.ir and the Retina.

But although Dr. Briggs [\'o good a Judge) denies the Tunica Cry/iallina, contrary to the Opinion of most former Anatomil^s ; yet there is gteat reason to conclude he was in a Miftake, in my Opinion, from the observations of the French Anatom-fts, of the Cr)';?^//;?;^ of the Eye, of the Gf>»/) or C^<imois, who say, The Ahmbrana Arachnoides was very thick, and hard, so that it was eafily feparaiid from the CryjlaliinHSf

p. 145-

The fime Anatomifts alfo favour the Surmife of Dr. Grew, This [Contradion of the Fibres of the Ligamentum Ciliare on one side, and Dilatation on the other] ivould make us think that these Fibres of the Ligamentum Ciliare, are capable of Contraction, and voluntary Dilatation, like that of the Fibres of the muscles ; and that this A6lion may augment, or diminijh the Convexity of the Cryftallinus, according as the Need ivhich the Difiance of the Obje6ls may make it to have on the Eye, to see fnore clearly and dijiin^ly. Anat. Defcrrp. of a Bear, p. 49.

Since my penning the foregoing Notes, having as critically ts I could, dilTeded many Eyes of Birds, Beads and Fiflies, I manifeftly found the Membrana Arachnoides, and will undertake to fbew it any one, with great Eafe and Certainty. It is indeed so iranfparent, as not to be seen diftindl from the iSrjM^i'}^' But if the Cornea and Uvis be taken off before^

Chap. II. Of the Eye. 103

Jy, irs admirable Approach to or from the Retina^ by help of the CUiar Ligament idd)^ according as

Objcds

or the viireoHs Humour behind it, and the out- side of the Cryfialline be gently cut, the ArachnouUs nuy be seen to open, and the Cry/lalline will eafily leap out, and p.\rt from the Lzgamentum Ctliare ; which otherwifc it would not do: For it is by the Arachno'iHes braced to the Ligamentum Ctiiare. This Membrane or Tunick, in the Ox, is lo rublhntial and itrong, tJiough thin, that it yields to. or links under the fliarpelt Lancet, and requires (for lb thin and weak a Membrane in appearance) a Itrong PrelTure to pierce it.

{dd) As Birds and Fidies are in divers Things conformable, so in ("ome sort they are in their F.ye; to enable it to correfpond to all the Convergences, and Divergences of the Rays, which the Variations of each of the Mediums may produce. For this Service the Tunica Choroeida, (\\\ Fiflies) hath a mufculous Subttance at the Bottom of it, lying round the optick Nerve, at a small Diltance from it; by which Means I imagme they are able to contracff, and dilate the Choroeides, and thereby to lengthen and Iborten the Fye : For the helping ia which Service, 1 imagine ;t is that the Choroeides, and Sclero' lica, are in a great Mcalure psrted, that the Choroeides may have the greater Liberty of ac^ting upon the Humours within.

But in Birds, I have my fcif found, that although the Choroeides be parted from che Sclerotica ; yet the Choroeides hath no muscle, but inftend thereof, a curious pedinated Work, fcated on the optick Nerve, reprefented in Fig. z. In Vv'hich c a. e. b. d. reprefents the Choroeides and Sclerotica: a. b. the Part of the optick Kerve, that is within the Lye : v. v. v. the 'vitreous Humour : a. f. g. b. the PeCten : h. i the Cryftalline. For the Reception of this Fe£len, the optick Nerve comes farther within the Eye, than in other Creatures. The Stiudure of this Petlen, is very like that of the Ltgamentum Ciliare ; and in the Eye of a Alagpy, and some others, I could perceive it to be mufcubus towards the Bottom. This Peflen is so firmly fixed unto, or embodied in the vitreous Humour, th.U the vitreous Humour hangs firmly to it, and is not so eafily parted from it. By which Means all the Motions of the Pe^en are eafily communicated to the vitreous Humour, and indeed to all contained in the Choroeides. And foraimuch as the Cry/Ialiine is conne(ffed to the vitreous Humour, therefore alfo the Alterations in the vitreous Humour atfetft alio the Cry» fiAlltne-, and the Cryftalitrte is hereby brought nearer unto, QX farther from the Rttina, as occafion is.

H 4 BcttJcs

X04 Of the Eye, Book IV.

Obje6ts are far oflF or near, because these Things are what areufually taken notice ofj but that which J l"hall observe is, the. prodigious Art and Finery of its conltitnent Parts, it beings according to fomelate nice Microfcopical observations (<?^), compofed

Befidcs nil which O'ufervables in the Choroeldes, and inner Eye, I have ahb fuund this farther remarkable in the Sclerotica, and outer-part of the i"-ye of Birds, "Jiz. That the forepart of the Sclerotica is horny and hard, the middle-part thin and flexible, and Braces intervene between the fore and hindpart, running between the Choroeides and Sclerotica ; by which Means the Cornea, and back-part of the Eye, are brought to the fsme Conformity, that the rest of the Eye hath.

The great End and design of this fmgular and curious ^pfaratus in the Eyes, both of Birds and Fiflies, I take to be, I. To enable those Creatures to see at all distances, far off, or nigh; which (especially in the Waters) requireth a different Conformation of the Eye. In Birds alfo, this is of great Ufe, to enable them to see their Food at their Bill's End, or to reach the utmofl: distances their high Flights c;i.ib!e them to view ; as to see over great Trads of Sea or Land, whither they have occafion to fly ; or to see their Food or Prey, even small Filhes in the Waters, and Birds, Worms, zs'c. on the Eaich, when they fit upon Trees, high Rocks, or are hovering high in the Air. 2. To enable those Animals to adapt their Eye to all the various Refradions of their Medium. Even the Air it self varies the Refraftions, according as it is rarer or d'jnfcr, more or less corapreffed; as is manifefl: from the learned and ingenious Mr. Loivthorp's Experiment in Phil. Tranf. N°. 2.57. and feme other Experiments since of the before-commended Mr. Havjkfiee, both in natural, rarify'd and comrreffed Air; in each of which, the Refraftions constantly \ar)ed in exaft Proportion to the Rarity or Denfity of the Air. Vid. Hazvkjhee's Exp. pag. 175, ct^c.

Beiides this Conformity in general, between the Eyes of Birds and Fifties, Du Hatnel tells us of a fingular Conformity in the Cormorant's Eye, and that is, that the Cry/ialline is globous, as in Fifties, to enable it to see and purfue its Preyunder Water: Which ^. Falser, in Mr.Wilbughhy faith, they do zvith wonderful Szvifmefsj and for a long Time. Will. Omithol. p. 329.

{ee) The CryJIalline Humour, when dry'd, doth mani.^eftly enough appear to be made up of many very thin fphcrical

Chap. II. Of the Eje. lOf

pofcd of divers thin Scales, and thefc made up of one lingle minuteft Thread or Fibre, wound round and round, so as not to crols one another in any one Place, and yet to meet, some in two, and fomc in more different Centers j a Web not to be woven, an Optick Lens^ not to be wrought by any Art less than infinite Wifdoni.

Lajllyy To conclude the Parts of this admirable Organ, 1 ihall make only one Remark more, and that is about its Nerves. And here, among others, the admirable Make of the Optick Nerves might dcferve to be taken notice of in the first Place, their Medullary Part (//) terminating in the Brain it self, the Teguments propagated from the Meninges^ and terminating in the Coats of the Eye, and their commodious Infertions into the Ball of the Eye, in fomc direftly oppofite to the Pupil of the Eye, in others

Lami?u, or Scales lying one upon another. Mr. Lewenhoek reckons there may be looo of them in one Cryfialime, from the outcrmolt lo the Center. Every one of tlicle Scales, he faith, he hath difcovcred to be made up of one fingle Fibre, or h.ieft Thread wound, in a most llupendous Manner, this way, and that way, ib as to run fever.U Courfcs, and meet in as many Centers, and yet not to interfere, or crofs one another, in any one Place. InOxew, Sheep, Hogs, Bogs inCi Cat s, the Thiead fpreads into three several Courlcs, and makes as many Centers : In Wheiles five; but in Hares and Rabbe:$ only two. In the whole Surface of an Ox's CnJlalluie, he reckons there are more than iiooo Fibres juxtapolited. For the right and clear Underlbnding of the Manner of which admirable Piece of mechanism, I (IviU refer to his Cuts and Defcriptions in Philof. Tranf. N". 165. and 2.93. The Truth hereof I have heard some ingenious Men quellion ; but it is what 1 my self have seen, and can Ihew to any Body, witli the Help of a good Microfcope.

(//) S. Malpighi observed the Middle of the optick Kerv$ of the Sword-Fijh, to be nothing elfe but a large Membrane, folded according to its Length in many Doubles, almoll like ? Fan, and invelfed by the Duramater; whereas in Land- Animals it is a Bundle of Fibres, v. Phil. Tranf. N". 27.

pbliquely

io6 Of the Eye. Book IV.

obliquely towards one Side (gg). But most of these Things have been treated of, and the Convenience hereof set forth by others that have written of God's Works. I shall therefore take notice only of one wife Provifion the Creator hath made about the Motion of the Eye, by uniting into one the T'hird Pair of Nerves, called the Motory Nerves {hb), each of which fending its Branches into each muscle of each Eye, would cause a Diitortion in the Eyes j but being united into one, near their Infertion into the Brain, do thereby cause both Eyes to have the same Motion; so that when one Eye is moved this way and that way, to this and that Objed, the other Eye is turned the same way alfo.

Thus from this tranfient and flight View (I may call it) of the Parts of the Eye, it appears what an admirable Artift was the Contriver thereof. And now in the

Seventh and lad Place, Let us conflder what Provifion this admirable Artid hath made for the Guard and Security of this so well formed Organ (//). And

here

(og) Certijfimum est, quod in omn'tbus Ocul'ts humanis (qu»s [dtem mihi dijjecare conttgit) Kervus opticus PupilU e diametro ciponitur, &C. Briggss Ophthal. c. 3. §. ij. Ita Willis de Amm. Brut. p. I. e. 15.

Nervi Optici in nobis, item in Cane, Tele (zT in c&teris for fan animalihus calidisj ad fundum Oculi delati PupilU regioni pr«-- fpiciunt, dum interim in aliis S}jadrupedibus, uti etiam in Pifcibus cr Volucribus, oblique femper TunicA Sclerotidt inferuntur, Vnde, &c. WiUis lb. c. 7. §. ir.

{hh) This Pair is united at its Rife; whence is commonly drazvn a reason why one Eye being tnov'd towards an ObjeCi, the other is direSled alfo to the same. Gibfon'i Anat. Book ill. Chap. ir. So Bartholme Anat. Libellus 3. C 2.

{ii) Among all the other Security the Eye hath, we may reckon the Reparation of the aqueous Humour-, by which Means the Eye when wounded, and that in all Appearance very dangeroufly too, doth often recover its Sight : Of which l^znt. Verzafcha gives divers Examples ancient and modern. One is £1019 Gal(»s, of a Boy so wouiided, that the Cor»t4

Chap. II. Of the Eye. 107

here we shall find the Gaaid equivalent to the Ufc and Excellency of the Part. I'hc whole Organ fortified and fenced with strong, com pa(5l Hones, lodged in a lliong, well made Socket, and the Eye it self guarded with a nice made Cover {kk). Its Humours, and its inward Tunicks, are indeed tender,

proporfell, and became flaccid, but yet recovered his Sight. Other such hke InlUnccs alfo he gives from Fent.ius ColHmbus^ Rhodiust and Tulpius ; and one thnt he cured himself in thcfe Words, Fgo in Kobiiijfmi viri j'llicla fimtlem cafum obferva- \ji : hic di4m levibm de can/is cum fiaire altercaret, ifie iracitndid perch us cultellum Scriptorium apprehenJit, (j" fororn cculo vulnus infligit, iride humor a^nens tfjhtxit. V'ocatus pr£fentem Chirurgum jtijfi fequens collyriiim anodynum Qj- exftccans tepide fipihs admovere. F?( aq. PUntag. f iv. Rofar. Sanicul. Euphraf. ana Trochifc. alb. Rhaf. cum Opio 5ii. Tut:£ pp. ^\ Crock orient. ^j>. M. Hoc Collyrium uiflammationem compefcuit, "vulnus ficcavit c^ fanavit. Hinc pjji ait juot tnenfes Humor aqueus fuccrevit. Nam 'vifus, fed dibilior, cum fummo parentum gaU' dio redivit* B. Verzifchae Ohferv. Mcdicce. Obf. i.\.

Another Cure of tliis kind, was experimented by Dr. Da-i niel Alajor, upon a Goofe, Ann. 1(^)70. the aqueous Humour of both whole Eyes they let our. To that the Eyes fell, and the Goofe became quite blind : But without the Uie of any Medicine, in about two Days Time, Nature repaired the watery Humour again, the Eyes returned to their former Turgency, and the Goofe was in a Week after produced feeing before twenty eight or thirty Spedtators. Ephem. Germ. T. j. Add. ad. Obf. 117.

From the same cause, I doubt not, it was that the Eye of a Gentleman's Daughter, and those of a Cock, when wounded, so that the Cornea funk, were reftored by a Lithuanian Chymift, that palled fur a Conjurer, by the Ut'e of a Liquor found in May, in the Veliculjie of Elm. Of which see Mr, Kay's Catal. Cantab, in Vlmus from Henr. ab Hecrs.

[kk] Palpebrd, qnt funt tegmnenta Oculorum, tn^lijfimt ta6lu, ne Uderent aciem, apti[f>ms. fafU, c/ ad claudendas Fupilias, ne quid incideret, cr ad apenendas ; idjue providtt, ut identidem fieri pojfet cum maxima celeritate. MnnitAque funf Palpebn tanqu.im -vallo pilorum : quibus CT* atcriis Oculu, fi quid incideret, repelleretury c?" fomno connizenitbtti, cum Ociilis ad ctrneudum non egerimtn, ut q'ti, tanquam invcluti, quitf- (trerit. La:en( prxtcrea Htjlitert c/ excelfif undique partibnt

Je^tHUluf^

ic)8 Of the Eye, Book IV.

proportionate to their tender, curious Ufesj but the Coats without, are context and callous, firm and flrong. And in some Animals, particularly

Birds

fep'mntur. Primhm enim fttpenora Sdperciliis obdi-ifla fudorem acapite. ^S' fronte defluentem repellunt. Gens de'mde ab injeriore pane tutuntur fubjetl&, levilerque eminentes Cicer, de Nat. Deor. L. z. c. 57,

Tully, in the Perfon of a Stokk, having so well accounted for the Ufe or the Eye- Lids, I (liill for a further Manifeftation of the Creator's Contrivance and Structure of them, take notice of two or thr.?e Things : i. They confilt of a thin and flexible, butftroig Skin, by which means they the better wipe, clean, and guard the Cornea, z. Their Edges are forcitied with a sort Cartilage, by which means they are not only enabled the better to do their Office, but alio to close and flvar the better. 3 Out of these Cartilages grow a failifade ot itiflf Hairs, of great Uie to warn the Eye of the invafion of Dangers, to keep off Motes, and to ftiut out too exeeffive Light, ct'c and at the same time to admit of (through their intervals) a sufficient passage for Objeds to approach the Eye, And it is remarkable, that these Hairs grow but to a certain, commodious Length, and need no cutting, as many other Hairs of the Body do : Alio, that their Points itand out of the way, and in the upper-lid bend upwards, as they do downwards in the lower lid, whereby they are well adapted to their \J^q. From which lah Obfcrvables, we may learn how critical and nice the great Author of Nature hath been, in even the lead and mod trivial Conveniencies belonging to Animal Bodies ; for which reason I have added it to Tally s Remarks. And more might have been added too, as particularly concerning the curious Strudture and Lodgment of the Right Mnfcle, which opens the Eye-Lids; and the Orbicularis, or Circular one, that (liuts them ; the nice j^ptraratus of Glands that keep the Eye moift, and serve for Tears ; together with the reason why Man alone, who is a fecial Animal, doth exhibit his focial Affeftions by such outward Tokens as Tears ; the Nerves alfo, and other Organs afting in this Minillry. I might alfo speak of the passages for difcharging the fuperfluous Moifture of the Eyes through the Noftrils, and much more of the hke kind. But it would take up too much Room in these Notes ; and therefore it (hail fuffice to give only such Hints as may create a Sufpicion of a noble O Economy and Contrivance in this (I bad almost said) least confiderahle part of the Eye. But for

Particulars.

Chap. II. Of the Eye. I09

Birds (//), fomcPart ofthofc Tiinides have the Nature and Hardnifs of Bone or Hurn.

But for Creatures, whofc Eyes, hkc the rest of their Body, are tender, and without tlic CJuard of Bones J there Natuie hath provided for this ncccfliiry and tcnd^-r ScniV, a wonderful kind o*i Guard, by endowmg the Creature with a Faculty of with*

Particulars I fhill refer to the Anatomifts ; and for some of these Things, pjrtijuiarly to Dr. Willis < Cercj. Anut. and de jinim Brut, and Mr. Cow^er's Elcginc Cuts in the nth Jal/. of his Anatcmy.

To the Eye- Lias we may add another Guard afforded the Eyes of moll Qu.idiupeds, Birds, and Filli::<:, by the nitlitattng Membrane, which Dr Willis givts this Account of, Plurimis [Animahbus] qnibm Mttfculus fufpenforiu: adeji (which Limitation he needed not to ii've added) etia77i alttr Membranofus ccnceditur, ijui juxta ::iteriorem cculi cant hum fttttt^ quando elevatur, Octtli glohum fere tottim obtegit. Hujtis ujiii effe I'idctur, ttt ckm BejiU inter gramina, ikc. capita fua propter i>ifl:iPi cap!jj!:nJ:im dtwtr^nnt, hie Mufctil.is Oc:ili Pw f :11am, ne k Jlipularum incurfu feriatur, oculit, fnunitq:te. De Anim. Brut, p i. c. 15.

1 his Mtfnbrane Man hath not, ht having little Occafion to thrull his He.id into lach Places of Ai>noy,ince, as Beafls and other Animals; or if he hath, he can defend his Eyes with his Hands. But Birds (who frequent Trees and Bu(lics) and Quadrupeds, (Hedges and long Grafs) and who have no part leady, like the Hand, to fence off Annoyances; these, I say, have this incomparable Provifion made for the Safety of their Eyes. And for Fiflies, as they are delh'tute of Kyc- Lids, becaufc in the Wa ers there is no occafion for a Defenl^itive against Dull and Motes, offenfive to the Eyes of Land Animals, nor to moiflen and wipe the Eyes, as the Eye-Lids do, so the Nictitating-Metnbratie is an abundant Provifion for all their Occafions, without the Addition of the Eye-Lids.

And now, if we reflctfl, are these the Works of any Thing but a wife and indulgent Agent ^

ill) Although the Hardnefs and Firmnefs of the Adnata, or Sclerotica in li.rds, is a good Guard to their Eyes, yet I do not think i; is made thus, so much for a Defence, as to minifterto thelengthningandfliortmng the Eye, mentioned before ia Holt {cc^t

drawing

no Of the Eye. Book IV.

drawing its Eyes into its Head {mm)., and lodging them in the same Safety with the Body.

Thus have I furvey'd this firll Senfe of Animals, I may say in a curfory, not accurate, ftri6t manner, confidering the prodigious Workmanfhip thereof j but so, as abundantly to demondrate it to be the Contrivance, the Work of no less a Being than the infinite Wife, Potent, and Indulgent Creator {nn). For none less could compofe so admirable an Organ, so adapt all its Parts, so adjuft it to all Occasions, so nicely provide for every Ufe, and for every Emergency : In a word, none less than God, could, I say, thus contrive, order, and provide an Organ, as magnificent and curious as the Senfe is ufeful 5 a Senfe without which, as all the Animal World would be in perpetual Darknefs, so it would labour under perpetual Inconveniencies, be expofed to perpetual Harms, and suffer perpetual Wants and D\- ilrefles. But now by this admirable Senfe, thegreat God, who hath placed us in this World, hath as well provided for our comfortable Rcfidence in it 5 enabled us to see and chufe wholfome, yea delicate Food, to provide our selves ufeful, yea gaudy Cloathing, and commodious Places of Habitation and Retreat. We can now difpatch our Affairs with Alaimin) Cochleii oculorum vicem Comicula bina pntentu implent. Plin. Nat. Hifl:. 1. ir. c. 37, See more of the Eyes of Snaih before in Note (k) ; and in Note (/), I said that I fufpeded Moles alfo might thruft out, or withdraw their Eyes more or less within the Hair or Skin.

(»») The diligent Sturmim was fully perluaded there could not be any fpeculative Atheifm in any one that (hould well furvey the Eye. Nobis, faith he, fuit ferfuafijfimum, Atheifmum, quern vacant fpeculativum, h. e. obfirmatam de Deitate in Univerfo nulla perfuafeonem, habere locum aut inventri nott foJJ'e in eo hotnine, qui vtl uniiis corporis organici, c fpeciatim Oculi fabricam attento animo afpexerit. StUim. Exerc. Acad. 9. De Vif. Organ. 8c Rat. in Epilogo.

cnty

Chap. II. Of the Eye, iir

crity and pleasure, go here and there as our Occafions Call us. We cm, if need be, vanfack the whole Globe, penetrate into the Bowels of the Earth, dcfccnd to the bottom t)f the Deep, travel to the fartheft Regions oF this World, to acquire Wealth, to encrcale our Knowledge, or even only to pleafc our Eye and Fancy. We can now look about us, difcern and fl\un the Precipices and Dangers which every where cnclofe us, and would deiboy us. And those glorious Objects which fill the Heavens and the Earth, iholc admirable Works of God which every where furround us, and which would be as nothing to us, without being ieen, do by means of this noble Senfe present their Glories to us (t^o), and

{oo) The glorious Landll:;ps, and otlier Objeds tli»t present theiiifelvcs to the Eye, are manifellly painted on the Rttina, and that not ered, but inverted as the l^aws of Opticks require; and is manilelt to the Lye from AUn/ieur Canes's txperiment, of laying bare the vitreous Humour on the back part of the Eye, and clapping over it a Bit of wliite Paper, or the Skin of an Egg; and ilien placing the fore-parr of the Eye to the Hole of the Window of a darkned Room. By which means we have a pretty Landlliip of the Objcdts abroad invertedly painted on the Paper, on the back of the Eye. But now the QuelUoa is, How in this Cafe the Eye comes to see the Objeds cre(Jt .-• Monfieur Cartel's answer is, Notiiia iUim ex nulla, imagine pendet, nee ex ulid a6lione ab objeclis veniente, Jed ex folo fitu exiguarum partium cerebri, e quibus Nervi cxpnUiilani.———E. g. cogitandtim tn Ocuh ■

fitum capillamenti nervi opiici refpondere ad alium

quendufn partis cerebri qui facit ut Anima fmgula lota

cognofcat, qu£ jacsnt in reila, ant qtt-ift retLi linea ; ut ita mtrart rton dcbcamuA corpora in naturah fitu videri, quamvis ijnago in oculo liclmeaia contrarium habeat. Dioptr. c. 6. But our mod mgenious Mr. Motyneux anfwereth thus, The Eye is only the Organ or lnftrnment, 'tis the Soul that fees by means of the Eye. To enquire then hozu the Soul perceives the Objetl ere5l, by an inverted Image, is to enquire into the Soul's JFaculties ■ But ereci arid inverted are only Terms oj Relatton to up and down; or farther from, or ntgher to the Cen-

Ur of tht Earth, in Parts of the same Thing, But the

Eyt, I

itr Of the Eye. Book IV.

fill us with Admiration and pleasure. But I need rot expatiate in the Ufefuhiefs and Praifes of this Senfe, which we receive the Benefit of every Moment, and the want, or any defed of which, we lament among our greatest Misfortunes.

Leaving then this Senfe, I shall proceed to the other four, but more briefly treat of them, by reason we have so ample a Sample of the divine Art in the last, and may prefume that the same is exerted in all as well as one. For a Demonftration of •which, let us in the next Place carry our Scrutiny to the Senfe of Hearing.

Eye, or vifive Faculty takes no notice of the internal Pofiure of its own Parts, hut ufeth them as an Inftrument only, contrived by Nature for the Exercife of such a Faculty. — Let tu imagine^ that the Eye (on its lower Part) receives an Impulfe [by a Ray from the upper part of theObjedt] mufi not the vifive Faculty be necejjarily diretled hereby to consider this Stroke, as coming from the top rather than the bottom [of the Objedl] and consequently be direiied to conclude it the Reprefentation of the top ? Hereof we may be satisfied, by fuppofing a Alan standing on his Head. For here, though the upper Parts of OhjeSls are tairted on the upper Parts of the Eye, yet the Objetis are judged to be ercfi. What is said of Ere£l and Reverfe, may be underfiood of Sinifier and Dexter. Molyneux'j Dioptr. Nov. Part I. Prop. 28.

CHAP,

JI3

CHAP. III.

Of the Senfe of Hearing,

Concerning the Senfc of Hearings I ihall take notice oF two Things, the Organ, the Ear-^ and Its Obic6i:, Sound.

I. For the Organ, the Ear-, I shall pass by its convenient Number oF being double, which (as in the hilt Senfe) serves for the commodious Hearing every way round us; as alfo a wife Provifion for the utter Lofs or Injury {a) of one of the Ears. But I shall a Htcle indtl upon its Situation, and its admirable Fabrick and Parts.

I. It

{a) I prefurae it will not be ungrateful to take notice here of the admirable, as well as ufcful Sagacity of some deaf Perlbns, that have learnt to supply their want of Hearing by underlVanding what is said by the Motion of the Lips. My very ingenious Friend Mr. Waller, R. s. Seer, gives this Account, There live now and have from their Birth, in- our Town, a Man and his Stjier, each about fifi'j Tears old, neither of which have the least Senfe of Hearing, — — — yer both of theft know, by the Motion of the Lips only, whatever is said to them, and will anfzuer pertinently to the Giuefiion propofed ta

them The Mother told me they could hear very well, and

speak when they were Children, but both loji that Senfc afterwards, which makes them retain their Speech ; though that, to Perfom not ufed to them. Is a little uncouth and odd, but intelligible enough. Phil. Tranf. N". 3ri.

Such anotlicr Indance is that of Mr. Goddy, Minifler of Sl.Gervats in Genev-i, his Daughter. She is now about Jixteen Tears old. Her Nurje had an extraordinary Thicknefi of Hearing ; at a Tear old, the Child fpake all thoje little Words that

Children begin to speak at that Age. ■ ./// two Years old, they

perceived jlie had lofl her Hearing, and was so Deaf, that ever since, though fiie hears great Noifes, yet fie hears njthing that

one can speak to her. But by obferving the Motions of the

Mouth and Lips of others, (he hath acquired so mA»J Words, that out of theft fit hath formed a sort of Jargon, in which

iij^ Of the Ear. Book IV.

1 . It is fituated in the most convenient Part of the Body, (Hke as I said the Eye is) in a Part near the common Senfory in the Brain, to give the more fpeedy Information > in a Part where it can be best guarded, and where it is most: free from Annoyances and Harms it self, and where it gives the lead Annoyance and Hindrance to the Exercifes of any other Part ; in a Part appropriated to the peculiar Ufe of the principal Senfes, in the moll lofty, eminent Part of the Body, where it can perceive the most Objects, and receive the greatest Information ; And kflly, in a Part in the Neighbourhood of its Sifter Senfe the Eye, with whom it hath peculiar and admirable Communication by its Nerves, as I intend to shew in its proper Place. In refpe6t then of its Situation and Place in the Body, this Senfe is well designed and contrived, and may so far be accounted the Work of some admirable Artift. But,

2. If we furvey its Fabrick and Parts, it will appear to be an admirable Piece of the Divine wisdom, Art, and Power. For the Manifeftation of which, let us diftin6tly furvey the outward and the inward Part of its curious Organ.

I . For the outward Ear : If we observe its Striifture in all Kinds of Animals, it must: needs be acknowledged to be admirably Artificial, it being so

p}e can hold Converfation ivhole Bays with those that can [peak her oivn Language. I could under/land some of her IVords, but could not comprehend a Period^ for it feemed to be but a confufed Notfe. She knoivs nothing that is said to her, unless flie feeth the Motion of their Months that [peak to her ; so that in the Night, zvhen it is necejj'ary to speak to her, they jfiufi light a Candle. Only one thing appeared the ftrangejl part of the ■whole Narration : She hath a SiJIer, with whom flie hath firat'iifed her Language more than tvith any other : And in the Night, by laying her Hand on her Sifter's Mouth, fjg can perceive by that what pe faith, and so can difconrfe with her in the Ni^ht. Bilhop Burnet'z Let, 4. p. 248. *

nicely

Chap. m. Of the Ear. ixt^

r.iccly prepared, and adjured to the peculiar Occa- ^ns. of each rcfpcaivc Animal. In Man {h)^ it is . r a Form proper for th- ercd Poflure of his Body. In Birds, of a Form proper for Flight ; notprotubcranr, because that would obltructr heir Progrcfs, but close and covered, to afford the eaHcr PafTigc through tlie Air. In Qiiadrupeds, its Form is agreeable ^o the posture, and flower Motion of their Bodies j and in these too, various, according to their various Occafions. In some large, crcd, and open, to h.car the kail Approaches of Dangers {c\ in others covered, to keep out noxious Bodies. In the Sub-

1*^) I cannot but admire th.u our most eminent modern Anatomilh Oiould not agree, whether there be any muscles m the outward Ear of Man or not. Dr. Ked faith there are two ; Dr. Drake the same Number; and Dr. Gibfon makes < icm to be four. So alfo doth Monfieur Diofih, and so did t.'ij ancient Anatomirts : But Dr. Schelhammer expreffly denies there are any, and faith, Seduxit autetnrdiquos Brntorum A>i.ttome,^ in quorum plenfque tales Mufculi plures inieniunt:'ry putarunt autem fortajfts ignominiofum Hommi, fi non CT* L:^ tnJtruClus ejfet, &• minks mde perfe£}um animal fore. Schel dc Auditu^ p. r. c. r. §.7. But Valfalva, who wrote ver/ Ivcly, and is very accurate in his Survey of the Ear, faith, cull aurtcuU pofteriores quandoque quatuor, quandoque duo ;

ut plurtmum tres adnoiantur ; ^ quando folhm duo fe jna- Unt, tunc unus ex illis dupiuato tendine ziershs Concham dc ' " folet. Horum mufculorum in numero varietalcm non Mum in diver [is; verkm ettatn in eodem fub^eefo quandoque ztdi-^ Ex quibus diferentiis fuboru funt Auaorum dijcrepantu in horum Mufculorum numero, cr pofitu: quod non evenifTet,

^* P^^ries in diverfis Corponbus iidem Mufcuit quxfiti ejfent Ant Mar. Valfalva de Aur. Human, c.i. §.6. But Dr Drake :hmks some of Valfalva s muscles the Produd of F^ncy Mr ^owper makes them to be three, one Attollent, and iv^oKetrabent muscles. See Anat. Tab. li.

^ (0 Inter citera [animalia aurita] maxim): admirabdis tjl au- •IS leponm fabnca, quod cum timidijfitnmn antmal fit <y >rorfus tnerme, natura td tum audit u acuttjfimo, tanquam hottum exploratore ad perfentienda pencula, tum ped.bus ceu arms ad currendum aftis munijfe vidctur. A Kucher'; Phonurct. fir §. 7. Techaaf. z. *

Iz

terraneouj

i 1 6 Of the Ear. Book IV.

terraneous Quadrupeds, who are forced to mine, and dig for their Food and Habitation, as a protuberant Ear, like that of other Quadrupeds, would obftru6t their Labours,- and be apt to be torn and injured 5 fothey have the contrary {d\ their Ears short, lodged deep and backward in their Head, and passing

{d) Moles h&ve no portuberant Ear, but only a round Hole between the Neck and Shoulder ; which Situation of it, together with the thick, (hort Fur that covers it, is a sufficient Defenfative against external Annoyances. The Meatus Audhorius is long, round and cartilaginous, reaching to the under part of the Skull. Round the iniide runs a little Ridge, resembling two Threads of a Skrew ; at the Bottom whereof is a pretty Inlet, leading to the Drum, made, on one side with the aforefaid cochleous Ridge, and on the other, with a small Cartilage. I observed there was Cerumen in the Meatus.

As to the inner Ear, it is fomewhat lingular, and different from that of the other Quadrupeds, and much more from Birds, although I have met with some Authors that make it agreeing with that of Birds, There are three small Bones only (all hollow) by which the Brum (to ufe the old Appellation) or the Membrana Tympani (as others call it) afteth upon the Auditory Nerve. The firi\ is the Malleus, which hath two ProcelTes nearly of equal Length ; the longer of which is braced to the Membrana Tympani, the (horter to the side of the Drmn or Os Petrofum ; the back part of it resembles the Head and Stalk of a small Mujljroom, such as are pickled. On the back of the Malleus lies the next small i Bone, which may be called the Incus, long, and without any process, having fomewhat the Form of the (liort Scoop wherewith Water-men throw the Water out of their Wherries. To the end of this the third andlaft small Bone is tacked by a very tender Brace. This little Bone bears the Office of the Stapes, but is only forked without any Bafe. One of these Forks is at one Feneftra, or Foramen, the other at another; in which Fenejin I apprehend the Forks are tacked to the Auditory Nerve. these FeneftrA (equivalent to the Fenejira Ovalis, and Rotunda in others) are the Inlets into the Cochlea znd Canalcs Semicirculares, in which the Auditory Nerve li-^ cth. The Semicircular Canales lie at a distance from the Drum^ ■ and are not lodged (as in other Animals) in a strong, thick Body of Bone, but are thruft out, within the Skull, making

Chap. III. Of the Ear. 117

fing to the under Part thereof, and all fufficiently fenced and guarded. And as for Infefts, Reptiles, and the Inhabitants of the Waters, if they enjoy this Senfc, (as there is great reason to think they do,) it may probably be lodged commodioufly under the same Security and Guard, as the Smelling, or some other Senfe is.

And moreover, as the Form of this Organ is various in various Animals, so in each of them its Strudure is very curious and obfervable, being in all admirably contrived to colled the wandering, circumambient Impreilions, and Undulations of Sound, and to convey them to the Senfory within. If I should run over the several Genera of Animals, we might find a notable Profped of the handy-work of God (^), even in this so inconliderable Part of Animals. But 1 ihall only carry my Survey to

that

an Antrum^ with an handfome Arch leading into it, into which a part of the Brain enters.

One Leg of the Mallem being faftned to the Membrane Tympaniy and the Incus to the back of the Malleus, and the top of that to the top of the Stapes, and the Forks or Branches of the Stapes to the Auditory Nerve, I observed that whenever 1 moved the Membrane, all the little Bones were at the same time moved, and confcquenlly the Auditory Nerve thereby atfeded alio.

I hope the Reader will excufe me for being so particular in this Organ only of the AloU, a defpifed Creature, but as notable an Example of God's Work, as its Life is different from that of other Quadrupeds ; for which reason it partly is that I have enlarged on this part differing from that of others, and which no Body that I know of, hath taken much notice of, and which is not difcoverable without great Patience and Application; and partly because by comparmg these Obfervalions with Book VII. Chap.r. Note (d), we may judge how the Senfe of Hearing is performed.

(e) Among many Varieties, both in the inner and outer Ear, those which appear in the Pajfage into the Rock-Bone, are remarkable. For in an Owl, that perches on a Tree or Beamt and hearkens after the Prey beneath her, it is produced farther out above than it is bcloiv, for the better Reception of the least

1 3 sound.

Ii8 Of the Ear. Book IV.

that of Man. And here the first Thing that offereth it self to our View, is the Helix^ with its tortuous Cavities, made to flop, and collcft the fonorous Undulations, to give them a gentle Circulation and Refradion, and lo convey them to the Concha^ or larger and more capacious round Cell at the Entrance of the Ear. And to bridle the Evagation of the Sound, when arrived so far, but withal not to make a Confufion thereof, by any difagreeable Repercuffions, we may take notice of a very curious Provifion in those little Protuberances, called the T'ragus^ and j^ntitragus of the outward Ear, of a commodious Form and Texture (/), and conveniently lodged for this Ufe. The great Convenience and Benefit of this Form and Contrivance of the outward Ear, is fufficiencly manifest by the want thereof, which caufeth a Confufion in the Hearing.^ with a certain Murmur^ or Swooing like the Fall of Waters (g).

Sound, But in a Fox, that fcouteth underneath the Prey at Kooft ; it is for the same reason, produced farther out below. In a Pole-Cat, which hearkens firait forward, it is produced lehind, for the taking of a forward Sound. Whereas ;» 4 Hare, ivhich is very quick of Hearing, and thinks of nothing hut being purfued, it is fupplied zvith a bony Tube, which as a natural Otocouflick, is so directed backward, as to receive the fmalle/l and rnofi dijlant Sound that comes behind her. Giew'i Cofmolog. Sacr. lib. i. c. 5, §.6.

(/) The Texture of the Tragus and Antitragm, is fofter than that of the Helix, which lerveth gently to blunt, not forcibly to repel the Sound in the Concha.

(g) Dr. Gibfon's Anatomy, Chap. iz. Book IIT.

those whoje Ears are cut off, have but a confufed ivay of Hearing, and are obliged either to form a Cavity round the Ear with their own Hands, or elje to make ufe of a Horn, and apply the end of it to the inner Cavity of the Ear, in order to receive the a~itated Ai>\ 'Tis likewife observed, that those yihofe Ears jut out, hear better than jiat-eared Perfoos. Monfieur Dionis'i Anat. Dtmvnftr. 8.

Another

Chap. III. Of the Ear. 119

Another wife Provifion of the Creator, Is in the Subftance of the outward Ear, which is cartilaginous, the fitted for this Place. For (as an ingenious Anatomilt {h) obfcrves) " If it had been Bone, " It would have been troublefome, and might by *' many Accidents have been broken off: If Fiefli, " it would have been fubjeft to Contufion". Buc indeed a worfe consequence than this would have cnfu'd such a Softnefs as that of FlcHi, and that is, it would neither have remain'd expanded, neither would it so kindly receive and circulate the Sounds, but abforb, retard, or blunt their progress into the inward Organ. But being hard, and curiously fmooth and tortuous. Sounds find an eafie Pafiage, with a regular Volutation and Refraflion : As in a "Well-built Arch, Grotto, or mufical Inllrumcnt;, which magnify and meliorate Sounds j and some of which convey even a Whifper to a large Dillance (/) : But from the outward, let us carry our Survey,

2. To

(/>) Gibf. Ibid.

(■;) It would naufeate the Reader to reckon up the Places famed for the Conveyance of VVhifpers, such as the Prifon of Dionyfius at Syracufe, which is said to encreafe a Whifper to a Noife ; the clapping ones Hands to the Sound of a Cannon, crc Nor the Aquxdudis of ClauditMy which carry a Voice fixteen Miles, and many others both Ancient and Modern. If the Reader hath a mind to be entertained in this way, he may find enough in Kirchers Phonurgia. But it may not be irkfome to mention one or two of our own m England. Among which, one of the most famed is the Whifpering-Place in Gloucejler Cathedral, which is no other than a a Gallery above the Eaft-end of the Choir, leading from one side thereof to the other. It confifteth, (if I millake not) of five Angles, and fix Sides, the middlc-moftof which is a naked, uncovered Window, looking into a Chapel behind it. I guefs the two Whilperers stand at about twenty five Yards Dirtance from one another. But the Dome of St. Paul's^ London, is a more confideiable whifpering' place, where ihc ticking of a Watch (when no Noife is in the Streets) n.ay

1 4 be

no Of the Ear. Book IV.

2. To the inward Part of this admirable Organ. And here we find the moll curious and artful Provifion for every Emergency and Occafion. The auditory passage^ in the firil Place, curiously tunnelled, and artfully turned, to give Sounds an eafie PafTage, as well as a gentle Circulation and Refra- 6tion 5 but withal, so as to prevent their too furious rufliing in, and aflaulting the more tender Parts within.

And forafmuch as it is necefTaiy that this PafT.ge should be always open, to be upon the Watch k)'y therefore to prevent the Invalion of noxious Infers, or other Animals, (who are apt to m?ike their retreat in every little Hole), Nature hath fecured this Paflage (/), with a bitter naufeous

be nerrd from Side to Side; yea, a Whifper may be fent all Touni the Dome. And not only in the Gallery below, but above, upon the Scaffold, I tried, and found that a Whifper would be carried over one's Head round the top of the Arch, notwithftanding there is a large Opening in the middle of it into the upper part of the Dome.

(k) Audit U4 autem femper patet : ejm enlm fenfu etiam dortnientes egemu4 : A quo cum [onus efi acceptttSy etiar?} e fomno excitamur. Flexuojum iter habet, ne quid intrare pcj/it, Jiftmflex, CT* dire5ium pateret ; provifum etiam, ut Jiqua minima beftiola conaretur trrumpere, in fordibus auriumy tanquam in 'vifco, inb&refceret. Cicer. de Nat. Deor. 1.2. c. 57.

It deferves a particular Remark here, that in Infants in the Womb, and newly born, the Meatus Auditorius is (but up very closely, partly by the ConftriAion of the Paflage, and partly by a glutinous Subftance, whereby the Tympanum is guarded against the Water in the Secundine, and against the Injuries of the Air as foon as the Infant is born.

(/) It is remarkable, that in most, if not all Animals, whole Ears are tunnelled, or where the Meatus Auditorius is long enough to afford Harbour to Ear-wigs, or other Infers ; that, I say, in the Ears of such. Ear-wax is conilantly to be found. But in Birds, whose Ears are covered with Feathers, and where the Tympanum lies but a little way within the Skull, no Ear-wax is found, because none is necelTary to the Ears so well guardedj and so little tunnelled.

Excrement

Chap. III. Of the Ear. ix,

Excrement (w), afforded from the Glands (») appointed for that Purpole.

From hence let us approach the mod inward Parts, in which we shall see Strokes of the most exquifite Art. To pass over the innate Air., that most Authors talk of (o), (because there is no such)

the

(m) The Ear-wax was thought by the old Anatomiftstobe an Excrement of the Brain : Humor biliofus a cereiro expugnatus, the Bartholines (ay of it, 1. 3. c. 9. But as Schelhamtner well obfcrves, Ntl aifurdius, quain cerebri excrementum hoc flatuere. Nam v ratio nulla fttadet, ut in cerehro fieri excrementum tale credamus : ■ neque "vts, patent per quas ab eo feclufum in meatum auditorium pojjit inde penetrare. As X.0 its Talle, CaJJerius gives instances of its being fvveet in fomc Creatures. ^n\. Schelhatnmerhys, Ego vero femper, cum ama~ ritie aliquid dulcedinii in illo ucprehendi. Vid. Schel. de Audit, p \. c. z. § 10. But I could never diftinguifli any Sweetnefs in it ; but think it inlipid mixed with a Bitternefs.

( ») Cerumtna amara Arteriolis exudantia Willis de Anim. Brut. par. l. c 14. in the Skin are little Glands,

which furnijh a 'yellow and bitter Humour. Monlieur Dionis'i Dem. 18. An handibme Cut of those GlanduU ceruminofs, IS in Dr. Drake, from Valfalva.

Pliny attributes a great Virtue loXhQ Ear-ivax ; Morfus hominis inter a/perrimos numeratur : medentur fordes ex auribus : ac ne quis miretur, etiam Scorpionum tilibus Serpentiumque ftatim impofu£. Plin. Nat. Hiit. /. 28. c. 4. And that it hath an healing Quality, and may be accounted a good Balfam, I my self have experienced.

(0) That there is such a Thing as the innate Air, (talked of much by most Authors on this Subjed) Schelhammer very juftly, 1 think, denies, by reason there is a Paflage into the inner iiar from the Throat, through which the innate Air may pass out, and the outward Air enter in. V. Par. Alt. p. 2. c. I. §. ro. When by flopping our Breath, and Straining, we force the external Air into the Ear, it may be heard rufhing in ; and if much be forced in, it may be felt alfo to beat against the Tympanum. When the Paflage to the Throat is by any Means ilopp'd, as by a Cold in the Head, zsyc. the Hearing thereby becomes dull and blunt; by reason the Communication between the outward and inward Air are obftru(^ed : But when by flrong Swallowing, or such like Motion of the Throat, the Pallage is opened, we perceive it by a

fuddea

ii> Of the Ear. Book IV.

the Paflage to the Palate (/>), and their Ufes, with divers other curious Things that might be named 5 let us Hop a Httle at the Part containing the rest, namely, the Bone {q). The particular Texture and Hardnefs of which, above other Bones of the Body, is very remarkable 3 whereby it serves not only as a substantial Guard to the Senfory, but alfo to oppofe the Impulfes of the aetherial Matter, that there may be no lofs, nor Confufion in the Sound j but that it may be conveyed regularly, and intirely to the auditory Nerves.

The next Part I ihall take Notice of, may be that fine Membrane, called the Tympanum^ or Meni'

fudden Smack or Crack, and we immediately hear very clears ly ; the load of feculent Air bemg at that Time difcharged from the inner Ear.

It is a wife Provifion, that the PafTage for the Air into the Ear, is from the Throat; Ut non ftatim quivis aer extemus irrumpere queat (as Schdhammer faith. Par. Ult. c. 4. §. 8.) [ed tionn'ih'il immutatui, ac temperatus, calore ex medio ventre exfpirante; imo fortajfis non facile alius, nifi ex puLmonibus.

(p) Valfalva hath given us a more accurate description of the Tuba Eufiachiana, or Pajfage to the Palate, than any other Author, to whom 1 therefore refer. Be Aur. Human, c. i. §. 16, ere.

The chief Ufe hereof, he thinks, is to give way to the inner Air, upon every Motion of the Membrana Tympani, the Malleus, Incus and Stapes. This passage, if it be (hut up, Deafnefsenfues: Of which he gives two instances: One a Gentleman, who loft his Hearing by a Polypus in the nose reaching to the Uvula; the other a Yeoman, labouring with an Ulcer above the left Side of the Uvula ; which when he ftopt with a Tent dipped in Medicine, he loft his Hearing in the left Ear, and recovered it, as foon as the Tent was out. ibid. c. 5 §. 10.

{q) Os [petrofum] ex quo interiors [Labyrinthi] eavitatum parietes conjlati funt, album, duriffimum, necnon maxime compattum. Id autem a NaturA it a comparatum ejfe videtur, ut materia &therea Sonorum objeihrum imprejftonibus onufia, dum prididlis impingitur Parietibus, nihil aut faltem fere nihil motus fui amittat, atque adeo ilium qualem ab Obje^lis Jonoris accepit, talem communicet fpiritui animali contento intra expanfiones rami moUioris Nervorum auris. Dr. Raym. Vieuffens of Montpellier, in Phil Tranf. N". 158.

han0

Chap. III. Of the Ear. 113

brana T'ympam (r), with its inner Membrane (/); together with the four httle appcndent Bones (/), and the three inner muscles to move them, and adjull the whole Compages to the fevcral purposes

of

CO The Tympanum of the Ear, or as Valfalva and the Moderns, the Alemirana Tympani was taken notice of as early as Jiippocrates's Time. In Buds, it is drained towards the outward Parts ; in other Animals towards the B: ain, or inner Parts. Monfieur JDionis faith, // is not equally fajleued to the whole Circumference of the bony Circle, in which it is inchafed; for on the upper Side it hath a free difengaged Part, iy which some tan give vent to the Smoah in their Mouth. Demonftr. 8. That there is some passage I doubt nor, but I queflioii whether Monfieur Dionis ever faw the difengaged Part he mentions. 1 have my self carefully fearched divers Subjecfts, and do not remember to have seen any such passage; and I perceive it efcapcd the diligent Schelhammer's Eye. Valfalva alfo by injecflini? ia through the Tuba Euflachiana, could not force any Liquov into the Meatus Auditorius; but yet he imagines he found the Pallage out in another Place of the Drum, in some morbid, and one found Head. Valfalv. de Aur. Hum. c. z. §. 8. Mr. Cowper alfo affirms there is a PalTage by the upper Part of the Membrane. Anat. Ap. Fig. 8.

(/) Dr. Vieufens, before-named, discovered a Membrane, tenuiJfimA ranqtie admod'um texturA intra cavitatem Tympani ; as he defcribes it. whose ufe he faith is, i. Occluders Labyrinthi januam impedit ne naturalis purijftmus ac fubtUiffnnus Aer

intra cavitates communicationem——habeat cum acre craf

so. r. Labyrinthi bafin calefacit, &c. ubi fupra. Probably this double Membrane may be such, or after the same Manner as it is in the Tympanum of Birds : Of which see my observations in Book VII. Chap. x. Note {d).

(t) The four little Bones being treated of by all that have concerned themselves about this Senfe of Heaiing, fmce thejr discovery, I shall take Notice of only two Thmgs concerning them. I. The discovery of them is owing wholly to tl.c Diligence and Sagacity of the latter Ages; of which Schclhammer gives this Account from Fallopius, Hac Ojficula antiquis Anatomicis ignota fuere ; primufcjue qui in lucem produxit [Malleum & Incum] fuit Jac. Carpenfis ; prnn^ts quoqut procul omni dubio Jnaromicx artis, quam Vejaiius p.^flc.i perfeat, rcflaurator. Tertium [Stapedem] tnvenit ac promuhavit pri~ mus Jch. Phil, ah Ingrajfiiy Suul:t:, Philof'^phus ac Medicis do-

(liJfimHs,

114 or ^^^ ^^^- Book IV.

of Hearing, to hear all Manner of Sounds, loud or languid, harfh or grateful («).

From

6l'tjfimiii. Ciuartum, Thomd Bartholin, tefie, viro longe celeherrimoy Fran. Sylvio debetur Schel. ubi fupr c. 3. §.9. 2. Their Difference in Animals : In Man, and Giuadrupeds, they are four, cunoufly in.irii'^ulated with one another; with an external and internal muscle to dnw, or work them, in extending, or relaxing the Drum; but in Fowls the Cafe is very different : His unum Ojficulum folhm largua efi Natura, quod Collumellam forte appellaveris : teres enim est 'iy fubtiltfflnmmj hafi innitens latiori, rotunds. Huic adnexa est cartilage iialde mobillsy qui in Tympanum videtnr terminari. !d lb. §. 8. In the Ears of all the Fowl that I c<juld examine^ I never found any more than one Bone, and a Cartilage, making a Joynt zvith itf that was eafiiy moveable. The Cartilage had gene- ally an Epiphyfe, or two, one on each Side.- The Bone was very hard and small, having at the end of it a broad Plate, of the same Sttbftance , very thin, upon which it refted, as on its Bafts, Dr. Al. Moulen in Phil. Tranf. N". 100.

these are the most material Things I find observed by others, concerning the Ears of Fowls, and some of them hardly, I believe, observed before. To which I lliall fubjoyn some other Things I have my self discovered, that I prefume cfcaped the Eyes of those most curious and inquifitive Anatomifts. Of which the last cited Book VII. Chap, i. Note (d).

(«) Videtur quod Tympanum Auditionis inftrumentum prsiliminare, ct* quafi pr&paratorium fuerit, quod Soni impre/fwnem, five species fenftbiles primo fufcipiens, eas in debita proportione, CT* apta conformitate, versus Senforium^ quod adhuc interius fitum est, dirigat : fimili officio fungitur refpe6lu Auditils, ac tunicA Oculi Pupillam conftituentes, refpeSlw Visus ; utr&que Membrans, Species fenftbiles refringunt CT* quafi emolliunt, eafque Senforio non nifi proportionatas tradunt, cui nudo ft advenianty teneriorem ejus crafin facile Udanty aut obruant. Revera Tympanum non audit, fed meliori tutiorique Auditioni confert. Si h&c pars deftruatur, Senfto adhuc aliquamdiu, rudi licet modoy peragi poffit; quippe experimento olim in Cane fa6lo, Sec. ^anitoris officio ut Tympanum re^e defungi poffit, expanfum ejus pro data occafione ftringi, aut relaxari debet, veluti nimirhm Oculi Pupilla ^apropter huic Auris Tympana j non [ecus

ac bellicoy machine five t&niA quadam apponuntur, qu& fuperficiem ejus modo tenfiorem, modi laxiorem reddant : hoc enim efficiunt tria Officnla^ cum Mufcnbt &c. Willis's de Anim. Brut, c. 14.

For

Chap. III. Of the Ear, ii^

From this Region of. the tympanum^ I might

pass

For this Opinion of Dr. Willis, Dr. Schtlhammer is very feverc upon him, deriding the Refradions he speaks of; and therefore ferioufly proves that they are the Humours, not Tunicks of the Eye, that refraft the Rays of Light; and then jeeringly demandeth, Whether the fonorous Rays are refraded by pafling through a different Medium .^ Whether the Convexity or Concavity of the Drum colleds those Rays into a focal Point, or fcatters them ? crc And then faith, Ob has rationes a clanjf. Viri, ac de re Medico, praclare meriti, fententia. non pojjumus non ejjc alieniores ; in quo uti ingenium admiror, quoties medicamentorurn vires, aut morborttm caufas expUcat, Jic ubi jorum juum egrejjus, Philofophurti agir, ac vel Parttutn ufum, vel Chymicarum return naturam fcrtttetur, ejus hand femel non modb judicium defidero, verrwi altquando ttiam fidem. This is so fcvere and unjuft a Cenlure of our truly famous Countryman, (a Man of known Probity) that might deferve a better answer; but I have only Time to say, that although Dr. Schelhamtfjcr hath out-done all that wrote before him, in his Book de Auditu, and thewed" himself a Man of Learning and Indultry ; yet as our Countryman wrote more than he, (though perhaps not free from Errors too) so he hath manifcfted himself to have been as curious and fagacious an AnatoraiR, as great a Philofopher, and as learned and skilful a Phylician, as any of his Cenfurers, and his Reputation for Veracity and Integrity, was no less than any of theirs too. But after all this terrible Clamour, Dr. Schelhammer prejudicately miflaketh Dr. Willis's Meaning, to say no worie. For by utnque MembrariA refringunt. Dr. Willis plainly enough, I think, means no more than a Reftrit^ion of the Ingrefs of too mnny Rays ; as his following explicatory Words manifest, -viz.. refrmgunt, CT" qteafi emolliitnt, eafque Senforio non nifi proportional as tradunt. But indeed Dr. Schelhammer hath (hewn himself a too rigid Cenfor, by making Dr. Willis say, the ILar-Drum hath such like Braces as the War-Drum, viz. tj>£<e^ porrl de machinis feu t&niis Tympani bcUici adducit, dicttque idem in Tympana auditorio confpici, id prorfus faljijfimum est. I wonder Dl. Schelhammer did not alio charge Dr. Willis with making it a Porter, since he faith in the same Paragraph, Janitoris officio, &cc. But Dr. Willis's Meaning is plain enough, that the little Bones and muscles of the Ear-Drum do the same Oflice in ftraining and relaxing it, as the Braces of the War- Drum do in that. And confidering how curious and folemn an Apparatus there is of Bones, muscles, and Joynts, all adapted to a ready Molion; I am dearly of Dr. Willis's Opinion, that cue great

Ufe

ii6 Of the Ear, Book IV.

Ufe of the Ear Drum is for rhe proportioning Sounds, and that by its Extenfion and RetracHiion, it correfponds to all Sounds, loud or languid, as the Pupil of the Eye doth to fevera'l Degrees of Light : And that they are no other than fecondary Ufts affigned by Dr. Schelhammer, as the principal or fole Ufes of keeping out the external colder Air,' Dud, and other Annoyances ; but especially thu, ob foliui aeris intemi fotijfimum irrumpsntis vim, hunc motum Tympani ac Mallei ejfe conditum, ut cedere primkmy deinde fibi refiitm queat ; as his Words are, P. uh. c. 6. §. 13.

It was no improbable thought of Rohault, nos attentos prA' here, nil aliud ejl, nifi Tympanum, ubi ita opus est fa.£lo, contendere aiit laxare, ct* operam dare ut illud in ed pofitione intentum ftet, in qua tremulum aeris externi motum commodi(ftm)i excipere pojfit. Roh. Phyf. p. i. c. 26. §. 48.

The Hearing of deaf Perfons more eafily by Means of loud Noifes, is another Argument of the Ufe of the Straining or Relaxation of the T<ympanum in Hearing. Thus Dr. Willii (ubi fupra} Accept olim a viro side digno, fe mulierem novijfet qu£ licet furda fuerit, quoufque tamen intra conclave Tympanum pulfaretur, verba quAvis dare audiebat : quare Maritus ejus Tympaniftam pro fervo domeftico conducebat, ut illius ope, colloquia tnterdum cum Uxore fud haberet. Etiam de alio Surdaftro mihi narratum est, qui prope Campanile degens, quotiet una. plures CampanA refonarenty vocem quamvis facile audirey CT" non alias, potuit.

Abfcijfo Mufculo [ProcefTus majoris Mallei] in recenti aure, relaxatur [Tympani Membrana]. Valfalv. de Aur. Hum. c. 2. §. 5.

Upon confidering the great Difference in Authors Opinions, about the Ufe of the Parts, and Manner how Hearing is performed, as alfo what a curious Provifion there is made in the Ear, by the four little Bones, the muscles, Membrane, crc. I was minded (since I penned this Note) to make enquiry my self into this Part, and not to rely upon Authority. And after a diligent fearch of various Subjeds, I find we may give as rational and eafie an Account of Hearing, as of Seeing, or any other Senfe ; as I have fliewn in my last cited Note id) Book VII. Chap. 2. with relation to Birds. And as to "Man and beasts, the Cafe is the same, but the Apparatus more complex and magnificent. For whereas in Birds, the auditory Nerve is affedted by the Impreffions made on the Membrane, by only the Intermediacy of the CoUumella; in Man, it is done by the Intervention of the four little Bones, with the muscles acting upon them ; his Hearing being to be adjufled to all kinds of Sounds, or Impreffions made upon the Membrana Tympani. Which Impreffions are imparted to the auditory Nerve, in this Manner, viz. Firll they ad upon the Membrane and Malleus, the Majkus upon the i^f^^j and the

Chap. III. Of the Ear. 117

pass to that of the Labyrinth (w), and therein Purvey the curious and admirable Strudlure of the FcJIibulitm^ the Semicircular Canals {x)^ and Cochlea-^ particularly the artificial Gyrations, and other lingular Curiofities obfervable in the two latter.

But I shall not expatiate on thclc reclufc Parts j only there is one fpecial Contrivance of the Nerves, miniflring to this Senfe of Hearing, which mult

Incus upon the O; OrbicuUre and Stapes ; and the Stapes upon the auditor'^ Nerve: For the Bafc of the Stapes (the same as the Operculum in Birds) not only covers the Feuejlra Ovalis, within which the auditory Kerve heth, but hath a Part of the auditory Nerve fprcad upon it too. It is manifest that this is the true process of Hearing ; because, if the Membrane be mov'd, you may see all the Bones move at the same Time, and work the Bafe of the Stapes up and down in the Fenejlra. Ovalis, as I fliewed in this Chapter, Note {d) concerning the Mole; and as it may be seen in other Ears carefully opened, if the Parts remain in fitu.

(w) I do not confine the Labyrinth to the Canales Semicirculares, or any other Part, as the elder Anatomills seem to have done, who by their erroneous and blind Defcriptioiw seem not well to have underftood these Parts ; but with those much more curious and accurate Anatomifts, Monjteur de Veriiay, and Dr. Valfalva; uiider the Labyrinth, I comprehend the Canales Semicircidares, and the Cochlea, together with the intermediate Cavity, called by them the Veftibulum.

(x) In the femicircular Canals, two Things deferve to be noted. I. That the three Canals are of three ditferent Sizes, Major, Minor, and Minimus. 2. Although in different SubjeSs, they are frequently different; yet in the same Su&jecfl they are constantly the same. The reason of all which, together with their Ufes, Valjalva ingenioufly thinks is, that as a Part of the tender auditory Nerve is lodged in thefc Canals, so they are of three Sizes, the better to fuit all the Variety of Tones ; some of the Canals fuiting some, and others, other Tones. And although there be some Difference as to the Length and Size of these Canals, in different Perfons ; yet, Iclt there should be any difcord in the auditory Organs of one and the same Man, those Canals are always in exadt Conformity to one another in one and the same Man. r. Valjul. ubi fu^r, c. 3. §. 7, and c. 6. §. 4 9.

ii8 Of the Ear. Book IV.

not be pafled by j and that is, the Branches of one of the auditory Nerves (y)^ fpread partly to the muscles of the Ear, partly to the Eye, partly to the Tongue and Inftruments of Speech, and inofculated with the Nerves to go to the Heart and Breaft. By which Means there is an admirable, and ufeful Confent between these Parts of the Body 5 it being natural for most Animals, upon the "Hearing any uncouth Sound, to ere6t their Ears, and prepare them to catch every Sounds to opea their Eyes (those constant faithful Sentinels) to stand upon their Watch 5 and to be ready with the Mouth to call out, or utter what the prcfent Occafion Ihall dictate. And accordingly it is very ufual for most Animals, when furpriz'd, and terrify'd with any Noife, prefently to fhriek and cry out.

But there is befides this, in Man, another great Ufe of this nervous Commerce betv/een the Ear and Mouth : And that is, (as one of the best Authors on this Subje6t exprelTeth it) (z), " That the Voice " may correfpond with the Hearing, and be a kind " of Echo thereof, that what is heard with one " of the two Nerves, may be readily exprefled

with the Voice, by the help of the other.

C(

(y) Hlcpojlerior Nervus extra cranium delatus, in tres ramos dividitur, qui omnes motibus patheticis — — — inferviunt. Pritnu4 mufciilis Auris impenditur. Proculdubio hujns ailicne efficitur, ut animaita quAvts, a, fubito foni impulfu, aureSf quafi fonum nimis cito tranfettntem captaturas erigant, Ra' mus alter — — verfus utrumque oculi angmum furculos emittit : qui mufculis palpebrarum attollentibus inferuntur ; quorum Cerfe munus efi ad fubitum foni appulfum oculos confejitm aperire, eofque velut ad Excubias vocare — — Tertius ramus

"verfus LinguA radicem dejcendens, mufculis ejus e? o^s Hyoeideos dijiribuitur, adeoque organa quidam vocisedendAa6luat,&Z.C. Willis's Cereb. Anat. c. 17.

(x,) Hujufmodi Nervorum conformatio in Homine ufum alium infigniorem prijiat, nempe ut VoXf &c. }Vi^is Ibid,

Thus

Chap. III. Of Sound. 119

Thus much Ihall fufiicc to have spoken concerning the Organ. Let us,

11. Take Notice of ihcObJc^ of this admirable Senlc, namely, Sound-, and so conclude this Chapter. I ihall not here enquire into the Nature and Poperties of Sounds which is in a great Mcafure intricate, and hath puzzellcd the bell Naturalifts : Neither {hall I ilicw how this admirable Effect of the divine Contrivance, may be improv'd to divers Ules {aa) and purposes in humane Life j but my business will be to fliew that this Thing, of so admirable Ufc in the animal World, is the Work of

God.

{aa) Among ihe Ufes to which the Wit of Man hath cmploy'd Sounds, we may reckon the I nil rum cms ul'eful m con* vooating AlTembhcs, managing Armies, and many other Occalions, wherein Bells, Trumpets, Drums, Horns, and other founding Inftrumcnts are ufed; the Particularities of which it ■would be tedious to recount : As ih it tlie biggefl Ijcll in Z."«- rope is reckoned to be at Erfurt in German-j, which ihey lay may be heard twenty four Miles; with much more to the same purpose. I iliiil therefore only for a Sample take notice of the Speakm^-l'rumiet; the hivention of which is commonly aTcrihed to our eminent Sir Sarnncl MorUnd; but was more probably Ath. Kircher's; at leall he had contiived such an Inftrument, bclore Sir Samuel hit upon his. Kircher in hi3 Phonurg. faith, the Tromba pubh'flicd last Year in England, he had invented twenty four Years before, and publiflied \n his M'tfurgia ; that 'Jac. Albanus Ghihl/ejias, and Fr. f.Jchinardui afcribe it to him ; and that G. Schiitus teftifieth he had such an Inftrumcnt in his Chamber in the Koman College, with ■which he could call to, and receive answers from the Porter. And confidering how famed Alexander the Great's Tube was, which is laid might be heard loo Stadia, it is fomewhat ftrange that no Body fooncr hit upon the Invention. Of this Stetitorophonick Horn of Alexiinder, there is a Figure preferved in the Vatican, which for Curiofity fake, I have from Kircher reprefented in Fig. 3. He faith its Diameter was five Cubits, and that it was lufpended on a Supporter.

I'or the Make of the Spcaking-Trtimptt, and the Rcafott ■why it magnifies Sounds, I Ihall refer to Kircher; cfpecially to Sir Satniigl Merland'% Tuba. Stentorophonica , Publilhcd ia 1672.

K Kinhtr

J50 Of Sound. Book IV,

God. And this will appear, let the fubjed Matter of Sounds be what it will j either the atmosphere {hb) in Grofs, or the a:therial Part thereof, or foniferous Particles of Bodies, as some fancy, or

whatever

Kircher faith, he took one of thde Trumpets of fifteen Palms length, along with him to the Mons Eufiachianus , where he convocated 2100 Perfons to Prayers, by means of the unufual Sound, at two, three, four, and five Italian Miles Diitance.

With these Belloxotng Trumpets, I fcall join some Bflloin'ing- Caves for the Reader's Diverfion. Ol. Mag>7us defcnbes a. Cave in Finland, near V'tburg, called Smellen, into which, if a Dog, or other Living Creature be catt, it fends forth so dreadful a Sound, that knocks down every one near it. For which reason they have guarded the Cave with high Walls, to prevent the Mifchiefs of its Noife. Vid. Ol. Magn. Hiftor. r. I K c. 4. Such another Peter Marty faith is in Mifpaviola^ which, with a small Wdght cast into it, endangers Deafnefs at five Miles distance. And in Switzerland, Kircher faith, in the Cucumer- Mountain is a Pit that fends out both a dreadftil Noife and a great Wind therewith; and that there is a Well in his Country 3000 Palms deep, whose Sound is equal to that of a great Gun. Vid. Kirch. Phonurg,.

Ol. Magnus fpeaking of the vart high Mou-ntains of a Northern Province, call'd Angermannia faith, Vhi bafes eorum iis. prcf»)7diijlmo gurgite Jiantes, cafi* aliquo, -eel propofito Naut£ accejjerint, tantum horrorcm ex altd flu^uum coiltfione perci~ piunt, ut nifi prdcipiti remigio, aut valido I'ento evaferint, folo pavore fere exanimes fiant, m/tltoque dierum curriculo, ob capitis turbationem, prijitns. mentis, e^ fanitatis compotes vix evadant. Habent bafes illorum montium in fiuiiuum ingreffu ct* regreffu tortuofas rif^as, Jive fciffuras, fatis flupendo naiurA opi~ ficio fabricatasy in qutlus longa varagine formidabilis Hie Sonittti quafi fubterraneum tonitru generatur. Ol. Magn. 1. 2. C. 4. See alfo Chap. iz.

{bb) That the Air is the Subjedl, or Medium of Sound, is manifest from the Experiments in rarefied and condenfed Air. In an unexhaufted Receiver, a small Bell may be heard, at the Diitance of some Paces; but when exhaufted, it can scarce be heard at the neareft distance: And if the Air be comprelTed, the Sound will be loudejif'proportionably to the Compreffion or Quantity of Air crouded in, as 1 have often tried my self, and may be seen in Mr. Haivkfbee's curious Experiments, p. 97. Alfo his Experiments ia Pkil. Tranf fci". 311.

Neither

Chap. III. Of Sound. 131

whatever elfe the Philolophcr may think it. For ^vho but an intclhgcnt Being, wh.u Ids than iin

oinni^jotcnt

Neither doth this fucceed only in forced Rarefa^ions and Condenfations of the Air, but in luch alfo as arc iiatuial ; as is evident from David trivdiuhms in Vareums , upon the highefl: hmineocies ot Cirpathtts, near Kejr.;urckt w^ Hungary. The Story of FniJlichius \s this, /'.go Moifs Ju/iii 1015. turn adclefcens, fublnnitatttn horum tnonoum, cinn diiobHs cow it ibui Scholanbui, cxperiri votcns, uli, chm in f>nmi. lupis vertice, magnj laiore, me [urnmutn lerwiniim ajjecntum ejj'e putarem, dcwum Ji-jC obiuiit alia multo attior i antes, ubi perva/la eaque %\icillantia faxa. (quorum unum, Jt loco a viatore ditKOie:ur alijuot centena ■ — rapit, c/ quidem tanto cum

fragore, ut illi tnetuendum fit »i totus Mans conuat, eumque obruat ) enixus ejjem, iterum alia fublimior prudiit, &cc. donee fiummo vitA fericiib ad Jitpiemum cacumen pane: r aver im. Ex decliviorJbus monttbus cum in fubjetfas valles, • •■ nil nifi

0bfcuratn notfem, aut ccxruleum qti.d, infiar profundi aeris, quod vulgo fudutn caelum appellatur, obfervare potui, mihique vidcbar, fi de monte cailercrfj, non in terraw, fed retTe in jolum me prolapfurum. Kimia. enim declivitate, species vifibtles extenuate o- hebetate fuerunt. Cum vero altiorem montem peterem, quafi intra nebulas denfffimas hsrebavj Ut cum

non procul a fummo veriice ejjtm de fublimi q.'iiefceiis profpext C?' animadverti its in locis, nbt mihi antea videbar imra nebulas h^fjje, compitlas at que alias fefc movere nubcs, fupra quas, per aliquot milliaria, cr ultra' lenni/ios St^pufi commodits mihi profpecius paiutt. Alias tawcn etuim nubes altiore, alas :tetn humiliores, necnon quafdam aqualiter a terr.i diftaiiits iiJi. uitque hmc tria intellexi, I. Me turn traufi^ijc pnncipiutn tnediA Aeris regionis. X. Diflaniiam nubium ii tcrr-i, non efft

Aqualem. 3. Dijlantiam nubiurn non 71 Mill Ger. ut

quidam fed tantuvj dimidiatum Mill. Ger. In fumvium

mantis vcrticem cttm perveniffem, aJeo ti unquilluT/i C" Jubtilem a'erem ibi offcndi, ut nc pili quiJem motum jentirem, ciitn tamen in depre/fionbus ventum vthementem expenus fim : um'e coltegi fummum cacumen ijiius montis Carp.ifliici ad Mill. Gerrr » a. radicibus fuis imis exfurgere, CT" ad fupiemam Ujque aens icgionem, ad qiiam I'enti non afcendunt, pertingere. Fxplofi in ed fummitate Sclopetum : quod non majorim fonitum primo put, fe tulitf qui'jm Ji ligillum vcl bacillum confregifjem; p^'jl vittf^ vallum aut cm ttmpons murmur prulixum invaluit, jnfir:orefqu* montis panes, convalles cr fylvas oppievit. DeJcendenJ ptr nives annofas intra convalles, cum iterum Sclopetum exonerarsmf major cr hornbilior fragor, qu^m ea urmtnn capacijfimo

K z indt

132, Of Sound. Book. IV.

omnipotent and infinitely wife God could contrive, and make such a fine Body, such a Medium, so fufceptible of every Imprellion, that the Senfe of Hearing hath occalion tor, to empower all Animals to exprcTs their Senfe and Meaning to others j to make known their Fears, their Wants, their Pains

tnde exor'icbatur : hinc 'verehar ne totus tnons conctijfiis mecum corrueret -. duravitque hie [onus per [emic^uadrantem hor& ujque dum abfirufijfimas cavernas penetrajj'et, ad quas aer undiq; multiplicat'M refililt. — — In his celjis montibus, plerumq; nmgit grandtnatve media &jlate, quoties nempe in fubje^a o' vicina planitie pluit, uti hoc ipfum expertus fum. Nives diverforum annorum ex colore cr cortice duriore dignofci pojfunt. Varen, Georg. Gen. 1. r. c. 19. Prop. ult.

The Story being diverting, and containing divers Things remarkable, I have chofen to note the whole of it (altho' fomevvhat long) rather than fingle out the Paflages only which relate to the diminifliing the Sound of his Piftol, by the Rarity of the Air at that great Afcent into the Atmoiphere; and the mrignifying the Sound by the Polyphonifms or Repercuffions of the Rocks, Caverns, and other Phonocamptick Objeds below in the Mount.

But 'tis not the Air alone that is capable of the Impreffions of Sound, but the Water alfo, as is manifest by ftrikingaBell under Water, the Sound of which may plainly enough be heard, but it is much duller, and not so loud ; and it is alfo a fourth deeper, by* the Ear of some great Judges in Mufical Notes, who gave me their Judgments in the matter. But Merfenne faith, a Sound made under Water, is of the same Tone or Note, if heard under Water; as are alfo Sounds made in the Air, when heard under Water. Vid. Mer/en, Hydraul.

Having mentioned the hearing of Sounds under Water, there is another Curiofity worth mentioning, that alfo farther proves Water to be fufceptible of the Impreffions of Sound, ^'i^.. Divers at the bottom of the Sea, can hear the Noifes made above, only confufedly. But, on the contrary, those above cannot hear the Divers below. Of which an Experiment was made, that had like to have been fatal: One of the Divers blew an Horn in his Diving-Bell, at the bottom of the Sea; the Sound whereof (in thatcomprefled Air) was so very loud and irkfome, that ftunned the Diver, and made him so giddy, that he had like to have dropt out of his Bell, and to have been drowned. Vid, Sturmii Colleg. Cur, Vol. z. Tent am. i,

and

Chap. III. Of Sound. 133

and Sorrows in mclancholick Tonfs; tlicir Joys and Plciifurcs in more harmonious Notes j to fend tlicir Minds at great Dillances {cc)^ in a fhorc Time (^^), in loud Boations j or to exprcfs rhcir Thoughts near at hand with a gentle Voice, or in fccrct Whirpers] And to say no more, who lels than the Tame moll wife and indulgent Creator,

could

(fc) As to the distance to wliich Sound may be font, having some doubt, whether there was any Difference between the Northern and Southern Parts, by the Favour of my learned and illultriims Friend Sir Henry Newton, her Majeily"s hue Eiivoy at Florence: I procured lornc Experiments to he made for me in Italy. His molt Serene Highnels the Great Duke, was pleaieJ to order great Guns to be tir'dfor this purpoie at Florence, and Perfons were appointed on fiurpofe to ooierve them at Leghorve, which they compute is no less than 55 Miles in a Ibait Line. But notwithlhnding the Country between being Ibmewhat hiily and woudy, and the Wind alfo was not favourmg, only very cah:i and llill, yet the Sound was plainly enough heard. And they tell me, that the Leghorne Guns are ofien heard f>6 Miles ofl', at Forto Ferraio; that when the French bombarded Ger.oa, tlicy heard it near Leghome, 90 Miles dilhnt: and in the Mclfwa ln[iirre£l'i~ on, the Guns were lieard from thence as far as Augufta and Syracufe, about 100 Italian Miles. Thcfe DiHances being (o confidcrable, give me reason to fufped, that Sounds tly as far, or nearly as far in the Southern, as in the Northern Parts of the World, notwithltanding we have a fewlnllances of Sounds reaching farther Diltanccs. As Dr. Heam tells us of Guns fired at Stockholm in 1685, that were heard 180 nngli/Jj Miles. And in the Dutch War, 1672, the Guns were heard above 100 Miles. Vid. Phil. Trarif. N'o. 113. Alfo there is this farther reason of Sufpicion, that the Mercury in the Barometer rifeth hit;her without than within the Tropicks, and the more Northerly, rtiil the higher, which may encreafe the Strength of Sounds, by Note {Ob).

(dd) As to the Velocity of Sounds, by reason the most celebrated Authors differ about it, I made divers nice Experiments my lelf, with good Inflrunients ; by which I found, I. That there is some, although a small Difference in the Velocity of Sounds, with or against the Wind: which alfo is, %. Augmented ordiminilhed by the Strength or Weakncfs ot' the Wind. But that nothing elfe doth accelerate or retard it,

K 3 noif

134 ^f So^^^- Book IV,

cpulJ form such an OEconomy, as that of Melody and Mufick is ! That the Medium Should (as I said) so readily receive every Jmprtflion of Sound, and convey the melodious Vibration of every mufical String, the harmonious Pulfes of every animal Voice, and of every mufical Pipe> and the Ear be as well adapted, and ready to receive all these Im^ prcfTions, as the Medimn to convey them : And lastly, that by Means of the curious Lodgment, and Inofculations of the auditory Nerves before-mentioned, the Orgafms of the Spirits should be allay'd, and Perturbations of the Mind, in a great measure quieted and ftilled {e^}: Or to expicfs it in the

Words

not the Differences of Day or Night, Heat or Cold, Summer or Winter, Cloudy or Clear, Barometer high or low, csrc. 3. That all kinds of Sounds have the same Motion, whether they be loud or languid, of Bells, Guns, great or small, or any other fonprous Body. 4. That they fly equal Spaces in equal Times. Fifthly and lastly, That the Mean of their Flight is at the Rate of a Mile in 9 ^r half Seconds, or 1141 Feel in one Second of Time. Vid. Phil. Tranf. ibid.

(ee) Timothy a Mufician could excite Alexander the Great to Arms with the Phrygian Sound, and allay his Fury with another Tone, and excite him to Merriment. So Ericus King of Denmark, by a certain Mufician, could be driven to such a Fury, as to kill some of his best and moll trufty Servants- More of this Power of Mufick over the Affedions, may be seen in Ath. Kirch. Phonurg. L. z. §. i, Alfo in if. Vojfius de Poematum cantu, cr Rythmi "jiribus.

And not only upon the Affedtions, but alfo on the Parts of the Body. Mufick is able to exert its Force, as appears from the Gafcoign Knight, Cui Phormingis fono audita Vefica ftatim ad Urinam reddendam veUicabatur. Such another we have in A**. I. Ephem. Nat. Curiof. Obferv. 134. Alfo Morhojf de Scyph. vitr. per cert, human, vocis fonumfra5lo : where there is not only the Account of the Dutchman ^t Amjierdam, one Nich. Peter, that brake Romer-GIalfes with the Sound of hi$ Voice; but alfo divers other instances of the Powers and Efi'tils of Sound. But to the Story of the Ga/coigne Knight, Mr. Boyl, from Scaliger, adds a pleafant PaflTage, That one he had diibbliged, to be even with him, caufed at a Feaft, a g^g-pipe tq bp played, when h(s was hemmed in with the

Chap. III. Of Sound. 135-

Company ; which made tlic Knight be: ifs himfclF, to iJ.c great Diverfion of the Company, as well as Contufiun vi liiinfclf. Bo'yl's h.JJ'jy of the l:jfed of Lavg. Moiicn. In the f.inic Hook arc other Matters that may be noted here One >vhore Arm wis cut off, was exceedingly toimcntcd with the dilcharge or the great Guns at Sea, althoii^li he was at a gicai Diilance on Land. And a great Ship-Commandcr ob« I'ervcd his wounded Men, with broken Limbs, luffcied in like manner at the Enemies Dilcharges. An ingcr.ious Domcl\ick of his own would have his Gums bleed at the tearing of Brown-Paper. And an ingenious Gentlem.in of Mr. Uo-yl'^ Acquaintance confcffcd to htm, that he w*s incHncd to the Knight of Gafcoj^ne's Dillemper, upou hearing the Noife of a Tap running. The dancing to certain Tunes, of Perfons bK with the Tarantula, he wasaiTured of by an ingenious Acquaintance at TarcntufHj who faw fevera!, among the rctl a Phyiician, aUefted with that Dilkmper. And many other Accounts of this kind, feemingly credible, are related in .(Worhojf, Kircher, and many others; although Dr. Comelio quellions the Matters of Fad relating to the cure of the Taiantttla-bnc, in Phil. Tranf. N°. 83. Mr. Boyl alio laith, a fober Mulician told him, he could make a certain Woman weep, by playing one Tune, which others would be little atfefted at. And he iaith, that helnmi'clf had a kind of (liivering at the repeating two Verfes in Lucan. And I add, that 1 very well know one to have a sort of chill about his Pncordia and Head, upon reading or hearing the 53^1 Chapter of Ifaiab; as alio David's Lamentations for S.ml and Jonathan, I Sam. i.

Neither are our own Minds and Bodies only affedcd with Sounds, but inanimate Bodies are so alio. Of which many Stories may be met with in Ktrcher, particularly a large Stone that would tremble at the Sound of one particular Organ- Tipe; \n Morhojf Mo, who among many oilier Relations hath this, Memtni ct'.rn ipfi [clarif. JVilli^o'j d-e expcnmento Vitn per "vocem jKiii'li narranm, ex eo auMvifl'e,c^uod in Adibm Muficis ftbi •vicinis alicjHOties collapfuvt pavimcntum ftnrit ; quod tpfe Jonn tnntmuis adfcribere non dubnavit. MorholT cap. 12. Mrrfenne alfo, among many Relations in his Harmon, and other Books, tells a lar more probable Story, of a particular Part of 2 Faveinent, that would iliake, as if the I'.arth would open, when the Organs played, than what he relates about Antipa thy, in his 6)M^yZ. Comment in Genef. viz. That the Sound of a Drum made of a Wolfs Skin, will break another made of Sheep s Skin: That Hens will fly at the Sound of an Harp ftruiig with P^ox-Gut-Strings, and more to the same purpofc. Mr. Boyl alfo, in his last cited Book tells us. Seats will tremble at the Sound of Organs; and that he hath felt his H.u to do so too under his Hand, at ceratain Notes both of Or-

K 4 gjns.

13^ Of Sound. Book IV.

Words of the last-ciied famous Author (//"), " That *' Mufick iliould not only affc6t the Fancy with " Deh'ght; but alfo give ReHef to the Grief and " Sadnefs of the Heart } yea, appeafe all those tur- " bulent Padions, which are excited in the Bread " by an immoderate Ferment, and Fluduation of *' the Blood".

And now, who can re{ie6b upon all this curious Apparatus of the Scnfc of Hearings and not give the great Creator his due praise ! Who can fuivey all this admirable Work, and not as readily ovv'ii it to be the Work of an omnipotent, and infinitely wife and good GOD {g£)t as the most artful Melodies we hear, are the Voice or Performances of a living Creature !

gans, and in discourse, thnt he tried an Arch that would answer to C fa-ut, and had done so an loo Years; and that an exp'^eiienced Builder told him any well-built Vault will answer Ibme determinate Note. And at Eajlbury-Houje near Barking, I my self dil'covered the Porch, (having firm Brick- Wails,) not only to found when ftruck on the Bottom, but alfo to give almost as loud a Sound, when I founded the same Note with my Voice.

(//) Willis, ubi fupra.

iSZ) ^^^'^ ^^^^ ^ft ^^' ^'^^ calamo tantum cantare, cr agrefte, atque incondifAm carmen ad aitqunm tanthm olleilatio' niitn modular'i docuit, fed tot artes, tot I'ocum •var'tetates, tot Jonas, alios fpiritu nojlro, altos externa cantH editnros corament'M efi, Senec. de Beuef. 1. 4. cap. 6.

CHAP.

^37

CHAP. IV.

Of the Senfe of Smelling.

THIS Senfc I shall difpatch in kfs Compafs than the two lafl, bccaufe its Apparatus (although fufficicntly grand and admirable, yet) is ncx: so multiplicious as of the Eye and Ear i it being sufficient in this Scnfe, that the odoriferous EfHuvia of Bodies {a) can have an cafy, free Paflagc ro the olfaftory Nerves, without the Formalities of Refractions, and other Preparations necellary to the Perfection of the two former Senfcs. Accordin_^ly the all-wife Creator hath made fufTicient Provifion for the Reception of Smells, by the Apertures of the Nolbils [h) j made not of Flclli, or Bone, but cartilaginous, the better to be kept open, and withal, to be dilated or contracted, as there is occafion: For which Service it hath fcvcral proper and curious muscles {c).

(4) A Piece of Amhergreafe fufpended in a Pair of Scales, that would turn with a very fniall Part of a Grain, loll nothing of its Weight in 3 4- bays; neither did AjJ'a fi^tida in 5 4- Days; but an Ounce of Nut7negs loft 5 '- Grains in 6 Days; and Cloves 7 -| Grains. Bo'yl'% Subtil, of rjfl:tv. C. 5.

{b) Nares, eo quod otnnis Odor a^ fuperiora fertur, ;ecTeJurfum funt : Et ejubd Cibi cj' Potion'n judicium t7)agnum earur/t eji, non fiv.e causii vicimtatem Oris Jccuu funt. Cicciu dc Nat. Deor. 1. 1. c. 56.

(c) Had not the Contriver of Animal Bodies been minded that his Work should have all the Signatures of Accuracy, this Senfe might have been performed vvuh a bare Aperture of the nose ; but that noching might go imperfedt out of his Hand, he hath made a part of the nose ealily moveable, and given a Set of muscles 10 lift up, and open and (luit the Noftrils ; and so adjullitto crvery Occallon of this Senfe.

And

138 Of the Smell. Book IV,

And forafmuch as it is by Breathing (^), that the odorant Particles are drawn in, and convey'd to the Senfory j therefore there is a very wife Provifion made in the Lamina^ with which the upper Part af the nose is barricaded, which serve to two excellent Ufes: Partly, to fence out any noxious Subftances from entering the breathing Paflages in our Sleep, or when we cannot be aware {e) j and part^y, to receive the Divarications of the olfa6iory Nervesy which are here thick fpread, and which do by thcfe Means meet the Smells entring with the Breath, and flriking upon them.

And accordingly, the more accurate this Senfe is in any Animal, the longer we may observe those l^amiriie arej and more of them in number folded up, and croudcd together, to contain the more nervous Filaments, and to detain and fetter the odoriferous Particles in their Windings and Turn-

Av\d an admirable Provifion this is, which the great Creator hath made for the good of brute Creatures (/) 5 the chief A€is of many of whose Lives, are performed by the Miniiby of this Senfe.

In

(d) Qdorem non aliud, quam mfuHHtn Aer^f intelligi pojje. Plin. Nat. hist. 1. 9. c. 7.

(e) For a further Guard against the Ingrcfs of noxious Things, the Vibriffi, or Hairs placed at the Entrance of the Noftri'.s lerve, which, in feme meafiire, Hop the Entrance of Things improper, or however give Warning of them, but at the same Time allow an eafy Faflage to the Breath and Odours.

(/) Mulio pnclarius ewicat [^Olfa^us] in brutis animalibus^ quam in homine : ifia tuitnque hoc fob indice, herharum, alicrumque corporum priifs ignotorum virtutes certilfme dignofcunt^ quin (J' vtcium fuum abfentem, lel in abftrufo pofittim, OJorattt venantur, ac facilitme inve/iigant. Slu'bd autem minus fa^ q,aces funt homintim nares, illud non facultatis hiijus abufui prout nonnulii voiunt ) aftribi debet, verhm in causa est ipfiui Orgam defeHus : hoc cntm circa viiliif humani criteria (ubi ratio.

Chap. IV. Of the Smell. 139

In Inkds, and many other Cic.irurc;, it is of great \J{'c in the Propagation of their Kindj as particularly in helping them to fafc and convenient Places for the Incubation of their EgL^s, and breeding up their Young. Others are by the Accuracy of this Scnfe, of Ufe to Mankind, which would be otherwife of little or no Ufe (g). And moll of the irrational Animals, Birds, beasts, and creeping Things, do, by their Smell, find out their Food j some at great Dillanccs, and some at Hand. With what Sagacity do some difcovcr their Food in the Midft of Mud and Dirt (Z?)? With what Curiofity do the herbaceous Kind pick and chufc I'uch Plants as afford them wholfome Food, or fometimcs such as are Medicinal (/), and rekife luch as would hurt and dcllroy them ? And all by the Help principally, if not only, of the Smell, aflilled by its near Ally the Talk. Of which I shall in the next Place speak very briefly.

tio, c intclletlus adj'unt ) non ita accuratum reqtitntur : Propterea. enim inferiorcs potent't& in homiae, n natiird minus perfeti& exijlunt, ut fupfriorum rtiltui ar exercitio relinaueretur locus. VVillis de Anim. Brut. cap. 13.

ig) Thus the chief Ufe of Hounds is to hunt; and other Dogs, to be i. Watch and Guard to our houses by Night. For which Services (particularly in Houiids) their OlfaUiory Herves are not only remarkably large, (like as they are in other Brutes,) but their Branches and Filaments are, in the LaminA of the Nolhils, both nu)re and larger than 1 have seen in any other Creature Nvhatfoevcr. Alio there are more Convulfions of the Lamim than 1 ever remember to have found in any other Animal.

The Sagacity of Hounds is prodigious, of which see an Inflance in Eeok- IV. Chap. 11. Note {hhh).

{h) See £(?o/: VII. Chap. 1. Note i^e).

(i) Vid. Plin. Hiji. Nat, 1. 8. cap. zy. 6UfA animal'ia quas hfrbas ojlcndernnt.

CHAP.

i,40 Book IV.

C H A P. V.

Of the Tap {a).

IN this, as in the last Senfe, we have an Jpparatus abundantly sufficient to the Senfe j Nerves curiously divaricated about the Tongue (/'), and Mouth, to receive the Imprellions of every Gufto -, and these Nerves guarded with a firm and proper Tegument to defend them from Harms ; but withalj so perforated in the papillary Eminences, as to give a free Admiflion to Taftes.

But

(a) T« 5 ei'J'jj T ypXk>ij &c. Sapornm genera, dulc'n,

flngais, anfierus, acerbus, acris, faljus, ajnarus, acidus. The- ©pkr. de Cauf. Plant. 1.6. c. i. What may the Cauie of the tiifference of Talks, he faith is hard to aliign, zrore^-j yi tali 'ssdSiTiy &c. Vtrum affetlionihus Senfunm — ■■ — an figuris, quihms [ingidi eonfiant, ut Democritus cenfet. id- ib. A^fjiox-e/l®" 3>

&c. Democruus dulcem ejje faporem qui rotundus : acerfriitn qtti Jigura magna.; afperum qui multis angulis, Scc id. ib. &c. But of the Diverfities and causes of Taftes, see Dr. Crew, Leil.6. and Dr. Willis de Anim. Brut. c. ii.

{b) Intelleiiui Saporum efi ceteris in prima lingua : Hominiy f^ in palato. Plin. 1. ii. c. 37.

The Opinions of Anatomifts concerning the Organ of Tajle, are various. Bauhin, T. Barthnlin, Barihclerte, Vejlinge^ Detifinge,2ic. place it in the hxer, flediy Parts of the Tongue. Our famous Wharton, in the Gland at theRoot of the Tongue : Laursntius in the thin Tunick covering the Tongue ; but the Learned Malpighi with great Probability concludes, because the outward Cover of the Tongue is perforated, under which lie papillary Parts, (of which Mr. Cozvper hath very good Cuts in his Anat. Tak 13.) that in these the Taftelieth. Malpight sWords are, 6luare cum diciis meatihm infignibus occurrant papillaria corpora, probabilius efi in his ultimo, ex fubintranti fapido humore titillationem, c mordicationem qHandam fiiri, qn£ Gajium eficiat. ^4alpig. Op. Tom. z, De Lingua, pag. iS.

Chiip. V. OftbeTafte. 141

But I Ihall say no more of this Scnfe; only a Word or two of its Confcnt with tlie Smell, and the Siru:ition of them both : Their Situation is in the most convenient Place imaginable, for the Difcharge of their Offices; at the firfl: Entrance (c), in the Way to the grand Receptacle of our Food and Nouriihment > to furvey what is to be admitted therein ; to judge between what is wholibme, and fit for Nounlhment, and what is unfavoury and pernicious. And for this End, the all-wile Creator fecms to have eflablidi'd a great Confent between the Eye, the nose, and Tongue, by ordering the Branches of the (arae Ntrves {d\ to each of thole three Parts ; as alfo indeed to divers other Parts of the Body, which I may have occadon to mention in a more proper Place ie). By which

Pra-cipuum acrfere folum Gufiatus organon ejl Lingua', cut

aliquarenus fubovfcure tamen Palatum, o" fuperior GuU pars cotijcnitttnt : tn omnibtis vcfo fibn nervo[& tmniedlata fenjion'is iiijirumenta Junt. Square obftrvare efi, Linguam pn alia qt*»~ ■VIS parte injtgniter Jibrofam ejjt, eiiam texturd -valJe pi-rosd conjiare, in e urn nempe finetn, ut partictU re: fapiJ£ Crpiofi:4s ac

pemtiiti intra Senj'oni meatus admittantur Kervrirutcm

i^ui fibns LingUA detjfijftmc intertextis fatmiltintur, ac faporutn

imprejfiones tJ ts-^otrtij tticSr^jti^^ui communicant, funt Servi

e paribus turn qKinto,- turn nono ; c/ ubique cum dt-asa propaginiim Jerir per tot am ejus ccmpajcm dijlributi. Willis ibid.

(c) Gujlatus, qui jcntire eorum <juihus xefcimur genera debet, habitat ;« ea parte Oris, qua efculentis CP* poculentis iter natura patefecit. Ciccr. de Nat. Dcor. J. l. c. 56. Vid. quoque fi4pr. Note {b). Chap. 4.

{d) Alulta hujus [quinti paris] l^ervi propagines Mafltcatio>- nis open- deftinantur ; ideoque quoniam alimcnta ingerenda nan tnodo Gu/iiis, afl etiam OLj'atltis <jr VisUs examen fubirc debint^ ab eodem Nervo, cujus rami ad Palatum CT* Fauces mifft, Manducat tonis negotium peragunt, propagines alii, -vclut extlnratri' ces, ad Karcs cr Oculos feruntur, netnpe ut ijih.u aiiorum fenfuum organa, etiam ad objedfa Guflus tnelms digncjcenda proba.* ttonum auxiliis quibufdam inJlrtiantHr. Willis Nerv. Defcrip. & Ulus. cap. 21.

(*) Sc« bock V, Chap, 8,

Means,

x^z Of the Tajie. Book IV.

Means, there is all the Guard that can be, against pernicious Foodi forafmuch as before it is taken into the Stomach, it is to undergo the Trial of three of the Senfesj the Scrutiny of the Eye, the ftri6i: Surveyor of its outward Appearance > and the Probation of the Smell and Talle, the two feverefb Judges of its natural Conllitution and Compofition.

CHAP. VI.

Of the Senfe of Feeling {a).

HAving fpent so much Time upon the other Senfes, and therein given such ample Proofs of the infinite Creator's wisdom i I ihall but briefly take Notice of two Things relating to this last Senfe.

One

(4) Malpight is of this Opinion, that as Ta(le is performed by the Va^dU in the Tongue, so is Feeling by such hke PapilU under the Sl^in. From ieveral DifTecftions, and other Obl'ervarions, he thus concludes. Ex his CT" fimdibiis videbatur animus abundi certior redditus, earundem Papiliarum pyramida- Itum copiam, quas alias in Lingua defcripfi, in locis prAcipue acqui/itiori Tatlui dicatis reperiri, eodem progigni nervofo c?" cuticsilari corpore , JImulque circumvolvi reticulari involucre , cr extimatn cuticulam , 'veluti ultitnutn terminum at" tingere. — ^— — Alicrofcopio quilibet in maniis dorfo pro fudore orificta quidam tniro ordine difperfa intueri poteft, circa qux frequentia qu<&Jam capitula aJJ'urgunt ; hxc vera ftmt Papiliarum fines, dam a cute iiJJ'urgentes interpofitum fuperant rete^ fimulque extimum cuticuLirn. H£c repetitts fetlionibus deprehendi; ex quibus non improbabiiicer deducam, ficuti ex elatio' riiiis • pai'iUis ■ /» Lingtta, Gtiflus Organon elicitur,

• ita ex loptosd harum Papiliarum congerie in or'

ganis, ubi t/taxime anitnalia iailki nutione ajficmntur, ■

adaquatitm

Chap. VI. Of Feeling, 143

One is its Organ, the Nerves. For as all Senfation is performed by the Nerves {h)^ and indeed the other Senfes (performed by Nerves) are a kind of Feeling-, Co is this Senfe of Feeling perlormed by Nerves likewife, fpread in the molt incomparable, curious Manner throughout the whole Body. But to describe their Origine in the Brain, and Spinal- Marrow, their Ramifications to all the Parts j their Inofcuiations with one another > and other Matters; whereby not only the Scnfe of Feeling is pcrform'd, but alfo animal Motion, and an admnable Confenc and Harmony of all the Parts of the Body is cffctbcd : (To describe, I say, thcfe Things) would take up too much Time, and I have already, and shall, as I go along, give some Hints thereof.

The other Thing 1 shall take Notice of, is, the Difperfion of this Senfe throughout the Body, both without, and within. The other Senfes, I have obferv'd, are feated in the very bell: Place for the Relief and Comfort, the Guard and Benefit of the Animal. And foralmuch as it is neccfl'ary to the Being, and well-being of the Body, that every Part llrould be fcnfible of Things fafe, or Things prejudicial to it self; therefore it is an admn'able Contrivance of the great Creator, to difperfe ihvs

adsquatum Ta51us organum fufficiennr habtr't. Malpig. dc extern. Tac't. Org. p. 2.6. Coujul. quoque ejujd. I'it. p. z8.

'I'hefe Oblcrvations of Malpighi, our late curious and diligent Mr. Cowpcr hath contirmed, and given us very elegant Cuts both of the Sfun, and the PapilU, and the Nerves, Glands, erf. under it, from Microfcopical Oblcrvations. Vid. Cowptr's Anat. Introd. and Tab. 4.

(Jf) Although the Eye be the ufual Judge of Colours, yet feme have been able to dilbnguilh them by their Feeling. Gh<'tdntn futt qui vinit ad M. Due. Hetruri»e attlaw qui colorts fer Tiictttm cognojcebac Pro expertmsTtto velum Jencum, uniformuer textuiDy cr plurihus colonbui tir)Clu7n, cj/erebaiiir, c?* veracirer de color* tn Jmgulis parttbus judtcabar. Grinuid. dc Lum. 3c CoJ. prop. 43. §. s'J>

Senfe

144 Of Feeling. Book IVo

Senfe of Feeling throughout every Part [c) ; to diflinguilh between pleasure and Painj Things falutary, and Things hurtful to the Body.

Thus in the five Senfes of Animals, we have an OEconomy worthy of the Creator, and manifeftly demonftrating his Power, wisdom and Indulgence. For whether we consider the mechanism of the Organs, or the great Ufe and Convenience of each Senfe, we find it noble and grand, curious and artificial 5 and every way worthy of its infinite Maker, and beyond the Wit and Power of any Thing but a GOD : And therefore we must even deny our Senfes, by denying them to be God's handy-worlc.

And now from those chief Machines of animal Performances and Enjoyments, the five Senfes 5 let us pass to another Thing in common to all the Senfitive Creatures, which is respiration.

(c) Ta6lus autem toto corpore aquahiliter fufus efi, ut omnes i6lus, omnefque nimios O" frigoris, ziy caloris appulfus /entire pofflmus. Cicer. ubi fupr.

Tadlus fenfus omnibus efi, et'iam quibus nullus alius ; nam & Oftreis, er terrefiribus Vermibus quoque. Exiftimaverim omnibus fenfum ^ Gufiattts efj'e. Cur enim alios alia faporei appetunt ? in qu'o vil pr&cipua Nature archite^io. Piin. Nat. hist. 1. lo. c. 71.

Of respiration.

OF all the Afts of Animal Life, this is one of the chief, and most neccfHiry. For whatfoever hath Animal Life, hathalfo the Faculty of respiration, or fomevvhat equivalent thereto {a). Indeed

(4) The Ufes aflign'd to Refplrat'ion by all the Anatomifts before Alalpighi's Dilcoveries of the Strudure of the LungSj are so various, and many of them so improbable, that it would be frivolous to recount them. But the more eminent modern Anatoraifts aflign these Ufes. Willis thus lums up his Opinion, Pr^cipua Pulfnonum funtlio, u'nfus ftint, fanguincm CT* aerem per tolas partttim compages, intimofque recejj'us, atq; duilus quojque minutijfnnos traducere, CT* ubique invicetn comtfiitrere ; in eum ncmpe fincm, ut fanguis vcnofus a circuitu

reduXf <y ch'^mo rccenti dilutus, turn perfeHiiis mifceatur V velnt fubigatur, turn potijfimum ut fecundUm omnes fuas partes ab aere nitrofo ds novo accendatur. Pharmaceut. p. 2. S. I. c. z. §. 2. Mayow faith rightly, that one grand Ufe of Expiration is, Ut cum aere expul/o, etiam vapores e fanguine exhalantes, fimul exftijfientur. And as for Jnfpiration, that it coveyeth a nitro-aenal ferment to the Blood, to which the Animal-Spirits are owing, and all Mufcular-Motion. Mayovi de Kefpir. p. 21. zsrc mea. Edit.

Somewhat of the Opinion of these tv/o lad: cited, if I miftake not (it being long since I read their Trads, and have them not now at hand,^ were Ent, S-jlvius, Szvammerdamt Diewerbroek, and my P'riend Mr. Ray in an unpublilhed Traft of his, and in his Letters now in my Hands.

But our Dx.Thurfton, for good reasons, rejedls these from being principal Ufes of respiration, and thinks, with great reason, the principal Ufes to be to move, or pass the Blood from the right to the left Ventricle of the Heart. Upon which account Perfons hanged, drowned, or ftrangled by Catarrhsj so fuddenlydie, namely, because the Circulation of their Blood is (topped. For the lame reason alio it is, that Animals die so foon in the Air-Pump. Among other Proofs he inftanceth in an Experiment of Dr. Croon, Profcj]'. Grejh. Which he made before our R. s. by ftiangUng a Pullet, so

L tb«t

1^6 Of Rejftratton. Book IV.

deed so congenial is this with Life , that Breath and Life are in Scripture Phrafe and Common

Speech

that not the least Sign of Life appcar'd; but by blowing Wind into the Lungs through ihe Trachea, and so fetting the Lungs a playing, he brought the Bird to Life again. Another Experiment was once tried by Dr. Walter Needham, before Mr, Boyl, and others at Oxford, by hanging a Dog, so that the Heart 'ceafed moving. But haftily opening the Dog, and blowing Wind into the Du£Ihs Pecquetlanus, he put the Blood in Motion, and by that means the Heart, and so recovered the Dog to Life again. V. Thurfton de Refpir. Uf. p. 60, and 63. mea, Edit.

Such an Experiment as Dr. Croons my Friend, the late juftly renowned Dr. Hook (hewed alfo our R. S. He cut away the Ribs, Diaphragm, and Pericardium, of a Dog ; alfo the top of the Wind-Pipe, that he might tie it on to the nose of a Pair of Bellows; and by blowing into the Lungs, he restored the Dog to Life; and then cealing blowing, the Dog would foon fall into dying Fits; but by blowing again, he recovered ; and so alternately would die, and recover, for a considerable Time, as long, and often as they pleafed. Philof. Tranf, No. i8.

For the farther Confirmation of Dr. Thurflon's Opinion, the ingenious Dr. Mafgrave cut off, and close flopped up the Wind-Pipe of a Dog with a Cork, and then threw open the Thorax; where he found the Blood ftagnating in the Lungs, the Arteria Puhnonaris the right Ventricle and Auricle of the Heart, and the two great Trunks of the Cava, diftended with Blood to an immenfe Degree; but at the same Time, theF^- na Pulmonaris, the left Ventricle and Auricle of the Heart in a manner empty, hardly a fpoonful of Blood therein. Phihf. Tranf. N". 240. Or both the Experiments may be together met with in Lowth. Abridg. Vol. 3. p. 66, 67.

This Opinion of our learned Thurfton, the late learned E/- mullerus efpoufed, who being particular in reckoning up the Ufes of respiration, I shall therefore the more largely cite him. respiration, faith he, serves, r. Ad Olfa^um. 2. Ad Screatum O' Sputationem. 3. Ad Ofcitationem, Tujftm, Sternutationem, Emun^ionemque. 4. Ad liquidorum Sorbitionem, Su£lionemve. 5. Ad Loquelam, Cantum, Clamorem, Rifum, Jletum, Flatum, &C. 6. Ad f&cum Alvi, Urins,, Foetus Motive, necnon Secundinarum expuljionem. 7. Ad promovendi Ventriculi, Inteftifzorum, LaHeorumque vaforum. Sec. contenta. %. Ad halitHS aqueos Sanguinis 'e pulmonibtts, aeris ope, export

iandos.

Chap. Vlf. Of Rcfpiratiott. T47

Spech taken as fynonytnous Things, or at Icafl ncccflary Concomitants of one another. Moy^

tandos, 9. Ad Diapnoen. lo. Ad exadltorcm Ch^li, L'jmphtque, necnon Sarigu'ims mifcelam. ir. Ad conciliafjdum Janguini' •coccineam ruhcd'tnem, &C. \i. Nee morose ve^abimus, a'crein pultnoriesy cr fanguinem illos tranfcurretucmi

minus calida reddere, &c. 1 3. §lu'od dcnique acr far.guini fngitlis Refpirat'tonibiis aliquant'tlla, fui parte, admixtus, paucijftmas quiifdam in fpirituum animalium elaboratione particulas fimul contribitat. All these Ufes, although of great consequence, yet he thinks rather conduce to the JVcU-Bei^g, than the Being of the AniiTi.^1 ; because without any of them, the Animal would not so fpcedily die, as it doth by Strangling, or in the Air-Pump. He therefore affigns a I4«'^ and the principal Ufe of respiration to be. For the pajfmg of the Blood through the Lungs, that is throzvn into them by the Heart. Etmull. DilTert. 2. c, 10. §. i. &16.

But the late Dr. Drake, with great Ingenuity and Addrefs, (like a Perlon so considerable for his Years, as he was in his Time,) not only eftablifli'd this Notion of respiration, but alfo carries it farther, making it the true cause of the Diaftole of the Heart ; which neither Borelli, Lower, or Coii-per, much less any before those great Men, have well accounted for. That the Heart isaMufcle, is made evident beyond all doubt by Dr. Lower. And that the Motion of all muscles confills in Conftri(f^ion, is not to be doubted alfo. By which means the Syftole is eafily accounted for. But forafmuch as the Heart hath no Antagonift- muscle, the Btafide hath puziled the greatest Wits. But Dr. Drake with great Judgment, and much Probability of reason, maketh the Weight of the Incumbent atmosphere to be the true Antagonifi to all the muscles which fcrve both for ordinary Infpiration and the Conftridion of the Heart. The Particulars of his Opinion may be seen in his Anatomy ^ 1. 2. c. 7. And in Philof. Tranf. 281.

And I remember when I was at the Univerfity, my mod ingenious and learned Tutor Dr. Wills, when he read Anatomy to us, yfas of Opinion, that the Lungs were blown up by the WeigTit of the incumbent Air, and reprefented the manner of respiration in this manner, viz.. He put a Bladder into a Pair of Bellows, turning back the Neck of the Bladder, and tying it fall, so that no Air might enter in between the Bladder and Bellows. This being done, when the Bellows were opened, the Bladder would be blown up by the Weight of the incumbent Air; and when (hut, the Air would be thereby preffed forcibly out of the Bladder, ^0 as ts

J4^ Of Refftration. Book IV.

fes (h) exprefTeth animal Life, by [The Breath of Life~]. Saith he, Gen. vii. ii, 21. Jll FlcJJj that mo- *ved on the Earthy Fowl, Cattle, beast, creeping Things, and Man-, all in whose Noflrils was the Breath of Life in the dry Land died. So the PGiliniftj Pfal. civ. zp. 'fhou takejl away their Breath, they die. So grand an Aft therefore in common to all Animals, may julHy deferve a Place in this Survey of the Works of God in the animal Kingdom.

And here I might launch out into an ample description of all the Parts miniftering to this necessary Adj and fliew the curious Contrivance and artificial Stru6lure of them j but a tranfient View shall fuffice. 1 might begin with the outward Guards, the nose and Mouth •■, but these have been already touched upon. But the exquifite mechanism of the Larynx, its Variety of Mufclcs, its Cartilages, all so exquifitcly made for the purpose of respiration, and forming the Voice {c), are very

admirable :

blow the Fire. This Experiment I take Notice of here; because (befidesthe Illuftration it gives to Reipiration) that great Gemtts seems to have had a truer Notion of this Ph^nomenont than was very common then, viz.. about the Year 1677 or 78; as alfo, because I have in some Authors met with the same Experiment, without mention of Dr. Wills, whose I take it to have been.

Another Ufe of great consideration, the already commended Dr. Cheytte aiTigns; namely, to form the elaftick Globules of which the Blood principally confifls, without which there would be a general Obftruflion in all the capillary Arteries, Cheynes Phil. Prin. of Nat. Rel. or Harris's Lex. Tech. in Lungs.

(l) Gen. ii. 7. vi, 17. and vii. 15.

{c) because it would be endlefs to fpecify the curious mechanism of all the Parts, concurring to the Formation of the Voice; I shall therefore for a Sample note only two Things, I, There are thirteen muscles provided for the Motion of the five Cartilages of the Larynx, Glbf. Anat. /. 2,. c. 14. a Sign of the careful and elaborate Provifion that is made for the Voice. 2.. It is a prodigious Faculty of the Glottis, in contrafting and dilating it self with such Exquifitenefs, as to form all Notes.

Fes

Chap. VII. Of Rcfptration. 149

admirable: And no Icfs so is the Tongue (</), which minillcrs to that, and many other Ufcs too.

Next, the Fabrick of tlie {e) Tr.^cbea defervcs cfpecial Remark. Its Valve, the Epiglottii on the

Top,

For (as the ingenious Dr. Keil Uitli) fuppopno the ^rtuttft Di- Jlarice of the tzvc Sides of the Glottis, to be one tenth Part "f an Inch in founding li Notes, (to which the Voice eafily reaches;) this Line mujl be divided into 12. Parts, each of w huh giues the jiperture reqrtifite for such a Note, with a certain stretigth. But if we consider the Sub-divifion of Notes, into which the Voice can run, the Motion oj the Sides of the Glottis is jhil 'vajily nicer. For if two Chords founding exatliy Uniji ns, one be JJjortened, 4-rT^ P^f^ of 't^ Length, a jufi Ear will perceive the Difagreement, and a good Voice zvill found the Difference, which ii -pr,-;^ Part of a Note. But fuppo'e the Voice can divide a Note into 100 Parts, it follows that the different j4pertures of the Glottis actually divide the tenth Part of an Inch, into liOO Parts, the F.ffcCl of each of which produces a fcnfible Alteration upon a good Ear. But because each Side of the GlotliS moves jufl equally, therefore the Divifions are jufl double, or the Sides of the Glottis, by their Motion do ailually divide one tenth Part of an. Inch into 14CO Parts. Keil's Anat. c. 3. Se(5t. 7.

(d) Among the Inftruments of Speech, the Tongue is a necellary one; and so necellary, that it is generally thought no Speech can be without it. But in the third Tome of the Hfhetn. Germ, is publillied, jac. Rclandi Aglnffoflomographia, five Dcfcriptio Oris fine Lingua, quod perfetie loquitur, c/ reliquas fuas funtlibnes naturalit'er exercet. The Perlon dcicribed is one Pet. Durand, a trench Boy of e'ght or nine Years old, who at five or fix loft his Tongue by a Gangrene, occafioned the Small-Pox. Notwithftandmg which, he could (as the Title faith) speak perfertly, as alfo tafte, fpit, fwallow, and chew his Food; but this latter he could do only on that Side he put it into, not being able to turn it to the other Side his Mouth.

In the same Tradt, Chap. 6. is this observation of ventriloquous Perlons, Metnini me a qitodam fat celebri Anatomica au" dtviffe. Hum de dupl/catura Medtafiini ageret, ft Mcmbrana ijla. duplex naturalittr unit » in duas partes dtvidatur, loquelam quafi ex peilore procedere, ut circumflantes credant Dimoniacum hunc, aut Sternomythum.

(e) The Variation of the Wine-pipe is obfervable in every Crea~ ture, according as it is necessary for that of the Voice. In an Urchin, which hath a very Jmall Voice, 'tis hardly more than membranous. And in a Pigeon, which hath a low and fcft

1^0 Of Refptration. Book IV.

Top, to fence against all Annoyances} its cartilaginous Rings (/) nearly environing it, with its membranous Part next the Gullet, to give the freer passage to the Defcent of the Food. And lastly, Irs inner Tegument of exquifite Senfe to be readily affefted with, and to make Efforts against every Thing that is hurtful or offenfivc } these, 1 say, do ail jultly deferve our Admiration.

And no less prodigious are the Parts farther with^ jnj the Bronchi^ the Feftculcs (g), with their mufcular

iJote, 'tis partly cartilaginous, and partly membranous. In an Owl, which hath a good audible Note, 'tis more cartilaginous-, iut that of a ]zy, hath hard Bones infiead of Cartilages ; and so of a Linnet : Whereby they have both of them a louder and fironger Note, &c.

The Rings of the Wind-pipe are fitted for the Modulation of the Voice : For in Dogs and Cats, which in the expression of divers Paffions ufe a great many Notes, (us Men do,) they are open and flexible, a,s in Man. Whereby all, or any of them are dilated, or contra^ed, more or less, as is convenient for a higher or deeper Note, 6cc. whereas tn some other Animals, us in the Japan- Peacock, which ufsth hardly more than one fingle Jflote, they are entire, 8cc. Grew's Cofmolog. Sacr. Book I. Chap. 5. §. 9, 10.

(/) It is a farther manifest Indication of fingular design in the cartilaginous Rings of the afpera Arteria, that all the Way •where they are contiguous to the Oefoph.igus, they are mem^ Isranous, to afford an eallePafTage to the Food; but after that, in the Bronchi; they are, some compleatly annular, some triungijlar, cc. And another obfervable is, the lower Parts of the fuperior Cartilages, receive the upper Parts of the inferior, in the Bronchi; v/hereas in the afpera Arteria, the Cartilages run and remain parallel to one another; which is a no- Ible Difference or mechanism in this (in a Manner) one and the same Part, enabling the Lungs and Bronchi to contra<fl themselves in Expiration, and to extend and dilate themselves in Infpiration.

{g) I shall not here intrench so much upon the Anatomifl's Province, to give a description of the Lungs, although it be a curious Piece of God's VVorkmanfliip; but refer to Seignior jkialpighi, the firfl Difcoverer of their VcftcuU in 1660, m his two L,ei:ters to B<irell} dp Palmon. Alfo to Dr. ff/^i/s Pbarm,

.hap. VII. Of Rcffiration. 1 5* I

lar Fibres (/^), as some afTeit they have, together with the Arteries and Veins, which every where accompany the airy Pafl-iges, for the Blood to receive there its Impregnations from the An*.

rat. p. 2. S. r. c. I. de Refpir. Orig. o' Vf. who as he wrote after Malpighl, so hath more accurately described thole Parts ; and to Mr. Cozuper's Anat. Tab. 24, 25. And if the Reader hath a Mind to see what Oppolition Seignior Malpighi's Difcoveries met with at Home and Abroad, and what Cuntroverfies he had on that Account, as alfo his Cenfures of Dr. Willis's Defcriptions and Figures, he may confult Malpighi'g Life written by himself, pag. 4. to 21.

That tl.e Lungi consist of VeftcuU, or Lobuli of VeficuU admitting of Air from the Bronchi, is visible, because they may be blown up, cleanfcd of Blood, and so dried. But Mr. Cowper faith, he could never part the Lobuli, (\o as to make Dr. Willis's Fig. r. Tab. 3. & 4.) so that probably the VeficuU are contiguous to one another throughout each Lobe of the Lungs. And not only Air; but Diemerbroeck proves, that the VeficuU admit of Dull alfo, from two allhmatick Perfons he opened; one a Stone cucter's Man, the VeficuU of whose Lungs were so ftufFed with Duft, that in cutting, his Knife went as if through an Heap of Sand; the other was a Feather-driver, who had these Bladders filled with the fine Dull or Down of F'eathers.

{h) There is a confulcrable Difference between Dr. IVillis, and EtTn:dler, -viz.. Whether the VeficuU of the Lungs have any mufcular Fibres or not.'* Etmuller exprcflly faith, Kullas Fibras mufciilofas, tfiiho minus rubicundam Alufculorum compur gem (funt enim VeficuU albid/t cr Jere diaphansj in ipfis reperiri. ubi fupr, c. 6. §. 2. And afterwards, $. 3. Pulmones ejje motles flextlefque mufculofis fibris ceu propria expUcationis organis defiitutos. Hut Dr. Willis as exprcllly alTerts they have mufculous Fibres, and aHigns an excellent Ule of them ; CellnU iftt, 'veficulares, ut nixus pro expiratione contraclivos edant, etiam fibras, ut) per Microfcopium plane confpicere est, mufculares obtinent, ubi fupr. §. 16. And m the next §, Ut pro data occafiott majorem aeris copiam exfuffient, aut materiam extujfiendam ejiciant, fibris mufculartbus donat&, fiefe arfiihs contrahunt, contentaque fiia penitits exterminant Et entm ordinari& pectoris SyfioU, quas tnufculorufn relaxationes ex parte efficiunt, aerem forfan totum a Trachea cr Bronchiis, haud tattien a VeficuUs, qudque vice eficiunt : propter has (quoties opus eritj inaniendaSf cr totitu Pectoris cavitas plurimum anguftatur, C/" celluU ipfi veficulures a propri'n fibris confiriclis coarClantur,

h ^ From

f$% Of Refplration. Book IV.

From hence I might proceed to the commodious Form of the Ribs (z), the curious mechanism of thelntercoftal-muscles (^)j the Diaphragm, and all the other muscles (/) minifbing both to the ordinary, and extraordinary Offices of respiration.

But

(i) Circa has motus \_Scil. Pediorts dilatationem,?^c~\ d'tv'mi Conditorls mechanicen, ad regulas Mathematicas plane adaptatam, fat'ts admirari non pojfumus ; fiquidem nulla alia in re manifefiiks 'O ©to? yeM/ut.i'l^eiy videtur. <^ippe cum pe^orisy turn ampliatioy turn coar6latio a quibufdam Mujculis (quorum tnuniis unicum efi contrahere ) perfici del/eat; res ita infiitutr tur, ut CofiA qu& thoracis, ■velut parallelogrammi ohlongi verfus c^lindrum incurvati, latera effortnant, in figuram modo quadratam, cum angulis reS^lis, pro pe^oris ampliatione ; modo in rhomboeidem, cum angulis acutis pro ejujdern contraitione, di*- (antur,6cc. Willis, ubi fupr. §. i8.

Galen having spoken of the Parts miniftring to respiration, Concludeth, Nihil ufquam a Natura ullo patio per incuriam, fuijfe prAteritum, qu& cum omnia prafentiret o" provideret, qua funt neceJJ'aria ilia, quA caufa alicujus extiterunt, confecutura, omnibm tnfiaurationes parare occupavit, cujus apparatus copioja facultas admirabdem Sapientiam tejlantur. De uf. part. 1. 5. c. 15. See alfo L 6. c. 1.

(k) For the Struiflure of the Intercojials, Midriff, 8cc. I shall refer to Dr. Willis, and other Anatomifts. But Dr. Drak? taxeth Dr. Willis with an Error in fancying there is an Oppolition in the Office of the intercojials, by reason that the Fibres of the external and internal Intercojials decufl'ate; that therefore the external serve to raise the Ribs, the internal to draw them down. But Dr. Drake is of Steno's, and Dr. i^f^jjiiju-'s Opinion, that notwithflanding the Decuffation of their f'ibres, the Power they exert upon, and the Motion they elfed: in the Ribs, is one and the same. Drake's Anat, 1. x, c. 7. and 1. 4. c. 5. Alayow de Refpir. c. 7.

(/) Although Dr. Drake and some others deny the Intercojials being Antagonift-muscles, as in the preceding Note, yet they, and most other Anatomifts that I have met with, attribute a considerable Power to them in the ad of respiration, as they do alfo to the Subclavian and Triangular Muffles: but the learned Etrnuller denies it for these three reasons, I. ^lia refpirando nullum in illis contra£lionern fentio. %. &uia — — fibi invicem non adducuntur, &c. 3. 6)«/4 CoJIa omnss ab aliis modo enarratis mufcults moventur, idquf

Chap. VII. Of Refp'iration. 15-3

But pnfTing them by, I lliall Hop at one prodigious Work of Nature, and manifcit Contrivance ot the Almighty Creator, which although taken notice of by others (w), yet cannot be cafily paflcd by in the Subjeft I am upon ; and that is the Circulation of the Blood in the Fostus in the Womb^ so different from the Method thereof after it is Born. In the Womb, whillt it is ns one Body with the Mother, and there is no Occafion, nor Place for respiration, there are two Palliiges («) on purpose for the TranfmifTion of the Blood without passing it through the

Lungs.

f;niul, Sec. Inlercoflales itaque, necnon Subclavioi Mufculot Coj'iis, parletum mjlar, ad complenda interjlitia intercojlaliaf fej:Iuj'ljue Integrandum, ac Coftas connedendas, tnterttClos ejj'e, probabiliHr concludo ; quo murere triangulates etiam fungi, rationi confentaneum est. Etmul. DilTert. z. cap. 4. §. 6.

But as to the Ule of the Triangular muscle in Kei'piration, we may judge of it, from its remarkable Size, and Ufe in a Dog; of which Dr. /-f^;///; gives this Account from Fallopius : In Homme parvtu ddeo or fubtilis i/le [Muiculus] e/l, ut vix fro Mufculo accipj queat : in Cans per totutn os pectoris protenditur, CT* cartilagines omneSy etiam verarum Coftarum fternoinofculatas, occupat : Cujus di/criminis ratio divinam circa Ani^ nmlium jabncas Providentiarn plane indigttat. *^ippt ciif»hoe animal, ad curjus velocijfnnos cr din continuandos natutn, quo fanguis, dum tntenjihs agitatur, rit~e accendatur evtntileturque, herein celerrime cr sort iter uti infpirare, it a etiam exfpirare debet idcirco propter hunc attitm frmius ol/eunJutn (cujus

in Homiiie haud magnus est ufus ) mufculus caninus molem ingentem cr tanto operi parem fortiiur. WiUis ubi [iipr. §. 31.

{m) Ray's wisdom of God in the Creation, p. 343.

(n) Mr. Chefelden, an ingenious and most accurate Anatomilt, having fomewhat particular in his observations about the Circulation of the Blood through the Heart of the Fcctus, I flnll present the Reader with some of his observations, which he favoured me with the Sight of. The Blood (faith he) which is brought to the Htart by the a/cending Cava, pajf'es out of the right Auricle into the left, through a passage called Foramen Ovale, in the Septum [common to ilicm toth] without pajftng through the right Ventricle (as after the ^irfhj while the Blood from (he defcending Cash p^Jfeth through

th$

1 5*4 0/ Refpration. Book IV.

Lungs. But as foon as the Foetui is Born, and become thereby a perfcdiy dillind Being, and breathes for it self, then thele two PaiTages are fhut up : one nearly obliterated, the other becomes only a Ligament, except in some Creatures that are Amphibious, or are forced to lie long under Water, in whom these Paflages probably remain open (o).

And now what A6tinn of any rational Creature, what is there in a Man's Life, that doth more

plainly

the right Auricle and Ventricle into the pulmonary Artery, and thence into the Aorta through the Du^, betwixt that and the fulmonary Artery, called Dudtus Arteriofus, whilfi a small Portion of the Blood, thrown into the pulmonary Artery pafj'eth through the Lungs, no more than is sufficient to keep open the pulmonary Vejfels. Thus both Ventricles are employed in driving the Blood through the Aorta to all Parts of the Fcetus, and to the Mother too. But after the Birth, the Blood being to be driven from the Aorta through the Foetus alone, and not the Mother too, one Ventricle becomes sufficient, zvhilfl the other is employed in driving the Blood through the Lungs, the Dudtus Arteriofus being fljut up by means of the Alteration of its Pofition, which happens to it from the raijing the Aorta by the Lungs •when they become inflated. After that the Blood is thus driven into the Lungs, in its return it flouts the Valve of the Foramen Ovale againfl the Foramen it self , to zvhofe Sides it foon adheres, and [o flops up the passage. The Dudus Arteriofus, or Ductus Arteriofus in Ligamentum verfus, is feldom to be difcerned in adult Bodies, but the Figure of the Foramen Ovale is never obliterated.

(o) It hath been generally thought to be not improbable, but that on some Occafions the Foramen Ovale may remain open in Man. In a Girl of four or five Years of Age, Dr. Connor found it but half closed, and in the Form of a Crefcent. And he thinks fomewhat of this kind might be in the Perfon whose Skeleton was found to have no Joynts in the Back-Bone, Ribs, ere Of which a description, with Cuts, may be fou-.d in Phil. Tranf. No. 215. and more largely in his T>iffert. Med. Phyf. de flupendo Ojfmm coalitu, where he adds to the Girl, in whom the For. Ov. was not fhut, a like observation of another Girl he opened at Oxford of three Years Old, In qua Foramen Ovale fer'e erat occlufum, in medio tafmn, exili forammt pr quod Turmdam facile tranfmift, erat

perviHW^

Chap. VII. Of Reffirat'ion. T^^

plainly fhcw design , reason , and Contrivance , than this very A61 of Nature doth the Contrivance

and

fervium, pag. 30. So Mr. Cowptr (than whom none more accurate and a better Judge) faith, 1 have often found the Foramen Ovale open m the Adult. Anat. Append. Fig. 3. But Mr. chcfelden is of a different Opinion. Of which in the following Note.

I'rom lomcwhat of this cause I am apt to think it was that the Tronningholm Gardiner efcaped drowning, and forae others mentioned by Pechlin. His Stories are, Hortulanut^ Tronningholmenfis etiamnum vivem, annos natus 65, pro ilia dtate fiitii adhuc valens c/ vegetus, cum ante 18 annos y alii /» aquas delapfo opem ferre vellet, forte fortune cr ipfe per glacierrt incautiiis procedens, aquas incidit 18 ulnas profundas : ubi tile, corpore ereCio quafi ad pcrpendiculum, pedibus fundo adhifit. Conflitit fie per 16 horas, antequhin produceretur in auras. Dixit autem, fimul ac infra aquarum fiiperficiem fuit demer^ fus, flatim obriguijfe tot urn, c?-, fi quern turn habuit motutn (j" fenfum, amififje, ntfi quod fonantes Stockolmii campanas etiam fub aquis obfcuriits percipere fibi fit vifus. Senfit etiam, fiattm fefe velut veficulam ori applicdjfe, adeb ut aqua nulla os penetraverit, in aures vero tranfiium, etiam fentiente illo, habuerit ; atque inde auditum fuum debilitatum aliquandiu ejfe. Hoc fialu dum 16 horas permaafit frujira quifittu, tandem repertum, conto in caput infixo, cujns etiam fenjum fe habiujj'e dixit, fundo extraxerunt, fperantcs ex more aitt perfuafione gcntis reviflurum eJJ'e. Itaque pannis linteifque produClum obvolvunt, ne a'er admttti poffit perniciofus futurus fubito illapfu : cuflodttum fie fatis ah a'ere fenfim fenfimque tepidiori loco admovent tnox calidis adoriuntur fafciis, fricant, radunt, u' fufflaminatutn tot horis Janguinis corporifque motum negotiosa ilia opera reducunt : denique antapopleHicis cr genialibus liquoribus vits. reddunt o" prifiins. mobilitati. Retulit is atque oftendit fe etiamnum in capite circumferre veftigia violentis a conto tllati, ct* fephalalgiis vexari graviffimis. Et propter hunc ipjum cafum, religiose a popularibus, c/ hujufce rei teftibus probatum, Sereniffimi RegitiA matris munificentta CT annuo fttpendio est donafus — - c?" Serenif. Principi — oblatus, vivus fui teftis <•

Confignatam manu habes Hiftoriam D. Tilafii, Biblioth. Reg. Pr-ifecli, qui teftatns est fe prdnoviffe mulierem, qu& tres ipjos dies fub aquis hifit. O' fimilcm in modum, quo Hortulanus tile, refufciiata, adhuc dum lucts plena fruitur ufurd. Accedit Nob.

BHrmmm ■'•^ sides, qui (onfcjjus est, fe in pago Bonefs

pareihi4

i$6 Of Refpiratlon, Book IV.

and design of the great GOD of Nature ? What is Thought and Contrivance, if this be not ? Namely, That there should be a temporary Part in the Body, made juft for the present Exigence 5 to continue whilft there is occafion for it, and to ceafe when there is none 5 in some Creatures to remain always, by reason of their amphibious Way of Living, and in Land-animals (purely such) to ceafe ?

Another excellent Contrivance, a-kin to the lafl, is, for the Prefervation of such Creatures whose ocfarochiA Pithoviae concionem frequentajfe funehrem, in qudf dum aila recenferet Prdco Senis cujufdam feptuagenar'ti Laur. Jonae • audiverit ex ore Coicionatorts, vivum eum, adolefcentem 11 annorum, aquis fubmerfum, 7 demum hehdomada (rem frodtgiofam ! ) extrachim ad fe rediijfe vivum er mcolntnem. Pechlin, de Aer. &: Alim. def. c. 10.

Shall we to this cause, or to the Offification, or more than ordinary Strength of the Wind-Pipe, attribute the Recovery to Life of Perfons hanged? Of which Pechlin gives an Initance that fell under his own Knowledge, of a Woman hanged, and in all Appearance dead, but recovered by a Phyfician accidentally coming in, with a plentiful Adminiftration of Spir.Sal. Armon. Pechl. ib. c.7. And the Story of Anne Green, executed at Oxford, Bee. 14. 1650. is still well remembered among the Seniors there, she was hanged by the Neck near half an Hour, some of her Friends in the mean Time thumping her on the Breafl, others hanging with all their Weight upon her Legs, fometimes lifting her up, and then pulling her down again with a fudden Jirk, thereby the fooner to difpatch her out of her Pain: as her printed Account wordeih it. After llie was in her Coffin, being observed to breath, a lufty Fellow ftamped with all his Force on her Bread and Stomach, to put her out of her Pain. But by theaffiftance of Dr Peity, Dr. Willis, Dr. Bathurfl, and Dr. Clark, ftie was again brought to Life. I my self faw her many Years after, after that (he had (I heard) born divers Children. The Particulars of her Crime, Execution and Reftauration, see in a little Pamphlet, called News from the Bead, written, as I have been informed, by Dr. Bathurft, (afterwards the most vigilant and learned Prefident of Trinity^ College, Oxon,) and publilhed ia j6si. with Verfes upon the Occafion.

cafions

Chap. Vir. Of Rejplration. IJ7

cafions frequently neccflitate them to live without, or with but little Rcfpiration : Fifhcs might be named here, whofc Habitation is always in the Waters i but these belong to an Element which I cannot at prefcnt engage in. But there arc many Animals of our own Element, or partly so, whofc Organs of Rcfpiration, whose Blood, whose Heart, and other Inllruments of Life, are admirably accommodated to their Method of Living: Thus many amphibious Creatures (/>), who live in Wate^ as well as Air i many Quadrupeds, Birds, Infefts, and other Animals, who can live some Hours, Days, yea, whole Winters, with little or no Rcfpiration, in a Torpitudc, or sort of Sleep, or middle State between Life and Death : The Provifion made for these peculiar Occafions of Life, in the Fabrick of the Lungs, the Heart, and other Parts of such

(;.) The Sea-Calf \\n\\ the Foramen Ovale, hy which means it is enabled to Hay long under the Water, as the Panf. Anatomifls. Of which see in Bock VI. Chap. 5. Note {c).

But the fore-commended Mr. Chefelden thinks the Foramen Ovale is neither open in amphibious Creatures, nor any adult Land- Animals. When 1 firji (faith he) applied my fclf to the Difeclion of Human Bodies, I had no dijirufi of tie frequent Accounts of the Foramen Ovale hsin^ open in Adults : but I find fin ce, that I mifiooh the Odium Venarum Coronaiiarum for the Foramen. The like I suppose Authors have done, zi'ha aJJ'ert that it is always open in amphibious Animals : for we have made diligent Enquiry into those Animals, and never found it open. Neither zvould that (as they imagine ) serve theft Creatures to live under Water, as the Foetus doth m Uteto, unless the Dudus Arteriofus was open alfo.

This Opinion of Mr. Chefelden hath this to render it probable, that the Ofiium Venarum Coronariarum is so near the Foramen OvaU, that without due regard, it inay be eafily miilaken for it. Such therefore as have Opportunity of cxaminmg this Fart in amphibious Animals, or any other Subjca, ought to feek for the Ofiium, whenever ihey fufpcdt fhey have met with the Foramen.

Creatures

3f58 Of Refftratlon. Book IV.

Creatures (^), is manifeftly the Work of him, who as St. Paul faith (r), giveth to all Breathy and Life^ and all Things.

(q) Of the fingular Conformation of the Heart and Lungs oi the Tortoife, which is an amphibious Animal. SeeBookWl, chap. 5. Note {b).

(r) A^ti xvii. zj.

CHAP. VIII.

Of the Motion of Animals,

NEXT to the two grand A6ts of animal Life, their Senfe or respiration, I shall consider their Motion^ or locomotive Faculty 5 whereby they convey themselves from Place to Place, according to their Occafions, and Way of Life : And the admirable Apparatus to this purpose, is a plain Demonftration of God's particular Forefighr, Care, and efpecial Providence towards all the animal World.

And here I might view in the firfl; Place the muscles, their curious Structure {a)^ the nice tackr ing them to every Joynt, to pull it this Way, and that Way, and the other Way, according to the fpecial purpose, design, and Office of every such Joint : Alfo their various Size and Strength ; some

large

{a) That the muscles are compounded of Fibres, is visible enough. Which Fibres, the curious and ingenious Borel- U faith, are cylindraceous ; not hollow, hut filled with a fpungy, pithy Subftance, after the manner of Elder, as he discovered by his Microfcopes. Bonl. de Mot. Animal. Parti,

6 Thefs

Chap. VIII. the Motion^ &c. 15-9

large and corpulent, others less, and fomc scarce vifiblc to the naked Eyej all cxadly fitted to every Place, and every ufe of the Body. And lastly, I might take Notice of the mufcular Motions, both involuntary and spontaneous {h).

Next, I might furvey the fpecial Fabrick of the Bones (^), miniilring to animal Motion. Next, I

might

these Fibres, he faith, are naturally white; but derive their Rednefs only from the Blood in them.

these Fibres do in every muscle, (in the Belly at least of the muscle,) run parallel to one another, in a neat orderly Form. But they do not at all tend the same Way, but fomc run aflant, some longways, g~c. according to the Artion or Pofition of each refpedive muscle. The Particulars of which, and of divers other Obfcrvables in the muscles, would, befides Figures, take up too much room in these Notes ; and therefore I mufl refer to the Anatomifts, particularly Stcno^ Borelli, Coivper, 6cc.

{i) The infinite Creator hath generally exerted his Art and Care, in the Provifion made by proper Muicles and Nerves, for all the different Motions in animal Bodies, both involuntary, and voluntary. It is a noble Providence that most of the vital Motions, luch as of the Heart, Stomach, Guts, ^c. are involuntary, the muscles adtmg whether we sleep or wake, whether we will or no. And it is no less providential that some, even of the vital Motions, are partly voluntary, partly involuntary, as that for Inlhnce, of Breathing, which is performed both fleeping and waking; but can be intermitted for a riiort Time on occafion, as for accurate hearing ony Thing, crc. or can be encreafed by a stronger Blall, to make the greater Difcharges of the Blood from the Lungs, when that any Thing overcharges them. And as for the other Motions of the Body, as of the Limbs, and luch as are voluntary, it is a no less Providence, that they are absolutely under the Power of the Will; so as that the Animal hath it in his Power to command the muscles and Spirits ot any part of its Body, to perform such Motions and Adtions as it hath Occafion tor.

(c) ^id di:am de Ojftbus ' quA fuhje^a cor per i mirabiles comtnijjurai hal^evt, ct' ad ftabilitaiem apta<, cr ad artus jiniendos accommodatas, cjr ad 7?iotut?t, ct' ad ovrntm torf^ns aiViinem. Cicer. de Nat. Deor. 1. 2. c. 55.

i6o The Motion Book IV.

By reason it would be endlefs to mention alUhe Curiofities obfervable in the Bones, I (liiil for a Sample, fingle out only n loftance or two, to manifest that Dcfign v/as ufed m the Strufi:ure of these Parts in Man.

The first (hall be in the Bach Bone., v^-hich (among many others) hath these two Things remarkable, i. Its different AiL. )lations from the other Joynts of the Body. For here moll: of the Joynts are flat, and withal guarded with Afperities nnd Hollows, made for catching and holding ; so as firmly to lock and keep the Joynts from Luxations, hut withal to afford them such a Motion, as is necessary for the Incurvations of the Body. 2. The difference of its own Joynts in the Neck, Back and Loins. In the Neck, the Adas, or upper Vertebra, as alfo the Dentata, are curiously made, and joynted (differently from the rest) for the commodious and eafie bending and turning the Head every way. In the Thorax, or Back, the Joynts are more close and firm ; and in the Loins, more lax and pliant ; as alfo the Sp;nes are different, and the Knobs and Sockets turned the quite contrary way, to answer the Occalions the Body hath to bend more there, than higher in the Back. I (hall close this Remark with the ingenious Dr. Keil's observation.

The Strutiiire of the Spine is the very befl that can be contrived; for had it been all Bone, zve could have had no Motion in our Backs; had it been of tzvo or three Bones articulated for Motion, the Medulla Spinalis must have been necejfarily bruifed at every Angle or Joynt ; befides, the whole would not have been so pliable for the fever al postures zve have occafion to put our selves in. If it had been made of several Bones without intervening Cartilages, zve fJjould have had no more life of it, than if it had been but one Bone. If each Vertebra had had its own diflinii Cartilages, it might have been eafily diflocated. And lafily. The oblique Procejj'es of each fuperior and inferior Venehrz, keep the middle one that it can neither be thrufl hackvjards nor forivards to comprefs the Medulla Spinalis* Keiis Anat. c. 5. §.8.

Compare here what Galen faith of the Articulations, Ligaments, Perforation, eye. of the Spine, to prove the Wifdonl and Providence of the Maker of animal Bodies, against such as found fault with Nature's Works ; among which he names Diagoras, Anaxagoras, Afclepiadcs and Epicurus. V. Galen.de Uf Part. L. 11. init. and Chap, rr, z^c. alfo L. 13. intt..

2. The next instance (hall be in one or two Things, wherein the Skeletons of Sexes differ. Thus the Pelvis made in the Belly by the Ilium^ Ojfa Coxendicis and Pubis, is larger in a Female than Mvil:- Skeleton, that there may be more room for the lying of the Vijcera and Tcstus. So the Cartilage bracing together the two Offa Pubis, or Shareboni.', Bartholine faith, is twice thicker and laxer in Women than 6 Men

Chap. VIII. of Animals, 161

might take notice of the Joynts (^/l, their complcat Form adjullcd to the Place, and Office they are employed in j their Bandage, keeping them from Luxations j the oily Matter {c) to lubricate

them.

Men : As alio is the Cartilage that tieth the Os Sacr;nn to its Vertebra ; and all to give way to the I'aflage ot the Ycetus.

Another coniidcrable DifttTence is in the cartilaginous Production ot" the feven long Ribs, whereby they are braced to the Brealt-Bone. Thele are harder and firmer in VVoiueu than in Men; the better to fupport the Weight of the Breads, the fucking Infant, crt.

{^d) It is remark.iblc in the Joynts, and a manifest Atfl of Caution and Delign, i. That altho' the Motion of ihe^Linibs be circular, yet the Center of that Motion is not in a Point, but an ample Superficies. In a Point, the Bones would wear and penetrate one another ; the Joynis would be exceedingly weak.o^'c. but the Joynts conlillmg of two large Supnficies, Concave and Convex, foine furrowed and ridded, some like a Ball and Socket, an<i all lubricated with an oily Subltance, they are incomparably prepared both for Motion and Strength. 2. That the Bones next the Joynt aie not fpungy, as their Extremities commonly aie, nor hard and brittle, but capped with a llrong, tc)U;:;h, fmooth, cartilaginous Subllance, ierving both toSirengiii and Motion.

But let us here take notice of whit Galen mentions on this Subje(fl. Articnlorum unufqiiifque lim'mentia}n Cavitati imtnijjam habet : I'eruntamen hoc fortajjc 7ion adeo rnirabde est : Sed ft, confidcratd otnniu/n totins corporis o;fi:im m.'ftua connexione, Etninenlias cavitatibus fufcipicntibus dquales [cm^ir mvc' f}eris ; Hoc mirabile. Si enim jufto am^lior ejjet Cavttas, lax:ii fane ct* inftrtnus fieret Articulus ; fi flriciior, mocus difficulter fterety ut qui nullam verftonem haberct ; ac periciilitm effet Hon parvum, eminentias ojjtmn ari^laias frangi : fedhorum i^eutrum ja^lum est. < Sed quoniatn ex tarn fecura conjlruilione perlciilum erat, nc tnotiona dijficiliUs fterent, c:r cminentid offtum exterereniur, duplex rur/us auxiltum in id Natura woiita est. I. Carttlagine os utrtunque fubun^ens, at que olUnens : alttrum, ipjis CartilagimiHs humorem unilno[um, velut oleum, fuperfunJcns ; per quern facile mobtlis, c?- attritu coniumax cmnis articiilatij Ojfi:tm fa:la est. Ut undiq;4e dili^enter Articulus omnis cuftjdireiitr, Ligamenta quidam ex utroq-ie cjfe frodtixit Natura. Galen de Uf. Part. 1. r. c. 15.

(e) For the affording this oily or mucilaginous Matter, there are Glandules very commodioufly placed ne^r the Joynts,

M so

i6z The Matton Book IV.

them, and their own Smoothnefs to facilitate their Motion.

And lastly, I might trace the various Nerves throughout the Body j fenr about to niinifler to its various Motions (/). I might consider their Origine (g), their Ramifications to the several Parts, and cheir Inofculations v/ith one another, according to the Harmony and Accord of one Part with another, necedary for the Benefit of the Animal. Bue some of those Things 1 have given some Touches upio as not to fuiFer too gre.ir ComprefTion by the Motion of the neighbouring Bones, and yet to receive a due PrefTure, so as to cause a llifficient Emiffion. of the Mucilage into the Joynts. Alfo another Thing conliderable is, that the excretory Duft:s of the mucilapnoHs Glatids have some Length in their Parage from the Glands to their Mouths ; which is a good Contrivance, to prevent their Mouths being opprefledbythe Mucilage, as alio to hinder the too plentiful Etfufion thereof, but yet to afibrd a due ExprelTure of it at all Times, and on all Occafions, as particularly in violent and long-continued Motions of the Joynts, when there is a greater thaa ordinary Expence of it. See Cowper's Anat. Tab. 79.

(/) There is no doubt to be made, but that the muscles receive their Motion from the Nerves. For if a Nerve be out, or ftraighdy bound, that goes to any muscle, that Mulcle ftiall immediately lofe its Motion. Which is doubtlefsthe cafe of Paralyticks ; whole Nerves are some of them by Gbftrudlions,. or I'uch like Means, reduced to the same State as if cut or bound.

And this alio is the cause of that Numnefs or sleep'mefs we find oftentimes, by long fitting or lying on any Part.

Neither is this a modern Notion only: For G^/ew faith, Principiu'n Nervorum omnium Cerebrum est, ^ fpinalis Medulla. Et Nervi a Cerelro animalem virtuietn acctpiunt —

Nervorum utiUtas est jaadtatem Sensiis CT* Motth a, pnnciplo in partes diducere. And this he intimates to have been the Opinion of Hippocrates and Plato. De UL Part. 1. s. c. 16. cp* fajfim.

{g) Dr. Willis thinks, that in the Brain the Spirits are ela.- borated that minifter to voluntary Motion; but in the Cerehelium, such as effcd involuntary, or natural Motions; such. as that of the Heart, the Lungs, c^'f. Csrtbri Anat. c. ij.

oa

Chap. VIII. of Animals. 163

on already, and more I shall mention hereafter (^), and it would be tedious here to infillupon them all.

I shall therefore only fpcak dirtinftly to the Locomotive Ad it self, or what directly relates to it.

And here it is admirable to consider the various Methods ot Nature (/), fuited to the Occafions of various Animals. In lome their Motion is fwift, in othcrsflow. In some performed with two, four, or more Legs : in some with two, or four Wings: in some with neither ik).

And firil for fwift or How Motion. This we find is proportional to the Occafions of each refpedivc Animal. Kept He Sj whose Food, Habitation, and Nefh, lie in the next Clod, Plant, Tree, or Hole, or can bear long Hunger and Hardlliip, they need neither Legs nor Wings for their Tranfportationj

{h) See Book V. Chap. 8.

(0 To the foregoing, 1 (liall briefly add some Examples of the Ifecial ProvUion made for the Motion of some Animals by Temporary Parts. Frogs and Toads, in their Tadpole-Jlate, have Tails, which fall off when their Legs are grown out. The Lacerta aqaatica, or IVater-Nezvt, when Young, hath four neat ramified Fins, two on a Side, growing out a little above its Fore-Legs, to poifc and keep its Body upright, (which gives it the resemblance of a young Fiftr,) which fall oft' when the Legs are grown. And the Nympl/d and ylurdU, of all or molt of the Inlcdts bred in the Waters, as they have particular Forms, difTerent from the Infeds they produce; so have alfo peculiar Parts afforded them for their Motion in the Waters: Oars, Tails, and every Part adapted to the Waters, which arc utterly varied in the Infccfts ihemfelves, in their mature State in the Air.

(k) Jam vera alia ammalia gradicndo, alia fcrpendo ai pafium accedunty alia volando, alia nando. Cic. de Nat. Deor. 1. 2.. c. 47.

Compare alfo what Galen excellently observes concerning the Number of Feet in Man, and in other Animals ; and the wife Piovilion theieby made for the Ufe and Benefit of the refpedive Animals. De Vf. Part, in the beginning of the third Book.

M 2, but

1^4 ^^^^ Motion Book IV.

but their vermicular or finuous Motion (performed with no less Art, and as curiously provided for as the Legs or Wings of other Creatures : This, I say,) is sufficient for their Conveyance.

Man and Beafls^ whose Occafions require a large Room, have accordingly a fvvifter Motion, with proper Engines for that Service j anfwerable to their Range for P'ood, their Occupation of business, or their want of Armature, and to fecure them against Harms (/).

But for the wingf-d Creatures (Birds and Infefts,) as they are to traverfe large Trafts of Land and Water, for their Food, for their commodious Habitation, or Breeding their Young, to find Places of Retreat and Security from Mifchiefs; so they have accordingly the Faculty of flying in the Air ; and that fwiftly or flowly, a long or short a Time, according to their Occafions and Way of Life. And accordingly their Wings, and whole Body, are curiously prepared for such a Motion 5 as I intend to Ihew in a proper Place {m).

Another remarkable Thing in the motive Faculty of all Creatures, is the neat, geometrical Performance of it. The mod accurate Mathematician, the most skilful in mechanick Motions, can't prefcribe a nicer Motion (than what they perform) to the Legs and Wings of those that walk or fly i^)^

(I) As I flvall hereafter (liew, that the indulgent Creator hath abundantly provided for the Safety of Animals by their Cloathing, Habitations, Sagacity and Inftruments of Defence ; so there appears to be a Contemperament of their Motion with these Provifions, They that are well armed and guarded, have commonly a flower Motion ; whereas they that are deftitute thereof, are fwifter. So alfo timid helplels Animals are commonly fwift ; thus Deer and Hares: But Animals endowed with Courage, Craft, Arms, o^. comraoiily have a flower Motion.

(m) See BookVll. chap. i.

(») SicBook Vil. Chap, i. the end.

or

Chap. VIII. of Animals: i6^

or to tlic Bodies of tliofe that creep (o). Neither can the Body be more compleatly poifcdfor the Motion it is to have in every Creature, than it already cidually is. From the largell: Elephant, to thcfmal- \ei\ Mite, we find the Body artfully balanced (/)). The Head not too heavy, nor too light for the rcll of the Body, nor the rell of the Body for it (y). The Fifccra are not let loofe, or so placed, as to fwag, over-balance, or over-set the Body j but well-braced, and dilhibuted to maintain the acquipoifc of the Body. The motive Parts alfo are admnably wcU'fixed in respect to the Center of Gravity ; placed in the very Point, fitted to fupport and convey the Body. Every Leg beareth his true Share of the Body's Weight. And the Wings so nicely are fct to the Center of Gravity, as even in that fluid Medium^ the Air, the Body is as truly balanced, as we could have balanced it with the nicell Scales.

But among all Creatures, none more elegant than the fizing the Body of Man, the gauging his Body so nicely, as to be able to Hand ercd, to

(<?) See Book IX. Chap. i. Hote (c.)

{p) Siquis unquam alius OpifeXy xqualitatis cr proport'iovif magriam hahuit providentiam, certe Natura habuit in anim.iliiim cot paribus conformandis ; unde Hippocrates earn rettijfnne jufiam notninat. Galen.de Uf. Part. l.i. c. i6.

(^) The Make of the Bodies of some Water-Fowl, seems to contradift what I here say, the Heads and long Necks of some, as of Swans, Ducks and Geefc ; and the hinder Parts of oilier?, as of the Doucker and More-hen, and some other Kinds, feeming to be too heavy for the rclt of their Body. But inllead of being an Argument against, it is a notable instance of, the divine Art and Providence, these Things being nice Accommodations to their way of Life. Of luch as have long Necks, see Book VII. chap.r. Note (;).

And as for such whose hinder Parts Teem to over-balance

their foremoit Parts, whereby they t]y with their Bodies in a

•manner ered, this alfo is an excellent Accommodation to

their wiy of Life, which is Diving rather than I'^lying. I'id.

Book VI 1. Chap. 4. Note (/>).

M 5 iloop,

i66 Of the Tlace Book IV.

floop, to fir, and indeed to move any way, only with the Help of so small a Stay as the Feet (r): whose mechanism of Bones, Tendons and muscles to this purpose, is very curious and admirable.

CHAP. IX.

Of the Tlace allotted to the fever al Tribes of Animals.

HAving difpatched the Motion of Animals, let us in the next Place consider the Place which the infinitely wife Creator hath appointed them to move and a6t, and perform the Offices of the Creation in. And here we find every Particular well ordered. All Parts of our Terraqueous Globe fit for an Animal to live and a6t in, are fufficiently itocked with proper Inhabitants : The watery Element (unfit, one would think, for respiration and Life) abounding with Creatures fitted for it j its Bowels abundantly ftorcd, and its Surface well befpread. The Earth alfo is plentifully flocked in all its Parts, where Animals can be of any Ufe ; not probably the deepeft Bowels thereof indeed, being Parts in all likelihood unfit for Habitation and Adtion, and where a living Creature would be ufelefs in the World j but the Surface every where abundant? ly flored.

But that which is mod considerable in this Matter, and plainly fheweth the divine Management in the Cafe, is, that those Creatures are manifeftly designed for the Place in which they are, and the Ufe and Services they perform therein. If all the

(r) See 'Book V. C%, 1. ^Qtt {li).

Chap. IX. of Animals. \by

Animals of our Globe had been made by Chance, or placed by Chance, or without the divine Providence, their Organs would have been othciwifc than they are, and their Place and Ilcfidcnce confufed and jumbled. Their Organs (for Indance) of respiration, of Vifion, and of Motion, would have fitted any Medium^ or have needed none j their Stomachs would have served anv Food, and their Blood, and Covering of their Bodies been made for any Clime, or only one Clime. Conlequcntly all the Animal World would have been in a confufed, inconvenient, and diforderiy Commixture. One Animal would have wanted Food, another Habitation, and moll of them Safety. They would have all flocked to one, or a few Places, taken up their Rell in the Temperate Zones only, and coveted one Food, the eaiiell to be come at, and moll fpccious in shew j and so would have poifoned, ilarved, or greatly incommoded one another. Burasihc Matter IS now ordered, the Globe is equally bcfpread, so that no Place wanteth proper Inhabitants, nor any Creature is deltitute of a proper Place, and all Things necessary to its Life, Health, and pleasure. As the Surface of the Terraqueous Globe is covered with different Soils, with Hills and Vales, with Seas, Rivers, Lakes and Ponds, with diveis Trees and Plants, in the several Places i so all these have their Animal Inhabitants, whose Organs of Life and A6tion are manifeilly adapted to such and such Places and Things j whose Food and Phyfick, and every other Convenience of Life, is to be met with in that very Place appointed it. The watery, the amphibious (^), the aiiy Inhabitants,

and

{a) Efi etiam admiratio nonnulU in befilis aquatilibus its, t^HA gi^nuntur m terra : veluti Crocodili, f.uviaulefqtie Tcjiuiitnes, (jHxdjtf;jue Serpentes orts. extra aquafn, Jifti:d ac Juifnurp nin l>oJjn?jt, atjuam pirfiff^uuntur, ^jl^in tiiam Anath^n

i68 • Of the Numbers Book IV.

and those on the dry Land Surface, and the Subterraneous under it, they all live and act with pleasure, they are gay, and flourifli in their proper Element and allotted Place, they want neither for Food, Cloathing, or Retreat > which would dwindle and die, deftroy, or poifon one another, if all coveted the same Element, Place, or Food,

Nay, and as the Matter is admirably well ordered, yet confidering the World's increafe, there would not be sufficient Room, Food, and other Neceflarics for all the living Creatures, without another grand A£t of the divme wisdom and Providence, which is the Balancing the Number of Indi- *viduals of each Species of Creatures, in that Place appointed thereto : Of which in the next Chapter.

C H A P. X.

Of the Balance of Anmals^ or the due Troportion in which the World is flocked with them.

TH E whole Surface of our Globe can afford Room and Support only to such a Number of all Sorts of Creatures. And if by their doubling, trebling, or any other Multiplication of their Kind, they should encrcafe to double or treble that Number, they mufl flavve, or devour one another. The keeping therefore the Balance even, is manifeftly a Work of the divine wisdom and Providence. To which end, the great Author of Life

9'va Gall'm'is ftpe fupponimus — — [Pulli] delude eas [matres] relmquunt — — ^ ejfugiunt, citm primiiTn aquam, quafi natU' r*hm domumi viden fotPterunt, Cic. de Nat, Deor. \,z. c-48«

hath

Chap.X. of Animals. 1^9

liath determined the Life of all Creatures to such a Length, and their Incrcale to luch a Number, proportional to their Ulc in the World. 'IJic Life of fomc Creatines is Ic'U^, imd their Increafcbut I'mall, and by that means they do not ovcr-ilock the World. And tlicfamc Benefit iseflcftcd, where the Increafc is great, by the Brevity of such Creatures Lives, by their great Ufe, and the frequent Occafions there are of them for Food to Man, or other Animals. It is a very rcmuikablc A61 of the Divine Providence, that ufcful Creatures are produced m great Plenty {a), and others in le(s. The prodigious and frequent Increafe o\ Ink^ls, both in and out of the Waters, may exemplify the one> and 'tis obfervable in the other, that Creatures less ufeful, or by their Voracity pernicious, have commonly fewer Young, or do feldomer bring forth : Of which many Inlfances might be given in the voracious Beaih and Birds. But there is one l"o peculiar an Animal, as if made for a particular In fiance in our present Cafe, and that is ihcCuntnr o^ Pei n {b): A Fowl of that Magnitude, Strength and Appetite, as to fcize not only on the Sheep, and Idler Cattle, but even the larger Bcalfs, yea, the very Children too. Nowthefe, as they arcthc moll pcrniciousof Birds,

so

{a) Benlgna circa hoc Natura, 'wnocua cr efctt'cntii a^tiima- Ua fvcunda gencravit. Plin. Nat. hist. 1. 8. c. 55.

{b) Captain J. ^\.\or\ggave vie this Account, together with a. (PlHdl- Feather of the [Cuntur or Connor of Feru] On the Coajl of Chili, they met ivith this lUi-i in about 33° S. Lat. not far from Mocha, nn Ijland in the bouth-Sea, > they f)ot it fitting on a Ciijf, by the Sea- side ; that it was \6 Feet from Wing TO iVing extended ; that the Spanifh Inhabitants tcld them they were afraid of theft Birds, left they ji)onld prry upon their children. And the Feather he gave me (faith the J^ocflor) is 1 Feet, 4 Inches long ; the &uillpart 5 ^- Inches long, and I { Inch about in the largefl Part. It zveighed 3 dr. 1 7 -1 gr. and is of a dark brovcn Colour. Dr. Sloans in Fhil. Tranl. N» zoS.

To

170 Of the Numbers Book IV.

so are they the most: rare, being feldom seen, or only one, or a few in large Countries 5 enough to keep up the Species j but not to over-charge the World.

Thus the Balance of the animal World, is, throughout all Ages, kept evenj and by a curious Harmony, and jull Proportion between the Increafe of all Animals, and the Length of their Lives, the World is through all Ages well 5 but not over-ftored : One Generation pajfeth away^ and another Generation cometh [c) ; so equally in its Room, to balance the Stock of the terraqueous Globe in all Ages, and Places, and among all Creatures J that it is an aclual Demonftration of our Saviour's Afiertion, Mat. x. 2p. that the most inconsiderable, common Creature, Even a Sparrow (two of which are fold for a Farthing) doth not fall en the Ground without our heavenly Father.

To this Account, the Doftor, (in a Letter to Mr. i?<?y, March 31, 1694, with other Papers of Mr. JR^y's, in my Hands,) adds the Tellimony of 5"/ Acofla, 1. 4. c. 7. and Garcilajf. de la Vega, who 1. 8. c. 19. faith, There are other Jowls, call'd Cuntur, and by the Spaniards corruptly Condor. Many of these Fowls having been kill'd by the Spaniards, had their Proportion taken, and from End to End of their Wings

meafured 15 or l6 Teet. Nature, to temper and allay

their Ttercenefs, deny'd them the Talons which are given to the t'/agle; their Feet being tipp'd zvith Claws like a Hen: Hozfever^ their Beak is firong enough to tear off the Hide, and rip up the Bowels of an Ox. Tvjo of them will attempt a Cow or Bull, and devour him : ^nd it hath often happened, that one of them alone hath affaulted Boys of ten or twelve Tears nf yige, and eaten them. Their Colour is black and white, like a Magpie. Jt is well there are but few of them ; for if they were many^ they would very much deftroy the Cattle. They have on the forepart of their Heads, a Comb, not pointed like that of a Cock; h-u: rather even, in the Form of a Razor. When they come to alight from the Air, they make such an humming Noife, with the fluttering of their Wings, as ii enough to ajionifhy or make fi Man deaf.

{■) Ecclef. i. 4;

Thii

Chap. X. of Anhnals. \yi

This Providence of God is remarkable in every Species of living Creatures: But that cfpccial Management of the Recruits and Decays of Mankind, so equally all the World over, deferves our cfpecial observation. In the Beginning of the World, and so after Noah's Flood, the Longaevity of Men, as it was of abfolute Ncceflity to the move fpeedy peopling of the new World -, so is a fpccial Instance of the divine Providence in this Matter (d). And the same Providence appears in the following Ages, when the World was pretty well peopled, in reducing the common Age of Man then to i lo Years, {Gen. vi. 3.) in Proportion to the Occafions of the World at that Time. And lalUy, when the World was fully peopled after the Flood, (as it was in the Age of Mofes^ and so down to our preient

{d) The Divine Providence doth not only appear in the Longevity of Man, immediately after the Creation and Flood ; but alfo in their dilfcrer.t Longacvity at those two Times. Immediately after the Creation, when the World was to be peopled by one Man, and one Woman, the Age of the greatest Part of those on Record, was 900 Years, and upwards. But after the Flood, when there were three Perfons by whom the World was to be peopled, none of thoic Patriarchs, except Shem, arriv'd to the Age of 500; and only the three firlt of Shem's Line, viz. Arphaxad, Salah, and Eber, came near that Age ; which was in the full Centuryafter the Hood. But in the fecond Century, we do not find any reached the Age of 240. And in the third C'entury, (about the latter End of which Abraham was born,) none, except Terab, arriv'd to loo Years: By which Time the World was so well peopled, (that Part of it, at least where Abraharn dwelt,) that they had built Cities, and began to be cantoned into diftinfl Nations and Societies, under their refpedivc Kings; so that they were abJe to wage War, four Kings againll five. Gen. xiv. Nay, if the Accounts of Aniun, Berofus, Manetho, and others, yea, Afncanus be to be credited; the World was so well peopled, even before the Times wc speak of, as to afford sufficient Numbers for the great Kingdoms of AJJyria, yEgypt, Ptrfia, 6cc. But learned Men generally, with great Hcafon, reject these as lejendaiy Accounts,

II

172' Of the Numbers Book IV.

fent Time) the IctTening the common Age of Man to 70 or 80 Years (^), (the Age mentioned by Mofes^ Pfal. xc. 10. this, I say,) is manifeftly an Appointment of the same infinite Lord that ruleth the World; For, by this Means, the peopled World is kept at a convenient Stay ; neither too full, nor too empty. For if Men (the Generality of them, I mean) were to live now to Methufalah's Age of p6p Years, or only to Abraham'' s^ long after the Flood, of i7f Years, the World would be too much over-run 5 or if the Age of Man was limited to that of divers other Animals, to ten, twenty, or thirty Years only; the Decays then of Mankind would be too fail : But at the middle Rate mentioned, the Balance is nearly even, and Life and Death keep an equal Pace. Which Equality is so great and harmonious, and so manifest an instance of the divine Management, that 1 shall fpend some Remarks upon it.

It appears from our best Accounts of these Matters,

]f the Revider hath a Mind to see a Computation of the Increafe of Mankind, in the three first Centuries after the Flood, he may find two diiferent Ones of the mo(t learned Ajchbiftiop Vjher, and Petavius ; together with a Refutation cf the so early Beginning of the AJjyian Monarchy ; as alfo reasons for placing Abraham near 100© Years after the Flood, in our mod learned Biflnop Stillin^fieet's Orig. Sacr, Book III. Chap. 4. §. 9.

(e) That the common Age of Man hath been the same in all Ages since the World was peopled, is manifest from prophane, as well as facred Hiltory. To pass by others : Plato lived to the Age of 81, and was accounted an old Man. And those which Pliny reckons up, /. 7. c. 48. as rare Examples of long Life, may for the most Part be match'd by our modern Hiftories ; especially luch as Pliny himself gave Credit unto. Dr. Plot hath given us divers instances in his Hiftory of Oxferdjlnre, c. i. §. 3. and c. 8. §. 54. and Hiftory of Stajfordfmre, c. 8. §. 91, ^c. Among others, one is of twelve Tenants of Mr. Biddidth'Sy that together made 1000 Years of

Age.

Chap. X. of Animals, ^1},

Age. But the mod contidcrable Lxamplcs of aged Pcrfons anioiig us, is of old Varre of Shropjhire, who lived 151 Years 9 Months, according to the learned Dr. Harvey's Account ; and Henry ^eytkins of lorkJJiirc, who hvcd 169 Years, according to the Account of my learned and ingenious Friend Dr. Tixncred Robinfon ; of both which, with others, see Lozvth. Abndg. Phil. Tranf. V. 3. p. 306. The great Age of Vane of Shropfjire, niinds me of an observation of the Reverend Mr. Plaxton, that in his two Pariflies of Ktnardjey and Dcnington in Shropflj'tre, every lixth Soul was 60 Years of Age, or upwards, Phil. Tranf. No. 310.

And if we ftep farther North into Scotland, we dial! find divers recorded I'or their great Age: Of which I fli.all prelent the Reader wiih only one modern Example of one Laurence^ who married a Wi.^e after he was 100 Years of Age, and would go out to Sea a Fifliing in his liitle Boat, when he was 140 Years old ; and is lately dead of no other Didcmper but mere old Age, laiih Sir Rob. bibbald, Prcdr. H'tft. Kat. Scot. p. 44. and 1. 3. p. 4.

As for Foreigners, the Examples would be endlefs ; and therefore that of 'i}oh. Oitele llull fufficc, who was as famous for his Beard, as for being 115 Years of Age. He was but two Brabant Flls -] high; and liis long grey Beard was one Lll ^ long. His Picture and Account may be leen in Fphem. Germ. T. 3. Obf. 163.

As for the Story Roger Bacon tells, of one that lived 900 Years by the Help of a certain Medicine, and many other such Stories, I look upon them as fabuhni?. And no better is that of the Wandring ^ezv, named Joh. Buttadxta, laid to h.ivc been present at our Saviour's Crucifixion; although very ferious Stories are told of hrs being Icen at Ant-juerp, and in France^ about the Middle of the lall Century but one ; and before in Ann. 1S42., converfed with by Paul of EitJ'en, Bifliop of Slejzvkk; and before that, i-iz,. in iiz8, seen and convcis'd with by an Armenian Arcbbijhop's Gentleman ; and by others at other Tunes.

If the Reader hath a Mind to see more F.xamplcs, he may meet with some of all Ages, in the learned HakciviU's Apol. p. i8r. where he will alfo find that learned Author's Opinion of the causes of the Brevity and Length of humane Life. The Brevity thereof he attributcth to a too tender Lducation, fucking ftrange Nurfes, too hally Marriages ; but above all, to Luxury, high Sauces, strong Liquors, c-c. The Longaevity of the Ancients he afcribes to Temperance in Meat and Drink, anointing the Body, the Ufe of Saffron and Money, warm Clothes, lefTcr Doors aud Windows, less Thylick and more Exercife.

(/) The

174 Of the Numbers Book IV.

icrs^ that In our European Parts (/), and I believe the same is throughout the World 5 that, I say,) there is a certain Race and Proportion in the Propagation of Mankind ; Such a Number marry (^),

so

(/) Tlie Proportions which Marriage^ bear to Births, and Births to Burials, in divers Parts of Europe, may be seen at an eafy View in this Table:

Names of the Places.

Marriages to Births: As

Births to Burials :

as

I

Enq^land in I'enerai

I to

4'63

[ ' 11 to

London.

i to

A'

I lol'i]

Hamfljire, from 1569, to 1658.

r to

4'

I'i Co

I

Xiverto7i in Devon, 1560, to 1649.

I to

3'7

r'z6 to t'6 to i'6 to

I I I

Cranbrook \n Kent, 1^60, to 1C140.

I to

V9

Aynho in NortfTamptonilwe rur i 18 V

I to

Leeds in lork;l;:re for lil Vcars.

I to

3'7

I'OltO l|

Hariuood \n lorkjhire ^1 Y'ears.

I to r to

3 '4 ■4<6'

i'z3 to

—

Upminfler in /^//fx TOO Year?.

f'o8 to I'l to

t'rankjurt on the iW^/w m 1095.

I to

3'7

Old middle and lower March in i6qS.

I to

3'7

I '9 to

Domin. ot rhe K. of PrMlfii^ m i^oS

r to

3'7

['5 to

orejlaiv in ;,i[ejia tioin i.'<&7 to l-.(;i.

t'6 to

/^ijr/f Ml 1070, 1671, 167Z.

I to

4' 7

I' tu I

'6

Which Table I made from Major Graunt's observations on the Bills of Mortality; Mr. King'i observations in the first of Dr. Davenant's EJJ'ays ; and what I find put together by my ingenious Friend Mr. Lozvthorp, in his Abridgment, Vol. 3. p. 668. and my own Regider of Upminjler. That from Aynho Regifter in Northamptonjhire, 1 had from the present Redor, the learned and ingenious Mr. Wajj'e : And I was promifed some Accounts from the North, and divers others Parts of this Kingdom ; but have not yet received them : Only those of Leeds and Harzvood in TorkJJiire, from my curious and ingenious Friend Mr. Thorejby.

{g) The preceding Table fliews, that Marriages, one with another, do each of them produce about four Births; not only in England, but in other Parts of Europe alfo.

And by Mr. King's Ei^imate, (the best Computations I imagine of any, being derived from the belt Accounts; such as

the

Chap. X. of Animals. 17^

so many are born, such a Number diej in Proportion to the Number of Perfons in every Nation, County, or Parifh. And as to Births, two Things are very confidcrable: One is the Proportion ot Males and Females (^), not in a wide Proportion, not an uncertain, accidental Number at all Adventures; but nearly equal. Another Thing is, that a few more arc born than appear to die, in any certain

the Marriage. Birtli, Burial-Adl, the Poll Books, a-c. by his Ellimate, I r<»y,) about i in 104 marry. For he juJgeth the Number of the People in England, to be about five Miihons and a half; of which about 41000 annually marry. As to what might be farther remarked concerning Marriages, in regard of the Rights and CuHoms of feverai Nations, the A^c to which divers Nations limited Marriage, crc. it would be End'.els, and too much out of the Way to rricntion them: 1 shall only therefore, for the Reader's Diver-Hon, take Notice of the Jeer of Ladantius, (Shjare apud Poet as falacijfimns Jupiter ^f///V liberos toUere ? Vtruw fexaienarius jacius, c/ et Lex Papia fibulam impo/Mit ? Ladant. Inllit. 1. i. c. 16. By which Lex Papia, Men were prohibited to marry after 60, and \Vc^ men after 50 Years of Age.

(Ij) Major Graunr, (whose Conclufions seem to be wellgrounded,) and Mr. Kw^, dilagree in the Proportions thty aflign to Males and Females. This latter rsL-vl^ in London, 10 Males to be to 13 Females; in other Cnies and Market- Towns, 8 to 9 ; and in the Vill;iges and Hamlets, ico Males to 99 Females. But Major Graunt, both from the Lordon, and Country Bills, faith, there are 14 Males to 13 Females: From whence he juftly infers, That Chnjiian Religion, prohibiting Polygamy, is more agreeable to the Law of Katttre than Mahumetllm, and others that altozv it, Ch<ip. 8.

This Proportion of 14 to 13, I imagine is nearly juft, it being agreeable to the Bills I have met with, as well as ihofein Mr. Graunt. In the 100 Years, for Example, of my own Parilli-Regiller, although the Burials of M.ilcs and Females were nearly equal, being 636 Males, and 613 Females in all that Time; yet there were baptized 709 Males, and but 675 Females, which is 13 Females to 13*7 Males. Which Inequality Ihews, not only, that one Man ought to have but one Wife; but alfo that every Woman may, without Polygamy, have an Hufband, if (he doih not bar her lelf by the want of Virtue, by Denial, o'c. Alio this iiurplufage of "^ *■ - - - Males

1 76 Of the Numbers Book IV".

tain Place (i). Which is an admirable Proviiion for the extraordinary Emergencies and Occafions of the World j to supply iinheathful Places, where Death out-runs Lifej to make up the Ravages of great Plagues, and Difeafes, and the Depredations of War, and the Seasj and to afford a sufficient Number for Colonies in the unpeopled Parts of the Earth. Or on the other Hand, We may say, that fometimes those extraordinary Expcnces of Mankind, may be not only a jufl: Puniihment of the Sins of Men > but alfo a wife Means to keep the Balance of Mankind evenj as one would be ready to conclude, by confidcring the Afiatick^ and other the more fertile Countries, where prodigious Multitudes are yearly fwept away with great Plagues, and fometimes Warj and yet those Countries are so far from being wafted, that they remain full of ,*^ People.

And

Males is very ufeful for the Supplies of W.ir, the Seas, and other fiich hxpences of the Men above the Women.

That this is a Work of the Divine Providence, and not a Matter of Chance, is well made out by the very Laws of Chance, by a Perfon able to do it, the ingenious and learned Dr. Arhuthnot. He fuppofeth Thomas to lay againd ^o^w, that for eighty two Years running, more Males shall be born than Females; and giving all Allowances in the Computation to Thomas's (ide, he makes the Odds again ft Thomas, that it doth not happen {o, to be near five Millions of Millions, of Millions, of Millions to one ; but for Ages of Ages (accordin"- to the World's Age) to be near an infinite Number to one rgainlt Thomas. V'id. Phil. Tranf. N^. 318.

(;) The foregoing Table lliews, that in England in general, fewer die than are born, there being but i Death to 1 _i.2. Births. But in London more die than are born. So by Dr.havenant'sTMs, the Cities likewife and Market-Towns j,nry I ~^l to one Birth. But in Pans they out-do London, their Dea'ths being i '- to O"^ Birth : The reason of which I conceive is, becaule their houses are more crowded than in London. But in the Villages of England, there are fewer die than are born, there being but i Death to i r^ Births. And ^et Major Graimt^ and Dr. Davgr?antt both observe, that "*-■ there

^

Ghap. X. of Animals. lyy

And now upon the whole Matter, What is all this but admirable and plain Management? What can the maintaining throughout all Ages, and Places, these Proportions of Mankind, and all other Creatures; this Harmony in the Generations of Men be, but the Work of one that rulcth the World? Is it pofllble that ^vtx^^ Species of Animals iTiould so evenly be prefervcd, proportionate to the Occafions of the World? That they lliould be so well balanced in all Ages and Places, without the Help of almighty wisdom and Power? How is it pollible by the bare Rules, and blind A^Sts of Nature, that there Ihould be any tolerable Proportion ; for Inllance, between Males and Females, either of Mankind, or of any other Creature {k) > especially such as are of a ferine, not of a domeick Nature, and confcquently out of the Comtnand and Management of Man? How could Life and Death keep Ibch an even Pace through all the animal World? If we ihould take it for granted^ that, according to the Scripture Hiftory, the World had a Beginning, (us who can deny it (/) j

or

there are more Breeders in London^ and the Cities and Market-Towns, than are in the Country, notwithtlandnig the London-?i\xx\i% are fewer than tlie Country ; the Realbn of which see in Graunt, Chap. 7. and Davenant tibl [I'pr. pzi.

The lalt Remark I Hnal] make from the foregoing Tables shall be, that we may from thence judge of the Healthfulnefs of the Places tliere mentioned. If the Year 169S was the mean Account of the three Murcks, those Places bid the fairelt for being moil healthful ; and next to them A^nho and Cranhooh for Hfigl'jh Towns.

(k) ohiid loquar, quanta ratio in befliis ad psrpetujim coilftrvAtiomm carum generis appareat ? Nam primum alu Martsi ali* Famtna funt, quod perpetuitatis cauf^ tnachinata natard eji. Cic. de Nat. Deor. 1. z. c. 51.

(/) Altho' Anfiotle held the Eternity of the Woild, yet he seems to have retraced that Opinion, or to have had a diff«rcnt Opiiiioa when h§ wrote his M*ti^hy[Kkt; for in his ■■^ ^ " N first

178 Of the Numbers Book IV.

or if we (hould suppose the Deftruftion thereof by Noah's Flood : How is it possible, after the World was replenifhed,) that in a certain Number of Years, by the greater Increafes and Doublings of each Species of Animals > that, I say, this Rate of Doubling {pi) ihould ceafej or that it should be compenfated by some other Means? That the World ihould be as well, or better Hocked than now it is, in i6f6 Years (the Time between the Creation and the Flood j this) we will suppose may be done by the natural Methods of each Species Doubling or Increaie: But in double that Number of Years, or at this Dirtance from the Flood, of 4000 Years, that the World should not be over ftock'd, can never be made out, without allowing an infinite Providence.

I confirft Book he affirms, that God. is the cause and Beginning ef all Things; and in his Book de Mundo he faith, There is no doubt, but God is the Maker and Confervatcr of all Things in the World. And the Stoicks Opinion is well known, who ftrenuoufly contended that the Contrivance and Beauty of the Heavens and Earth, and all Creatures was owing to a wife, intelligent Agent. Of which Tully gives a large Account in his fecond Book de Nat. Dear, in the Perfon of Balbus.

(m) I have before in Note (g), observed, that the ordinary rate of the Doubling or Increafe of Mankind is, that every Marriage, one with another, produces about four Births ; but some have much exceeded that. Baho, Earl of Alenjperg, had thirty two Sons and eight Daughters, and being invited to hunt with the Emperor Henr'^ II. and bring but few Servants, brought only one Servant, and his thirty two Sons. To these many others might be added; but one of the moil remarkable instances I have any where met with, is that of Mrs. Honyvjood y mentioned by HakewiU , Camden, and other Authors ; but having now before me the Names, with some Remarks (which I received from a pious neighbouring Defcendantof the same Mrs. Honyxvood) I ihallgive a more particular Account than they. Mrs. Mary Honywood wzs Daughter, and one of the Co-HeirelTes of Robert Atwatersy Efq; of Lenham in Kent. She was born in 1517, married in February 1543. at fixteen Years of Age, to her onlyHufband

Robers

Chap. XI. of Animals. . 179

I conclude then this observation with the Pfalmiil's Words, Pfal. civ. 29, 50. Thou hideji thy Faccy all Creatures are troubled y thou takefl aivay their Breath, they die, and return to their Du(l. Thot^ fe?idefl forth thy Spirit, they are created-, and thou tcneweji the Face of the Earth,

CHAP. XL

Of the Food of Animals.

THE preceding Reflcdion of the Pfalmift^ mindeth me oF anotlier Thing in common to Animals, chit pertinently fuUeth next under consideration, which is the Jppointment of Food^ men-

Rohert Honytuoed^ of Charing in Kent, Efq; She died in the ninety third Year of her Age, in May 1610. She had fixteen Children of her own Body, feven Sons and nine Daughters; of which one had no IfTue, three died young, and the youngeft was fl..in at Nezi-port Battle, June 20. 1600. Her Grand-Children in the foconJ Generation, were one hundred and fourteen ; in the third two hundred and twenty eight; and nine in the fourth G'.neration. So that flu- could say the same that the Dillick dcih, made of one of the Daliurg's Family of Ba/il :

Mater ait Kat&y die iiat£, fiha Katam 5 6

Ut moneatt Nat£, plangere Filiolam.

it 34

Rife up Daughter, and go to thy Daughter, for her Daughtei-t 5 6

Daughter hath a Daughter. Mrs. Honyiuood Was a very pious Woman, atTlidted, in her declining Age, with Delpair, io some measure ; concernmg which, some Divines once difcourfing with her, (lie in a Paflion said. She -Juat as certainly damned as this Glafs it broken, throwing a r^o/re-Glafs agamfl the Ground, whuu (he had then in her Hand. But the GlafS cfcjiped breaking, as aedible WitneiTes Actcftc<j.

N 4 tiOOCd

x8o Of the Food Book IV.

tioncd in Verfe 27, 28, of the lafl cited Pfalm civ. these [Creatures] nnjait all upon thee^ that thou mafjl give them their Meat in due Seafon. 'that thou givefi them^ they gather j thou openefl thy Hand^ they are filled -with Good. The same is again aflerted in PfaL cxlv. If, 1(5. the Eyes of all isoait upon thee .^ andthoit givefi them their Meat in due Seafon. thou openefl thy Hand., and fatisfiefi the Defire of every living thing.

What the Pfalmifi here aflerts, affords us a glorious Scene of the divine Providence and Management. Which, (as I have shew'd it to concern it self in other IciTcr Things -^Xo we may prefume doth exert it self particularly in so grand an Affair as that of Food, whereby the animal World fubfifts : And this will be nianifelled, and the Pfaimifs observations exemplified, from these fix following Particulars :

I. From the fubfifting and maintaining such a large Number of Animals, throughout all Parts of the World.

II. From the proportionate Qtiantity of Food to the Eaters.

III. From the Variety of Food fuited to the Variety of Animals: Or the Delight which various Animals have in different Food.

IV. From the peculiar Food which peculiar PIa« ees afford to the Creatures fuited to those Places.

V. From the admirable and curious Apparatus made for the gathering, preparing, and Digellion of the Food. And,

VI. andlafily^ From the great Sagacity of all Animals, in finding out and providing their Food.

I. It is a great A6t of the divine Power and wisdom, as well as goodness, to provide Food for such a World of Animals (^), as every where

[a) Paflum an'imantibus large o' copiose natura eH7n, qui cuicjHe aptui etat, comparavh. Cic. de Nat. Deor. 1.2. c. 47.

lile Deus est, qui per totum orbem armenta dimifit, qui

gregibiu ubique paffim "vagantibHs pabulam ^r&fiat. Senec. de Benef. 1. 4. c» 6.

possess

Chap. Xr, of Anhnah. \Z\

pofTcls the terraqueous Globe; on the dry Landj and in the Sea and Waters ; in the torrid and frozen Zones, as well as the temperate. That the temperate Climates, or at Icall the fertile X'ulleys, and rich and plentiful Regions of the Earth, Ihoiild afford Subfillence to many Animals, may appear Icfs wonderful perhaps: But that in all other the molb likely Places for Supplies fuHicient lood should be afforded to such a prodigious Number, and so great Variety of Bcalls, Birds, F'ilhes and Infcftsi is owing to that Being, who hath as wifely adapted their Bodies to their Place and Food, as well as carefully provided Food for their Subfiltencc there.

But I iliall leave this Confidcration, because it will be illullrated under the following Points > and proceed,

II. To consider the Adjuflment of the Qiiantity of Food, in Proportion to the Eaters. In all Places there \^ generally enough ; nay, such a Sufficiency, as may be llyled a Plenty j but not such a Superfluity, as to walle and corrupt, and thereby annoy the World. But that which is paiticularly remarkable here, is, that among the great Variety of Foods, the most ufeful is the moil plentiful, moll univerlal, eai'ielt propagated, and moll: patient of Weather, and other Injuries. As the herbaceous Eaters, (for Inllance) are many, and devour much ; io the dryland Surface we find every where almolt naturally carpeted over with Grafs, and other agreeable wholfome Plants; propagating thcmfelves in a Manner every where, and scarcely deilroyable by the Weather, the Plough, or any Art. So like wile for Grain, cfpecially such as is moll ufeful, how eafily is it cultivated, and what a large Increafe doth it produce ? Plinfi Example of Whc^t (^)i is a fufHc j •

ent

(^) Tritico nihil efi ftrtiUus : hoc ei natura tribuit, quoniarn ^9 tnnxif^t alat bommita ; uipote cum t tnodioy p fit a/tum

N 3 Joluvi

1 2% Of the Food Book IV,

cnt instance in this Matter j which (as that curious Heathen observes) being principally ufeful to the Support of Man, is eafily propagated, and in great Plenty : And an happy Faculty that is of it, ihat it can bear either extreams of Heat or Cold, so as scarce to refufe any Clime.

III. Another wife Provifion the Creator hath made relating to the Food of Animals, is, that various Animals delight in various Food ic)-, some in Grafs and Herbs } some in Grain and Seeds; some in Flefh ; some in Infe61:s5 some in this (<^), some in that; some more delicate and nice; some voracious and catching at any Thing. If all delighted in, or fubiifted only with one Sort of Food, there would nor be iufficient for allj but every Variety chufing various Food, and perhaps abhorring that which others like, is a great and wife Means that every Kind hath enough, and oftentimes fomewhat to fpare.

It deferves to be reckoned as an hOi of the divine Appointment, that what is wholefome Food

folum ——-' ji^o modii reddantur. Mifit D. Auguflo procurator — ex uno grano fvix credibile d'tilti) 400 paucis minus germina. Mifit ^ Neroni fimilher 340 ftipuloi ex uno grano. Plin. Nat. hist. I. t8. c. 10.

(c) Sed ilia quanta benignitas Nature, quod tarn mult a ad vefcendum, tarn varia, tarn jucunda gignit : neque ea uno tempore anni, at femper & novitate dele^emur o" copia. Cic. de Nat. Deor. 1. z. c. 53.

(d) Szvammtrdam observes of the Ephemeron Worms, that their Food is Clay, and that they make their Cells of the same. Upon which occafion he faith of Moths, that eat Wool and Fur, There are two Things very considerable, I. That the Cells they make to themselves, wherein they live, and with VJhich (as their house, Tortoife-like) they move from Place to place, they make of the Matter next at hand, 2. That they feed alfo on the same, therefore when you find their Cells, or rather Coats or Cafes to hs made of yellow,, green, blue ar black Cloth, you will alfo find their Dung of the same Colour. Iwammerd. Ephem. vita. PublKhed by Pr. Jji/om, Chap. 3.

Chap. XI. of Animals. 183

to one, is naufeous, and as a Poyfon to another j what is a fvveet and delicate Smell and Tarte to one, is foetid and loathCome to another : Ry which Means all the Provifions the Globe affords are well difpos'd of. Not only every Creature is well provided for, but a due Confumption is made of those Things that otherwifc would encumber the World, lie in the Way, corrupt, rot, (link and annoy, instead of cheriHiing and refrefhing it. For our moil ufeful Plants, Grain and Fruits, would mould and rot j those Beads, Fowls and Fiflics, which are reckoned among the greatcil Dainties, would turn to Carrion, and poyfon us: Nay, those Animals which are become Carrion, and many other Things that are noyfome, both on the Dryland, and in the Waters, would be great Annoyances, and breed Difcafts, was it not for the Provilion which the infinite Ordcrer of the World hath made, by caufing these Things to be fwcet, pleafint, and wholfome Food to fomc Creature or other, in the Place where those Things fall; To Dogs, Ravens, and other voracious Animals, for Inrtance, on the Earth •, and to rapacious FiHies, and other Creatures inhabiting the Waters.

Thus is the World in some measure kept sweet and clean, and at the same Time, divers Species of Animals supply'd with convenient Food. Which Providence of God, particularly in the Supplies afforded the Ravens^ is divers Times taken Notice of in the Scriptures {e) \ but whether for the reasons now hinted, or any other fpecial Rcafons, I {hall not enquire. Thus our Saviour, Luke xii. 24. consider the Ravens; for they neither fow nor reap^ ^hicb neither have Storehoiifey nor Barn, and God

(9) Jch xxxviii. 41. pfal cxlvii. 9.

N 4 Udcth

184 Of the Food Book IV.

feedeth them. It is a manifcfl Argument of the divine Care and Providence, in fupplying the World with Food and Neceflaries, that the Ra- *vens^ accounted as unclean, and little regarded by Man, deftitute of Stores, and that live by Accidents, by what falleth here and there 5 that such a Bud, I say, should be provided with sufficient Foodj especially if that be true, which Ariflotle (/), Pliny (^), and JElian (^), report of their unnatural Affe6i:ion and Cruelty to their Young : *' That they expel them their Nefts as foon as *' they can fly, and then drive them out of the .^' Country".

Thus having considered the wife Appointment of the Creator, in fuiting the Variety of Food, to Variety of Animals : Let us in the

IV. Place, Take a View of the peculiar Food, which particular Places afford to the Creatures inhabiting therein.

It hath been already observed (/), that every Place on the Surface of the terraqueous Globe, is; ilocked with proper Animals, whose Organs of Life and Aftion are curiously adapted to each refpeclive Place. Now it is an admirable A6t of the divine Providence, that every Place affords a proper Food to all the living Creatures therein. All the various Regions of the World, the different Climates {k)^ the varioiis Soils, the Seas, the

Watersjj

(/) Arifiot. /. 9. <:. 31. Uijl. Animal.

(S) Pi-jny affirms thjs of the Crozv as well as Ravsn ; C«- i'sr« omnes [i. e. Cornices] ex eodem genere pellunt nidis pullos, AC. volare cogunty ficut c Corvi, qui — — robufios fuos foetm fugant longms. Nat. hist. 1. 10. C. 12,.

(h) Far. Htji.

(i) Chap.c,.

ik) Admiranda Nature difpenfutio «/?, ut aliter, alioqu^ mo- SfO^ tempore^ cr indujiria colatur terra feptentrionalis, alitet^ ^Hihiop^i &:c. ^oaA jf^uil<inargsy hoc certHm efi, in fUrif-

Chap.Xf. Of An'imah. i8^

Waters, nay our very Putrcfa6lions, and most: nafty Places about the Globe, as they arc inhabited by some or other Animal, so they produce fonic proper Food or other, affording a coinlortablc Subliilence to the Creatures living there. I might for Inftanccs (/) of this, bring the great \'ancty of Herbs, Fruits and Grains on the Farth, the large Swarms of Infcfts in the Air, with every other Food of the Creatures redding in the Earth, or flying in the Air. But I shall ilop at the IVaters^ becaufc the Pfalmifl^ in the fore-cited civ^'^ Pfalnty speaks with relation to the efpccial Provifion for the Inhabitants of the Waters j and alio by reason that nvany Land Animals have their chief Maintenance from thence.

que agris Vefirogothorinn, parte ohjecia Alcridtoiialt pla^x, Hor- (leum jfatio 36 Diet urn a jemhie projetto tnattiruni cotUgt, hoc est a Jine 'Junii ufque medium Auguftiy aliquando celerius. En ttamqm maturitas ex foli naturd, a'er'ifque clementtd, ac hu~ more lapitlorum fovtnte radices, Soleque torrente, necejjurib proi/e?iit, ut ita nafcatur, ac maturetnr, talefque fpicA fex ordi- Ties in numcro arijld habent. OI. Mag. Hill. 1. 15. c. 8. Prata (jT pajcua tanta luxuriant gratninuvi iic/ertate ac dizciji" tatty ut neceJJ'um fit inde arcere jumenta, ne nimio hcriamtn est* crepent, 6cc. Id. ib, 1. 19. c. 36.

(/) AiTiong the many noble C'onirivances for Food, I cannot but attribute that univerl'al Aliment, Bread, to the Revelation, or at lealt the Infpiration of the Creator and ConTcrvator of Mankind ; not only because it is a Food ulcd in al!, or moll Parts of the World ; but efpecialiy becaule it is of incomparable life in the great Work of Digellion, greatly aiTillmg the Ferment, or whatever causes the Digcftion ot the Stomach. Of which take this Ex.\mplc from the ni/ble Mr. Boyle. *• He extraded a MenftruHm from llread alone, " that would work on Bodies more Compa(5l than many «' hard Minerals, nay even on Glafs it fclf, and do many

" Things that Aqua-foitii could not do Yet by no

*' means was this lb corrufive a Liquor as Aq. sort, or .is the V other acid Menflruum". Vid. the mgenious and Fam.d Dr. Harris's Lex. Tech. verbo Menjirunm, where the w.iV ui preparing it may be met with.

Now

lU Of the Food Book IV.

Now one would think, that the "Waters were a very unlikely Element to produce Food for so great a Number of Creatures, as have their Subfiftence from thence. But yet how rich a Promptuary is it, not only to large multitudes of FiHies, but alfo to many amphibious Quadrupeds, Infefts, Reptiles, and Birds ! From the largeft Leviathan^ which the Pfalmifi faith (m) playeth in the Seas^ to the smallest Mite in the Lakes and Ponds, all are plentifully provided for J as is manifefl from the Fatnefs of their Bodies, and the Gaiety of their Afpe6t and A61:ions.

And the Provifion which the Creator hath made for this Service in the Waters is very obfervable ; not only by the Germination of divers aquatick Plants there, but particularly by appointing the Waters to be the Matrix of many Animals, particularly of many of the Tnfe6t-Kind, not only of such as are peculiar to the Waters, but alfo of many appertaining to the Air and the Land, who, by their near Alliance to the Waters, delight to be about them, and by that means become a Prey, and plentiful Food to the Inhabitants of the Waters. And befides these, what prodigious Shoals do we find of minute Animals, even fometimes difcolouring the Waters {n)\ Of these (not only in the Water, but in the Air and on Land) I have always thought there was feme more than ordinary

(m) Pfal. civ. 26.

{n) The Infeds that for the most part difcolour the Waters, are the finall Infedtsof the Shrimp-kind, called by Swam^ merdatn, Pulex a^uaticus arborefcens. these I have often seen so numerous in ftagnating Waters in the Summer- Months, that they have changed the Colour of the Waters to a pale or deep Red, fometimes a Yellow, according to the Colour they vi'ere of. Of this Swammerdatn hath a pretty Story told him by Dr. Florence Schuyl, viz. Se aliquand» StMd'iis intentumt ntagm quodam & ho^rifico ftmore fuijj'e tur-

Chap. XI. of Animals. 187

nary Ufe intended by the All-wife Creator. And having bent many of my observations that way, I have evidently found it accordingly to be. For be they never so numberlefs or minute, those Animals serve for Food to some Creatures or other. Even those Animalcules in the Waters, difcovcrablc only with good Microfcopes, are a Repall: to others there, as I have often with no less Admiration than pleasure seen io).

hatutn, CT* ftmul ad cauj'am ejus inquirendam excitatum ; "veruin Je vix eum in finem jurrexifje, (km Anctlla. ejus p'xm exanitnis adcurreret, c tnitlto cutn jtngultu refcrret, cmnem Lug~ dtin't [Batavorum] aquam ejj'e mutatam in fatiguinem. Tlic cause of which, upon Examination he found to be only from the numerous Swarms of those Pulices. V. Swamm. hist. Infed. p. 70.

The cause of this great Concourfe, and Appearance of those little Infecf^s, 1 have frequently observed to he to perform their Coit ; which is commonly about the latter end of May, and in "June. At that Time they are very venereous, frillcing and catching at one another ; and many of the:n conjomed TaiJ to Tail, with their Bellies inclined one towards another.

At this Time alfo they change their Skin or Slough; which I conceive their rubbing against one another mightily promoteth. And what if at this Time they change their Quarters.^ V'id. Book Vlll. Chap. 4. Note (/).

these small Infedls, as they are very numerous, so are Food to many Water-Animals. I have fcen not only Ducks (hovel them up as they swim along the Waters, but divers Infe(fts alfo devour them, particularly some of the middle- iizcd SqudU aquaticA, which arc very voracious Infers.

(0) Befides the Puiues\z?i. mentioned, there are in the Waters other Animalcules very numerous, which are Laice visible without a Microfcope. In xMay , and the Summer Months, the green Scum on the top of itagnating Waters, is nothing elfe but prodigious Numbers of these Animalcules: So is likewife the green Colour in them, when all the Water seems green. Which Animalcules, in all Probability, fervc for Food to the PuUces Aquatici, and other the minuter Animals of the Waters. Of which I gave a pregnant Inflancc in one of the K^mphi of Gnats, to my Friend the late adpiirable Mr. Ray, which he was pleafed to publifli in the last jp^'Jition of his Wifdorr of God m tht Creation, p. 430.

■ Put

j88 Of the Food BooklV,

But now the ufual Objedion is, that necessity maketh Ufe {p). Animals mud be fed, and they make ufe of what they find : In the defolate Regions, and in the Waters, for instance, they feed upon what they can come at j but, when in greater Plenty, they pick and chufe.

But this Objedion hath been already in some measure answered by what hath been faidj which

plainly

(^) Nil ade)) quoniam natum'ft In Corpore, ut uti PoJJ'emus, fed quod natumjiy id procreat ufum.

And aftc'wards, Propterea captiur Cihus, ut fuffidciat artus, Et recreet vtre'ts interdatus, atque patentem Per membra ac 'uenas ut atnorem obturet edend'i.

And after the same manner he difcourfeth of Thirft, and divers other Things. Vid. Lucret. /. 4. jJ'. 831, e/f.

against this Opinion of the Epicureans, Galen ingenioufly argues in his discourse about the Hand, Non enim Manus ipfi (faith he) homlnem art?s docuerunt, fed Ratio. Mantis

autein ipf& funt artium or^ana ; ficut L'^ra mufici Lyra

tnufcam non docuit, fed efi ipfius artifex per earn, qua pr&ditus efi, Rationem : agere autem non potefi ex arte abfque or^ gams, ita c?' una qudibet antma facultates qua/dam ^. fua ip- Jius fubfiantid obtinet, ——— Glnod autem corporis particuU animam non impellunt, —— mamfefte videre licet, ft animalia recl'ns nata confideres, qu£ quidem prius agere conantur, quam perfeclas habeant particulas. Ego namquc Bovis "vitulum cornibus petere conantem f&penumero vrdi, antequam ei nata effent cornua ; Et pullum Equi caleitrantemj 6cc. Omne enim animal fuA ipftus Anim& facultates, ac in quos tifu-s partes fu& polleant maxim^e, nullo doiiore, pr<efentit. — — Qud igitur ratione did potefi, animalia partium ufus a partibus doceri, cum cr antequa??^ illas habeant, hoc cognofcere -videantttr ? Si igitur Ova tria acccpcris, unum AquiU, alierum Anatis, reliquum Serpentis, c" calore modico foveris, animaltaque excluferis ; ilia quidem alts 'volare conantia, antequam volare pofiint ; hoc autem revolvi videbis, c^ ferpere affe^ans, quamvis molle adhuc cj* invalidum fuerit. Et ft, dum perfeCia erunt, in und cddemque domo nutriveris, deinde ad locum fubdialem dufia emiferis, Aquila quidem ad fublime ; Anas autem in paludem ; — Serpens 'vero fub terra irrepet — Animalia quidem rnihi videntur Naturd magis quam Ratione artem aliquam [^ejcf */>;* artificiofa] exercere: Apes fingers alveohs, &c. Galen de iifuPart 1. c, 3.

Chap. XL of Animals. t ^

plainly argues design, and a fupcr-intending WiPdom. Power and Providence in this fpecial Bufincls of Food. Particularly the different Delight of divers Animals in different Food, so that wiiat is naufeous to one, should be Dainties to another, is a manifell: Argument, that the Allotment of Food is not a Matter of mere Chance, but entailed to the very constitution and Nature of Animals j that they chufc this, and rcfufe that, not by Accident, or Neceility, but bccaufc the one is a proper Food, agreeable to their Conllitution, and so appointed by the infinite Contriver of their Bodies i and the other is difagreeablc and injurious to them.

But all this Objection will be found frivolous, and the wisdom and design of the great Creator will demonibatively appear, if we take a Survey,

V. Of the admirable and curious Apparatus in all Animals, made for the Gathering, Preparing and Digellion of their Food. From the very firlt Entrance, to the utmolt Exit of the Food, we find every Thing contrived, made and difpofcd with the utmofl Dexterity and Art, and curiously adapted to the Place the Animal liveth in, and the Food ic is to be nounflicd with.

Let us begin with the Mouth. And this we find, in every Species of Animals, nicely conformable to the V>{i: of such a Part > neatly fized and Ihapcd for the catching of Prey, for the gathering or receiving Food (^), for the Formation of Speech,

(^) Alia dent'ibui prs.da.ntur, alia unguibits, alia rojlri aduncuate carpunt, alia latitudine [ejuldcm] ruunty alia acut/iine excavant, alia jugunt, alia lambunt, forhint, munduntf vorant. Kec nunor varietas in Pedum vjimjhrioy ut rapiant, dijlrahant, teneant, premant, pendeant, tcllurern [cahtrt »oi% cep/tiT i'lm. Nat. Hilt. I lo. c. 71,

and

i.

19^ Of Animals Mouths. Book IV:

and every other such like Ufe {r). In Tome Creatures it is wide and large, in some little and narrow: in some with a deep Incifure up into the Head (/"), for the better catching and holding of Prey, and more eafy Comminution of hard, large and troubleiome Food 3 in others with a much Ihorter Incifure, for the gathering and holding of herbaceous Food.

In InfeEis it is very notable. In some forcipated J to catch hold and tear their Prey (?). In some

acu-

(r) because it would be tedious to reckon up the Bones, Ghnds, muscles, and other Parts belonging to the Mouth, it (hall fuffice to observe, that, for the various Services of Man's Mouth, befidss the muscles in common with other Parts, there are. five Pair, and one fingle one proper to the Lips only, as Dr. Gibfon reckons them : But my mofi: dihgent and curious Friend the late Mr. Covjper, discovered a iixth Fair. And accordingly Dr. Drake reckons fix Pair, and one Tingle one proper to the Lips, /. 3. c. 13.

(/_) Galen deferves to be here confulted, who excellently argues againit the cafual Concourfe of the Atoms of Epicu^ rus and Afdefiades, from the provident and wife Formation of the Mouths of Animals, and their Teeth anfwerable therero. In Man, his Mouth without a deep Incifure, with only one canine Tooth on a side, and flat Nails, because, ftith he, Hic Natura certo fciebat, fe animal manfuetum ac civile ejfingere, cm robur CT' 'vires ejfent ex fapientid, non ex corporis Jortitudine. But for Lions, Wolfs and Dogs, and all Inch as are called Ka^piosg^J'ovTcs, (or having ftiarp, ferrated Teeth) their Mouths are large, and deep cut ; Teeth strong and (harp, and their Nails Iharp, large, strong and round, accommodated to holding and tearing. Vid. Galen. deUf.Part. I. II. c. 9.

(t) Among Inre<fts the SqttilU aquatica, as they ar6 very rapacious, so are accordingly provided for it: Particularly the Squilla aquatica maxima recurva (as I call it) who hath fomevvhat terrible in its very Afpeft, and in its posture in the Water, especially its Mouth, which is armed with long, fliup Hooks, with which it boldly, and greedily catcheth any thing in the Waters, even one's Fingers, When they h.Ave feized their Prey, they will so tenacioufly hold it with their forcipated Mouth, that they will not part therewith,

even

Chap.TX. Of Animals Mouths. 191

aculeatcd, to pierce and wound Animals («), and fuck their Blood. And in others fbongly riggtj with Jaws and Teeth, to gnaw and fcrapc out their Food, to carry Burdens {^m) to perforate the Earth, yea the hardelt Wood, yea even Stones themfelvcs,

even when they are taken out of the Waters, and jumbled about in one's Hand. I have admired at their peculiar way of taking in their Food; which is done by piercing their Prey with their Forcifes (which are hollow) and lucking the Juice thereof through them.

The Squilla here mentioned, is the iiift and fecond in Moufet's Thcat. Infe6l. I. i. f. 37.

(mj For an Inihnce of Infcds endued with a Spear, I shall, for its Peculiarity, pitch upon one of the fmaileft, if not the very smallest of all the Gnat-kind, which 1 call, Culex minimus nigricans maculatus fanguifuga. Among us in Ejfex, they are called Nidiots, by MouJJet Midges. It is about Y-r of an Inch, or fomevvhat more long, with fliorc jintenn£y plain in the Female, in the Male tcather'd, fomewhat like a Bottle-Brulh. It is fpotted with blackiOi Spots, especially on the Wings, which extend a little beyond the Body. It comes from a little (lender Eel-like Worm, of a dirty white Colour, Iwimming in ftagnating Waters by a wrigling Motion ; as in Tig. s'.

Its Aurelia is small, with a black Head, little iVvort Horns, a fpotted, flender, rough Belly, Vi,l. Tig. 6. It lies quietly on the top of the Water, now and then gently wagging it felt this way and that.

these Gnats are greedy Blood-Suckers, ^nd very troublefome, where numerous, as they are in some Places near the Thames, particularly in the Breach- Waters th.U have lately befallen near us, in the Parifti of Dagenham; where I found them so vexatious, that I was glad to get out of those MarOics. Yea, I have seen horses so ftung with them, that they have had Drops of Blood all over their Bodies, where they were wounded by them.

I have given a Figure (in Tig. 7.) and more particular description of the Gnats, becaul'e, although it be common, it is no where taken notice of by any Author I know, except Mouffet, who, "I suppose, means thele Gnats, which he calls Midges, c. 13. p. 8i.

{w) Hornets and iVaJfs have strong Jaws, toothed, wherewith they can dig into Fruits, for their Food ; as alfo gnaw and fcrape Wood , whole Mouthfuls of which they carry away to make their Ccnibs. Vtd. injr. Chap, 13. Nott (f).

for

191 Of Animals Mouths. Book IV.

for houses (x) to themselves, and Nefts for their young.

And kftly, ift Birds it is no less remarkable. In the firll Place, it is neatly Ihaped for piercing the Air, and making Way for the Body thro' the airy Regions. In the next Place, it is hard and horny, which is a good Supplement for the want of Teeth, and caufeth the Bill to have the Ufe and Service of the Hand. It's hooked Form is of great Ufe to the rapacious Kind (jf), in catching and holding their Prey, and in the Comminution thereof by tearing 3 to others it is no less ferviceable to their Climbing, as well as neat and nice Comminution of their Food {z). Its extraordinary Length and Slendernefs is very ufeful to some, to fearch and grope for their Food in moorifli Places iaa)-y as its Length and Breadth is to others to hunt and

(x) Monfietir de la Voye tells of an ancient Wall of Free- Stone in the Benediilines-Abby ztCaen in Normandy ^ so eaten with Worms, that one may run ones Hand into most of tha Cavities: That these Worms are small and black, lodging in a greyilli Shell, that they have large flatti(h Heads, a large Mouth, with four black Jaws, CT'f. Phtl. Tranf. No. 18.

(}') Pro lis [_ Labris ] cornea (^' acuta Volncr'ihus Roflra. Kadcm rapto -viventibus adunca : colletlo, re^a : herhas ruentihus innmnque lata, ut Suum gener't. Jumentis vice manus ad coUigcnda pabula : ora apertiora laniatu viventlbus. Plin. Nat* Hilt. 1. II. c. 37.

(z.) Parrots liave their Bills nicely adapted to these Services, being hooked, for climbing and reaching what they have occalion for; and the lower Jaw being compeatly fitted to the Hooks of the upper, they can as minutely break their Food, as other Animals do with their Teeth.

{aa) Thui in Woodcocks, Snipes, zsrc. who hunt for Worms in moorifli Ground, and, as Mr. Willnghby faith, live alfo on the fatty unctuous Humour they Uick out of the Earth. So alfo the Bills of Curlews, and many other Sea-Fowl, are verylong, to enable them to hunt for the Worms, z^c. in this iiands on the Sca-ft:o:e, which they frequent.

featch

chap. XI. Of Animals Mouths. 193

fcarch in muddy Places {bb) : And the contrary Form, namely, a thick, short, and fliarp-cdg'd Bill, is as ufcflil to other Birds, who have occalion to husk and flay the Grains they fwallow. But it Would be endlels, and tedious, to reckon up all the various Shapes, and commodious Mechanirm oi all i the Sharpnefs and Strength of thole who have Occafion to perforate Wood and Shells {cc)\ the Slendernefs and Neatnefsof ("uch aspick up Imall insects i the Crofs-form of such as break up Fruits {^dd) j the comprcfl'ed Form of others (^^), with many other curious and artificial Forms, all fuittd to the Way of Living, and peculiar Occafions of the several Species of Birds. Thus much for the Mouth. Let us next take a short View of the T!eeth {ff)^

In

{bb) Ducks, Geefe, and divers others, have such long broad Bills, to quaffer and hunt in Water and Mud; to which we may reckon the uncouth Bill of the Spoon-Bill: but that which deferves particular observation in the Birds named in these two lalt Notes is, the Nerves going to the end ot their Bills, enabling them to discover their Food out of Sight; of which see Book. VII. Chap. 2. Note {e),

(cc) The Picas viridis, or Green-Woodfpite, and all the Wood-Peckers have Bills, curiously made for digging Wood, strong, hard, and fliarp. A neat Ridge runs along the top of the green Wood- I'ccker's Bill, as if an Artift had designed it for Strength and Neatnefs.

{dd) The LoxU, ox Crofi-Bill, whose Bill is thick and strong, with the Tips crofTing one another; with great Readinefs breaks open Fir-cones, Apples, and other Fruit, to come at their Kernels, which arc us Food, as if the eroding of the Bill was designed for this Service.

(ee) The Sea-Pie hath a long, fliarp, narrow Bill, compreded side-ways, and every way so well adapted to the raifing Limpets from the Rocks (which are its chief, if not only Foodj that Nature (or rather the Author of Nature^ seems to have framed it purely for that Ule.

(//) those Animali which have Teeth on both JaiVs, bave tut one Stomach ; but moftof those which have no upper Teethe •r none at ail, havtthrn Stumachs; ai in Btajlt, the paunchy

O tht

394 ^f -Animals Mouths. Book IV.

In which their peculiar Hardnefs {g^ is remarkable, their Growth (Joh) alfo, their firm Infertion and Bandage in the Gums and Jaws, and their various Shape and Strength, fuited to their various Occafion and Ufe («) > the foremoft weak and fartheil from the Center, as being only Preparers to the refti the others being to grind and mince, are accordingly made stronger, and placed nearer

the

the. Read, and the Feck ; and in all granivorous Birds, the Crop, the Echinus and the Gizard. For as chewing is to an eafie Digejiion, so is fwallowing -whole to that which is more laborious. Dr. Grew'i Cofmol. Sacr. C 5. §.14.

fe) J- Pe^er faith, the Teeth are made of convolved Skins hardened; and if we view the Grinders of Beer, horses. Sheep, csrc. We ftjall find great reason to be of his Mind. His observations arc, Mirum autem eos (i. e. Dentes) cutn primum ^ pelliculis imbricatim convolutis CP* tntico vifcido confiarent, in tantam dirigefcere foliditatem, qu£ ojfa cun£la fuperet. Idem fit etiam in OjficuUs Ceraforum, &c. Separationefaild, per tnembrafias conditur Magma locellis, quos foftnant lamina tcnues, ac duriufcuU ad Dentis figttram antea, di" i/initus compofit£. J. Peyer Merycol. 1. z. c. 8.

{hh) §liti amem (i. e. Dentes) renafcuntur, minim'e credendi funt a facultate aliqud plafticd Brutorttm denm formari, fed latentes tantummodo in confpeclum prodacuntur augtnento molis ex efjiuente fucco. Id. ibid,

(ji) From these, and other like Confiderations of the Teeth, Galen infers, that they must needs be the Work of feme wife, provident Bting; not Chance, nor a fortuitous Concourfe of Atoms. For the Confirmation of which he puts the Cafe, That suppose the order of the Teeth should have been inverted, the Grinders set in the room of the I«» eifors, cT'c (which might as well have been, had not the Teeth been placed by a wife Agent) in this cafe,- what Ule would the Teeth have been of ? What Confufion by such a flight Error in their Difpofal only ? Upon which he argues. At fiquis ehoream hominum 32 (the Number of the Teeth) ordine difpofmt, eum ut hominem induftrium laudaremus : curm "vero Dentium ehoream Natura tarn belle exorndrit, nonne ipfam quoque laudabimtts ? And then he goes on with the Argument, from the Sockets of the Teeth, and their nice fitting in them* which being no less accurately done, than what is done by a Carpenter* or Stoue-Cwter, in fitting a

Tenon

Chap. XI. Of Animals Mouths. 195the Center of Motion and Strength. Likcwile their various Form {kk)^ in various Animals is considerable, being all curiously adapted to the peculiar Food (Z/)) and Occalions of the fevcral Species of Animals {fnm). And lallly, the temporary Defed of them (««), is no less obfervablc in Children,

and

Tenon into a Mortice, doth as well infer the Art and A£l of the wife Maker of Animal Bodies, as the other doth the A(fl and Art of Man. And so he goes on with other Arguments to the same Effc<fl. Galen, de Uf. Part. I. ir. c. 8.

{kk) A curious Account of this may be found in an Extrafl of a Letter concerning the Teeth of divers Animals. Printed at Paris, in Ai, Vaugnion% Compleat Body of Chirurg. Oper. Chap, 53.

(//) As it hath been taken notice of, that various Animals (jclight in various Food ; so it constantly falls out, that their Teeth are accordingly fitted to their Food ; the rapacious to catching, holding and tearing their Prey ; the herbaceous to Gathering and Comminution of Vegetables : And such as have no Teeth, as Birds, their Bill, Craw and Gizard, are aflTiIled with Stones, to supply the defeft of Teeth. But the inoft considerable Example of this Kind is in some Families of the Infecl-Tribes , as the Papilio-Kind, crc. who have Teeth, and are voracious, and live on tender Vegetables in their Nytnpha, or Caterpillar-State, when they can only creep; but in thei» mature Pafdio-State, they have noTeethj but a Probofcis, or Trunk to fuck up Honey, (^-c. their Parts for gathering Food, as well as their Food being changed, as foon as they have Wings to enable them to fly to \t.

{mm) It is remarkable in the Teeth of Filhesj that in some they are fliarp, as alfo jointed, so as to fall back, the bcttet to catch and hold their Prey, and to facilitate its Palfage into the Stomach: So in others they are broad and flat, made to break the Shells of Snails and Sheil-Fifli devoured by them. these Teeth, or Breakers, are placed, in some, in the Mouth; in some, in the Throat; and in Lol>j}ers,&c. inthtf Stomach it self ; in the bottom of whose Stomachs are thre« of those Grinders, with peculiar muscles to move them.

(»») What is there in the World can be called an A<fl of Providence and design, if this temporary Defed of Teeth be not such; that Children, for Inftancc, (hould have non« whilft they are not able to ufe them, but to hurt thcmfclvcsi or the Mother J and that at the very Ae« when tb«Y <^^n tak«

9* H^

ipij Of Animals Mouths. Book IV.

and such young Creatures, where there is no Occafion for them j but they would be rather an Annoyance to the tender Nipples and Breads.

E'Vom the Teeth, the grand Inilruments of Mailication j let us proceed to the other minifterial Parts. And here the Parotid., Sublingual^ and ma:)^' illary Glands j together with those of the Cheeks and Lips, are considerable j all lodged in the moll convenient Places about the Mouth and Throat to afford that noble digeftive falival Liquor, to be mixed with the Food in Maftication, and to moi- Hen and lubricate the passages, to give an eafie defcent to the Food. The commodious Form alfo of the Jaws, deferves our Notice ; together with the strong Articulation of the lowermofl, and its Motion. And lailly, the curious Form, the great Strength, the convenient Lodgment and Situation of the several muscles and Tendons (oo), all miniftring to this so necessary an A£t of Life, as Maftication is j they are such Contrivances, such Works, as plainly set forth the infinite Workman's Care and Skill.

Next to the Mouth, the Gullet prefenteth it self j in every Creature well-fiz'd to the Food it hath occafion to fwallowj in some but narrow, in oin more substantial Food, and live without the Bread, and begin to need Teeth, for the Hike of Speech; that then, I fjy, their Teeth should begin to appear, and gradually grow, as they more and more stand in need of 'em.

{oo) It would be endlefs to particularize here, and therefore I (hall refer to the Anatomifts; among the rest, particularly to Galen, for the fake of his Defcant upon this Subjedt. For having described the great Accuracy of the Contrivance and Make of these Parts, he faith, Haud fclo an horninum fit fobriorum ad Fortunam opificem id revocare : alioqui quid tandem ertt, quod cum Provident'ta atque Arte effic'ttur ? Omnino enim hoc ei contrarium ef[e debet, quod cafu ac fortuit9 Jit. Galen, de Uf. Part. 1. ii. c. 7. ubi flara.

chers

Chap. XI. Of Animals Throats. ic)j

thers as large find extcnfive (/>/>) •, in all exceedingly remarkable for the curious mechanism of its Mufclcs, and the artificial Decuflation and Polition of their Fibres (^q).

And now we arc arriv'd to the grand Receptacle of the Food, the Stomach y for the moll Pare as various as the Food to be convcy'd therein. And here I might dcfcribe the admirable mechanism of its Tunicks, muscles, Glands, the Nerves, Arteries and Veins (rr) j all manifclling the luper-eminent Contrivance and Arc of the infinite

(pp) The Bore of the Gullet is not in all Creatures alike anfiverable to the Body or Stomach. As in the I'OX, which both feeds on Bones, and fwalloivs zvhole, or with little chewing; add next in a Dog, and other offivorous <^iadruped$, 'tis "very large, viz. to prevent a Contufion therein. Next in a Korfe, ivhtch though he feeds on Grafs, yet fwallows much at once, and so requires a more open Pajfage. But in a Sheep, Rabbit, or Ox, which bite jhort, and fw allow less at once, 'tisfmaller. But in a Squnrc], /iill lejfer, both becaiife he eats fine, and to keep him from difgorgtng his Meat upon his defcending Leaps. And so in Rats and Mice, which often run along Walls with their Heads doxvnwards. Dr. Grgw'z Comp. Anat. of Stom. and Guts. Chap. 5.

(qq) Of this see Dr. Willis's Pharm. Rat. Part 1. Scd. i. C. 2,. Steno alfo, and Peyer Aiery, 1. 2.

The description theic give of the mufcular Part of the Gullet, the late ingenious and learned Dr. Drake faith is very exad in Ruminants, but not in Men. In Men, this Coat (the fecond of the Gullet) confifls of two fiefJjy Lamellx, like two diflinti muscles. The outward being ompojed of ft rait longitudinal Fibres. — — The inner Order of Fibres is annular^ without any obfervalle Angles. • • IheUfeof this Coat, and these Orders of Fibres is to promote Deglutition ; of which the

Longitudinal, fjorten the Oelbphagus, and so make its

Capacity larger, to admit of the Matter to be fwallowed. Tho Annular, on the contrary, contratl the Capacity, and clofin^ behind the defcending Aliment, prcfs it downwards. Drake"* Anat. vol. I. 1. 1, c. 9.

{rr) See y/illis, ibid. Cowftr'i Anat. Tab. 35. and nuny Other Authors.

O I WorIvni:\ni

19^ Of Anmals Stomachs. Book IV,

Workman {ff) •, they being all nicely adjufted to their refpedive Place, Occafion and Service. I might alfo infifl; upon that moll necessary Office o^ Digejiion'y and here consider that wonderful Faculty of the Stomachs of all Creatures, to dif^ folve {tt) all the several Sorts of Food appropriated to their Species j even fometimes Things of that Confiftency as seem infoluble (««)} especially by such feemingly fimple and weak Menfiruums as we find in their Stomachs : But I shall only give these Things a bare mention, and take more peculiar Notice of the fpecial Provifion made in the particular Species of Animals, for the Digellion of that fpecial Food appointed them.

(//) Promptuar'mm autem hoc, alimentum unlverfum exclp'tens, ten Dfvinum, non Humanum fit ofificium. Galen, de Uf. Part. 1. 4- c. I.

{tt) How great A Comprehenfion of the Nature of Things, did Jt require, to make a Menftruum, that fliouid corrode all sorts of iLejh coming into the Stomach, and yet not the Stomach it self, which is alfo Flefh ? Dr, Grew's Cofmol. Sacr. c. 4.

(««) The Food of the Cajior being oftentimes, if not always, dry Things, and hard of Digeftion, such as the Roots and Bark of Trees, 'tis a wonderful Provifion made in that Creature's Stomach, by the digeftive Juice lodged in the curious little Cells there. A Delcription of whose admirable Strudure and Order may be found in Blafius from Wepfer i concerning which he faith, in quibus Mucus reconditus, non fecus ac Mel in Favis. < Nimirum quia Caftoris alimentum exfuccum, ZP" co^u diffcillimum efl, fapientiffimus z:r fumtne admirandus in fuis operibus rerum Conditor, D. O. M. ipfi pulcherrima ijla CT" affaire fa^d flru^lurd benignijfime profpexit, ut nunquam deeff'et Fermentum, quod ad folvendum, er comfninuendum alimenttttn durum ey afperum par foret. Vid. Blaf. Anat. Animal, c. lo. Confer etiam ASl. Erud. Lipf Ann, 1684. p. 360.

most of our modern Anatomifts and Phyficians attribute Digeftion to a diffolving Menflruum ; but Dr. Drake takes it to be rather from fermentative, diffolving Principles in the Aliment it self, with the Concurrence of the Air and Heat of the Body i as in E^r, Papin'i Di^ejigr, Vid. Dr. 4W- "vol. i.

Chap. XL Of Animals Stomachs. 199

And in the first Place ic is obfci vablc, that, in every Species of Animals, the Strength and Size of their Stomach {nnw) is conformable to their Food. Such whose Food is more delicate, tender, and nutritive, have commonly tliis Part thinner, weaker, and less bulky j whereas such whole Aliment is Icfs nutritive, or whose Bodies require larger Supplies to answer their Bulk, their Labours, and walle of Strength and Spirits, in them it is large and strong.

Another very remarkable Thing in this Part, is, the Number of Ventricles in divers Creatures. In many but one 5 in some two or more (a.v). In such as make a sufficient Comminution of the Food in the Mouth, one fufficcs. But where Teeth arc wanting, and the Food dry and hard, (as in granivorous Birds,) there the Defc6l is abundantly supply'd by one thin membranaceous Ventricle, ta receive and moillen the Food, and another thick, llrong, mufcular one, to grind and tear ijy) it. But ni such Birds, and other Creatures,

whose

^wvj) All carnivorous (^adrupeds have the fmallejl Ventricles, Tle(h going fart heft, ihofc that feed on Fruits, and Roots, have them of a middle, Size. Jet the Mole, bccaufe it feeds unclean, hath a xrry great one. Sheep and Oxen, vjhich feedon Grafs, have the great est. Yet the horse (and for the same reason the Coney and Hare) though Graminivorous, yet comparatively hav2 but little ones. For that a horse is made jor Labour, and both this, and the Hare, for quick and continued Motion ; for which, the mo ft eafte respiration, and so the frecft Motion of the Diaphragme is very requtfite; which yet could not be, ft)ould the Stomach lie bi^ and c urn berfome upon it, as in. Sheep 4^3^ Oxen it doth. Grew, ib. Chap. 6.

(xx) The Dromedary hath four Stomachs, one whereof is peculiarly endowed with about twenty Cavities, like Sacks, in all Probability for the holding of Water. Concerning which, see Book VI. Chap 4. Note {a).

(yy) To aflill in which Office, they fwallow rmall angular ^tQn?s, which are to be met with in the Gizards of all gra-

P 4 nivorou;

xoo Of Animals Stomachs, Book IV,

whose Food is not Grain, but Flefli, Fruits, Infers, or partly one, partly the other, there their Stomachs are accordingly conformable to their Food (zz), flronger or weaker, membranaceous or mufcular.

But as remarkable a Thing, as any in this Part of Animals, is, the curious Contrivance and Fabrick of the several Ventricles of ruminating Creatures. The very Aft it self of Rumination^ is an excellent Provifion for the compleat Maftication of the Food, at the Refting, leifure Times of the Animal. But the Apparatus for this Service, of divers Ventricles for its various Ufes and purposes, together with their curious mechanism, deferves great Admiration {aaa).

Having thus far purfu'd the Food to the Place, where by its Redudion into Chyle, it becomes a proper Aliment for the Body } I might next trace it through the several M^eanders of the Guts^ the LaUeaU^ and so into the Blood {bbb)y and afterwards

nivorous Birds ; but in the Gizard of the Ijnx, or Wrynech^ which was full only of A?2ts, 1 found not one Stone. So in that of the Green Wood-Pecker (full of uints and Tree-maggots) there were but few Stones.

(zz) In mojl carnivorous Birds, the third Ventricle is Membranous ; where the Meat is concaved, as in a M(in : Or fomewhat Tendinous, as in anOviX ; as if it were made indi^erently for Fle/h, or other Meat, as he could meet with either. Or mofi thick and tendinous, called the Gizard; wherein the Meat, as in a Mill, is ground to Pieces. Grew, ubi fupra. Chap. 9.

{aaa) It would be much too long a Tafk to infift upon it here as it deferves, and therefore concerning the whole business of Rumination, I shall refer to j?. Conr. Peyeri Meryeolog. feu de B^uminantibus e? Ruminatione Commentar. where he largely treateth of the several Ruminating Animals, of the Parts miniftring to this Ad, and the great Ufe and Benefit thereof unto them.

{bbb) There are too many Particulars to be infifted on, obf^rvable in the Paira|es of the Chyltt from tlie Quts to the

■ ' ' Lefi

Chap. XI. Of Animals Stomachs. ir^i

wards into the very Habit of the Body : I might alfo take Notice of the Separation made in the JnteJiineSy of what is nutritive, (which is received,) and what is feculent, (being ejedcd j) and the Impregnations there from the Pancreas and the Gall^ and after it hath been Ibaincd through those curious Colanders, the laical Feins ^ 1 might alfo observe its Impregnations from the Glands and Lym~ fhiedu^s\ and, to name no more,. I might farther view the cxquifite Stru6turc of the l-*arts mi-

Lift Subclavian Vein, where it enters into the Blood ; and thereture I lli.^il only, for a Sample of this adrnirahie Oeconomy, take notice of some of the main and more general Matters. And,

r. After the Food is become Chyle, and gotten into the Guts, it is an excellent Provilion made, not only for its passage through the Guts, but alfo for its Protrufion into the Lac-leals, by the Ptriflalttck Motion and Valvult conniven" tes of the Guts. i. It is an admirable Proviiion, that the Mouths of the Latleals, and indeed the LaCieah primi generis themselves are small and fine, not wider than the Capillary Arteries are, left by admitting Particles of the Nouriftiment grolTer than the Capillaries, dan£;erous Oblfrudions might be thereby produced. 3. After the Reception of the Ahment into the Lacleals primi generis, it is a noble Provilion for the Advancement of its Motion, that in the Alej'esterick Glands, it meets with some of the Lymphi-Duih, and receives the Impregnations of the Lympha. And palFing on from thence, it is no less Advantage. 4. That the La^ieals, and Lymphi-Dufls meet in the Receptaculum Chyli, where the Aliment meeting with more of the Lympha, is made ot a due Conliftence, and Temperament, for its farther Advancement through the Thoracick D.xci, a;id fa into the Left Subclavian Vein and Blood. Laltly, This Thoracick Duil it self is a Part of great Conlideration. For (as Mr. Coy^fr faith) If we confiderin this Dutl its several Divtftons and Inofculatiens, its numerous Valves looking from belazu upivards, its advantagious Situation between the great Artery and Vertebrae of the Back, together with the DuSls difcharging their refluent Lympha from the Lungs, and other neighbouring Parts, we shall find all conduce to demon/Irate the utmojl Art of Nature ufed in furthering the Jleep and perpendicular Afant of th$ ^kyi^- Ar.at. lairodiidt

pidring

102, Of Animals Sagacity Book IV.

niftring to all these delicate Offices of Nature j particularly the artificial Conformation of the Inteftines might deferve a fpecial Enquiry, their Tunicks. Glands, Fibres traverfing one another {ccc\ and periftaltick Motion in all Creatures 5 and their cochleous Paflage {ddd) to retard the Motion of the Chyle, and to make amends for the Shortnefs of the Intellines, in such Creatures who have but one Gut 5 together with many other Accommodations of Nature in particular Animals that might be mention'd. But it ftiall fuffice to have given only a general Hint of those curious and admirable Works of God. From whence it is abundantly manifefl how little weight there is in the former atheiftical Objedion. Which v/ill receive a further Confutation from the

VI. and lad Thing relating to Food, that I fh all speak of, namely, The great Sagacity of all jinimals^ in finding out and providing their Food. In Man perhaps we may not find any Thing very admirable, or remarkable in this Kind, by Means of his reason and Underllanding, and his Supremacy over the inferior Creatures ; which anfwcreth all his Occafions relating to this business : Bat then even here the Creator hath Hiewed his Skill, in noc

{ccc) these, although noble Contrivances and Works of pod, are too many to be iiiiilled on, and therefore I fliail lefer to the Anatomilts, particularly Dr. Willis Pharmaceut. Dr. Cole^ in Phil Tranf. No. 115. and Mr. Cowper's elegant Cuts in Anat. Tab. 34, 35. and Append. Fig. 39, 40.

{ddd) In \.\iQTkornback, and some other Fiihes, it is a very curious Provifion that is made to supply the Paucity and IJrevity of the Guts ; by the Perforation of their firigle Gut, going otftrait al ong, but round Uke a Pair of Windmg Stairs; so that their Gut, v/hich seems to be but a few Inches long, hath really a Bare of many Inches. But of these, and many other noble Curiofities and Difcoveries in Anatomy, the Reader will, I hope, have a better and larger Account from the curious and ingenious Dr, Dey^gl^St who is iabouring ii? those Masters,

mm

Chap. XT. to get Food. 103

over-doing the Matter j in not providing Man with an unneceflary Apparatus, to cff"c6l over and over again what is fcalible, by the Reach oF his Undci- Handing, and the Power of his Authority.

But for the inferior Creatures, who want Rcafon, the Power of that natural In(lin(5b, that Sagacity {ece) which the Creator hath imprinted upon them, do amply compenfate that Dcfcd:. And here we shall find a glorious Scene of the divine wisdom, Power, Providence and Care, ifwcvievr the various Inftinfts of Beaf^s, great and small, of Birds, Infe6ls and Reptiles (///). For among every Species of them, we may find notable Atls of Sagacity, or Inflinft, proportional to their Occa- Cons for Food. Even among those whose Food is near at Hand, and eafily come at > as Grafs and Herbs \ and consequently have no great need of Art to discover it; yet, that Faculty of their accurate Smell and I'allc, so ready at every turn, to diftinguilh between what is falutary, and what pernicious [g^^t doth juilly deferve praise, But for

such

{tte) %uibui bef.iis erat is cibus, ut alms generis leffiis vefcerentur, ant vnes natura dedit, ant ceUritatem : data est qtiibufdam etiam machmatio quddjw, atque JoUrtia, crc Cic. dc Nat. Deor. 1. i. c. 48.

(fff) Among Reptiles that have a ftrange Faculty to fliif^; for Food, csrc. may be reckoned Eds, wliich, although belonging to the Waters, can creep on the Land from Pond to Pond,c7C. Mr. Mofely of Alo/ely, faw them creep over the Meadows, like so many Snakes from Ditch to Ditch; which he thought, was not only for bettering their Habitation, but alfo to catch Sqails m the Grafs. Plot's Hiji. of Stajfordfture^ C.7. §. 3z.

And as early as the Year iizj, the Frod wa: so very in- Jenfe, that the lids were forced to leave the Waters, an(^ were frozen to Death in the Meadows. I'iJ. idakezvill's ytpel. I. 7.. Chap. 7. S. z.

(g^g) Enumerate poffHm, ad faflum cap(jfcnd-4m conficieit' dumque, quA fit in figures animaniium qj- quam jolen, fubitUf-' ^uf defcripfio pqrtiitm, ^itamqut admtrtibUis jAbrna membro-

Tt^m,

^04 Of Animals Sagacity Book IV.

such Animals, whole Food is not so eafily come at, a Variety of wonderful Inftin6t may be met with, sufficient to entertain the mod curious Obferver. With what entertaining Power, and Artifice do some Creatures hunt {hhh)^ and purfue their Game and Prey ! And others watch and way-lay theirs {iii) \ With what prodigious Sagacity do others grope

for

rum. Omnia enim q»£ tntus inclufa funt, ita nata, atque ita heat a funt, ttt nihil eorum fupervacaneum fit, nihil ad vitam retinendatn nin necejfarium. Deiit ant cm eadem Nati*ra beltuis z^" fenfu}7t, (y appetitum, ut altera conatum haherent ai naturates pajius eapejjendos ; altera fecernerent pejlifera a. fhliitaribus. Cic. de Nat. Deor, 1. ^. c. 37. See £0^^ IV. Chap. 4.

{hhh) It would be cndlefs to give Inlhnces of my own and orheis Obf^rvations of the prodigious Sagacity of divers Animals in Hunting, particularly Hounds, Setting-Dogs, cs'c. one therefore i\n\\ fuffice of Mr. Boyl's, viz. A Per/on of '^alicj to make a Trial, whether a young Blood-Hound was

zvell inflnUied, caujed one of his Servants to walk to

a Town four Miles off, and then to a Market-Town three Miles

from thence. The Dog, without feeing the Man he tvas to

purjlte, followed him by the Scent to the abovementioned Places, notivit hfianding the Multitude of Market-People that went along tn the same Way, and of Travellers that had occafion to crofs it. And when the Blood-Hound came to the chief Market-Toivn, he fajjed through the Streets, without taking notice of any of the. People there, and left not till he had gone to the house, where the Man he fought refled himself, and found him in an upper Room, to the zvonder of those that followed him. Boyl. determ. Nat. of Effluv. Chap. 4.

(iii) There are many Stories told of the Craft of the Fox, to compafs his Prey; of which Ol. Magnus hath many such, as, feigning the barking of a Dog, to catch Prey near houses ; feigning himself dead, to catch such Animals as come to feed upon him; laying his Tail on a Wafp-Neit, and then robbing it hard against a Tree, and then eating the Wafps so killed: Ridding himself of Tleas, by gradually going into Water, with a Lock of Wool in his Mouth, and so driv-r ing the Tleas up into it, and then leaving it in the Water : By catching Crab-V\^ with his Tail, which he faith he him-r self was an Eye-Witnefs of; Vidi cr ego in Scopulis NorvefiiVulpem, inter rupes immijfd Cauda in aqujis, plures educere Caneros, ac demrim devorare. 01. Mag, hist. 1. 18. c. 39» 4o»

Chap. XT. to get Food. 105for it under Ground, out of Sight, in mooriili Places, in Mud and Dirt {kkk) j and others dig and delve for it, both above (///), and under the Surface of the drier Lands {mmm) ! And how curious and well designed a Provifion is it of particular large Nerves in such Creatures, adapted to that cfpecial Service!

What an admirable Faculty is that of many Animals, to difcovcr their Prey at vail Diilancesj some by their Smell some Miles off («««) j and some by their fliarp and piercing Sight, aloft in

But Pliny's fabulous Story of the Hy&na out-does ihefc Relations of the; Fox, Sermonetn humanum inter pa/iorum Jiabula aJfimuUre, notnenque altcujus addifctrre, cjuem evocatum foras laceret. Item Vomitionem ho?ninis imitari ad foUtcitandos Canes quos invadat. Plin. Nat. Hilt. 1. 8. C. 30.

{kkk) This do Ducks, Woodcocks, and many other Fowls, which Ceek their Food in dirty, moorifli Places. For which Service they have very remarkable Nerves reaching to the end of their Bills. Of which see Book VII, Chap. i. Note {e).

{Ill) Swme, and other Animals that dig, have their Nofes made more tendinous, callous, and llrong for this Service, than others that do not dig. They are alio edged with a proper, tough Border, for penetrating and lifting up the Earth; and their NoHnls are placed v/ell, and their Smell is very accurate, to discover M-hatlbever they purfue by digging.

{mmm) The Mole, as its Habitation is diiferent from that of other Animals, so hath its Organs in every rel"pe(5t curiously adapted to that way of Life; particularly its nose made fliarp, and flender, but withal tendinous and ftrongjC^f. But what is very remarkable, it hath such Nerves reaching to the end of its nose and Lips, as Ducks, o^c. have, mentioned above in Note {kkk). VVliich Pair of Nerves I obfcrved to be much larger in this Animal than any other Nerves proceeding out of its Brain.

(»«») Predacious Creatures, as Wolfs, Foxes, ov. will discover Prey at great Diftanccs; so will Dogs and Ravens difcovcr Carrion a great way off by their Smell. And if (as the Superftitious imagine) the latter flying over and haunting Houfcs be a fign of Death, it is no doubt from some cadaverous Smell, those Ravens diicovcr in the Air by their accurate Smell, which is emitted from those difeafcd Bodies, wkich have in them the Priuciplcs of a fpccdy Death.

the I

±o6 Of A^ima/s Sagacity Book IV.

the Air, or at other great distances (ooo) I An Infl'ance of the latter of which GOD himself giveth, (Jol'xxxix.zj^ 2,8, ZQ.) in thelnilinftof the Eagle: jDotb the Eagle mount up at thy Command^ and make her Nefi on high ? She dwelleth and ahideth on the Rocky upon the Crag of the Rock^ and the firong Place {ppp) . From thence Jhe feeketh her Prey^ and her Eyes behold afar off. What a commodious Pro* vifion hath the Contriver of Nature made for Animals, that are neceffitated to climb for their Food j not only in the Strudure of their Legs and Feet, and in the Strength of their Tendons and Mufclesj acting in that particular Office {qqq) 5 but alfo in the peculiar Stru6ture of the prmcipal Parts, a6ting in the Acqueft of their Food {rrr) I What a

Provi*

{000) Thus HAivks^nA Kites on Land, zn^ Gulls and other Birds that prey upon the Waters, can at a great Height in the Air see Micey little Birds and Infeds on the Earth, and small Fifties, shrimps^ vc in the Waters, which they will dart down upon, and take.

{ppp) Mr. Ray gives a good Account of the Nidification of the Chryfa'etos cauda annulo albo cinSta. Hujus Nidus Ann. 1668. in fylvojis props Deriventiam, 8cc. inventus efi e hacillis feu virgis ligneis grandioribus compofitus, quorum altera extremitas rupis cujufdam eminenttA, altera duabus Betulis innitehatur, — Erat Nidus quadratus, duas ulnas latus. -—In eo fullus unicusy adjacentibus cadaveribus unius agni, unius leporis, c?* trlumGrygallorum pullorum. Synopf. Method. Avium, p. 6. And not only Lambs, Hares, and Grygalli, but Sk Robert Sibhald tells us, they will feize Kids and Fawns, yea, and Children too : Of which he hath this Story of an Eagle in one of the Orcades Iflands, §lU£ Infantulum unius anni paii" tits involutum arripuit (quern Mater tejfellas ufitbiles pro igne allatura momenta tempotis depofuerat in loco HoMlon-H-t^diSlo ) eumque deport a(fe per 4 milliaria pajfuum ad Hoiam ; qua re ex tnatris ejulatibus cognitd, quatuor viri illuc in navicula pro" feSli funt, o" fcientes ubi Nidus ejfet, infantulum ilUfum iy intattum deprehenderunt. Prod. Nat. Hilt. Scot. 1. 3. p,. 2. p. 14.

{qqq) See in Book VII. Chap. i. Note (/). the Charaderiflicks of the Wood- Pecker-kind.

(rrr) The Contrivance of the Legs, Teet and Nails [of the Opoffum] fetms very advantagions to this Animal in climbing

Trtr

Chap. XI. to get Food, . 107

Provifion alfo is that in noiflurnal Birds and Beads, in the peculiar Stru(frurc of their Eye {fff)^ (and wc may perhaps add the Accuracy of their Smell too) vhereby they arc enabled to discover their Food in the Dark? But among all the Inllanccs we have of natural In(lin6V, those Inilin£ts, and efpecial Provifions made to supply the Necellities of Hclplefs Animals, do in a particular Manner demonllratc the great Creator's Care. Of which 1 lliall give two Inllanccs.

I. The Provifion made for young Creatures. That iTOf^):, that natural Affcdlion, so connatural to all, or moil Creatures towards their Young (///), what an admirable noble Principle is it, implanted

Tre% ( ivh'tch it doth very n'tmlly ) for preying upon Birds. But that which is most lingular in this Animal, is the Structure of its Tail, to enable it to hang on Boughs. The spines, or

Udoks in the middle of the under side of the Vertebrae cf

the Tail ; are a roondtrful Piece of Nature's MechMnifm. The firjl three Vertebrae had none of these Spines, but in all the refi they were to be obfcrved. - They ivere placed juji at tlj0

Articulation of each Joynt, and in the middle from the Sides. -^ for the perforryiing this Office [of hanging by the Tail] nothing, 1 think, could be more advantagioufly contrived. For -ujhen tht Tail is t7virled or wound about a Stick, this Hook of the Spinae tafily fufiains the Wtight, and there is but little labour cf tht muscles required, only enough for bowing or crooking the Tail. This, and more to the same purpose, Jec in Dr. Tyfoa's Anat. of the Opoj}'. in Phil. Tranf No. 139.

(///) See before Chap. 2. Note {z), {aa), {lb).

(ttt) ^id dicam quantus amor he/iiarum fit in educandis cufiodiendifque its, quA procreaverint, ufqut ad cum finem, dum fojftnt feipfa difendere ? And having inlUnced in some Animals, where this Care is not necessary, and accordingly is not employed, he goes on, Jam Gallim, avcfque reliqut, cr quietum requirunt ad paritndum locum, cr cubilia fibi, nidofque conftruunt, eofque quam poffunt mollijfime fubjiernuntg ut quam faciliime ova ferventur. Ex quibus pullos cum excluferint, it a tuentur, ut cf pennii fove*nt, ne frigore Udantur, c fi eji calcr, a fcU ft opponam, Cic. de Nar. Deor, 1. z. fSi. SI.

To ft

io8 Of Animals Care Book IV.

ed in them by the wife Creator? By Means of which, with what Alacrity do they tranra6t their parental Miniftry ? With what Care do they nurse up their Young j think no Pains too great to be taken for them , no Dangers {iiuu) too great to be ventured upon for their Guard and Security ? How carefully will they lead them about in Places of Safety, carry them into Places of Retreat and Security 5 yea, some of them admit them into their own Bowels {www) ? How will they carefs

To this natural Care of Parent-Animals to their young, Tve may add the Returns made by the young of some towards the old ones. Plmy faith of Rats, Genitores fuos fejfas fe^ neSlA, alunt infign't fietate. Nat. hist. ). 8. c. 57- So Cranes^ he faith, Genitricum fene^am tnvicem educant. L. lo. c. 23.

This St. Amhrofe takes Notice of in his Hexameron , and Cl. Magnus after him, Depofni patris artus, per long&vum fe»e- ^ut'ts plumis nudatos circumjlans foboles penrAs propr'tts jovet^ . collaiitio cibo pafcit, quando etiam ipfa naiur& reparat

difpendia, ut hinc inde fenem fuhlevantes, fulcro alarum fuarum ad volandum exerceant, c?* in priftinos ufus defueta membrA reducant. For which reason this Bird is denominated Pia. Vid. Ol. Mag. H'tfi. I. ig. C.14.

Hereto may be added alfo the conjugal Sro^y^ of the little green Ethiopian Parrot, which Mr. Ray defcribes from Cltifius. FcemeUe£ fenejcenies (quod I'alde notabile ) vix edert 'valebant, niji cibum jam a mare carptum, ZD" aliquandiu in prolobo retentum, 'O' ^^t^fi co^um roftro fuo exciperent, ut Columbarum pulli a matre ali folent, Synopf. Meth. Av. p. 32.

{uuu) The moll timid Animals, that at other Times abscond, or haltily fly from the Face of Man, Dogs, erf. will, for the fake of their young, expofe themselves. Thus among Fowls, Hens will affault, instead of fly from such as meddle with their Brood. So Partridges, before their young can fly, will drop frequently down, first at lesser, and then at greater Difl:ances, to dodge and draw off Dogs from purfuing their young.

{wzvw) The opojfum hath a curious Bag on purpofc for the fecuring and carrying about her young. There are belonging to this Bag two Bones (not to be met with in any other Skeleton) and four Pair of muscles; and fomefay the Teats lie therein alfo. Dr. Ty/ow, Anat, of the O/o/. in Phil.

Tranf,

chap. XI. of their Tomig. 209

rcfs them with their alftftionate Notes, lull and quiet them with their tender parental Voice, put Food into their Mouths, fuckle them, cherifh and keep them warm, teach them to pick, and ear, and gather Food for themrdvciii and, in a word, perform the whole Part of lb many Nurfcs, deputed by the Sovereign Lord and Prefervcr of the World, to help such young and Ihiklels Creatdrcs, till they are come to that Maturity, as to be able to fhift for themselves ?

And as for other Animals (particularly Infeds, whose Sire is partly the Sun, and whose numerous Off-spring would be too great for their Parent-Animal's Care and Provifion) these are so generated, as to need none of their Care, by Realon they arrive immediately to their 'HAiy^ia, their perfect, adult State, and are able to fhifc for themselves. Bun yet, thus far their parental Inltinft (equivalent to the moll rational Care and Fore-(ight) doth extend, that the old ones do not wildly drop their Eggs and Sperm any where, at all Adventures, buc so cautioufly repofit it in such commodious Places (some in the Waters, some on Flefli, lome on Plants proper and agreeable to their Species {xxx)\ and some fhut up agreeable Food in their Nells, partly for Incubation, partly for Food ijyy)-^ that their young in their Amelia^ or Nympba State, may find sufficient and agreeable Food to bring them up, till they arrive to their Maturity.

Thus far the Parental lnllin6t and Care.

Tranf. N^. 239. where he alfo, from Oppian, mentions the Bog-Fiji) , tnac upon any Storm or Danger, receives ihc young Ones into her Belly, which cumc out again when the Fright is over. So ahb the Squatma and Glaucus, the lame Author faith, have the same Care for their young, buc receive them into diilcrent Receptacles. (xxx) Sec BookVlll. chap. 6.

{y^y) See c/jd/". 13. n^u (c).

P Ncxc

zio Of Animals Care Book IV.

• Next we may observe no less in the young themfelvcs, especially in those of the irrational Animals. Forafmuch as the Parent- Animal is not able to bear them about, to cloath them, and to dandle them, as Man doth j how admirably hath the Creator contrived their State, thac those poor young Creatures can foon walk about, and with the little Helps of their Dam, fhift for, and help t.hemfelves ? How naturally do they hunt for their Teat, fuck, pick (zzz)^ and take in their proper Food ?

But for the young of Man, their Parents reason, joined with natural Affe6tion, being sufficient to help, to nurse, to feed, and to cloath themj therefore they are born helplefs, and are more absolutely than other Creatures, call upon their Parents Care (aaaa). A manifeit Acband Defignation of the Divine Providence.

2. The other Inlfance I promifed, is the Provifion made for the Prefervation of such Animals as are.fometimes deftitute of Food, or in Danger of being so. The \Vinter is a very inconvenient, improper Seafon, to afford either Food or Exercife i;o insects, and many other Animals. When the

. {zzz) There is manifeftly a fiiperintending Providence in this Gale, that some Animals are able to fuck as foon as ever the'y are born, and that they will naturally hunt for the Teat before they are quite gotten out of the Secundines, and parted from the Navel-String, as I havefeen. But iox Chickens, and other young Birds, they not being able immediately to pick till they are'stronger, have a notable Proviiion made for such a Time, by a part of the Yolk of the Egg being inclofed in their Belly, a little before their Exclufion or Hatching, which serves for their Nouriftiment, till they are grown strong enough to pick up Meat. Vid. Book VII. Chap.4. Note {a).

"• {a-iCaa) Gini [Infantes] de ope noftra ac de divina mifericord'tti fins mertntur, qui in prima Jlatifn nativitatis fu& ortu plorantes ac Jlentes, niC aliud faciunt ^u^m deprecaatur. Cypr. Ep. ad Fid.

flowry

Chap. XI. of their Toung. in

flowry Fields arc diverted of their Gaiety ; when the fertile Trees and Plants arc (bipp'd of their Fruits, and the Air, inllcad of being warmed with the chcrifhing Beams of the Sun, is chilled with rigid Froft j what would become of such Animals as are impatient of Cold ? What Food could be found by such as arc fuhfillcd by the Summer- Fruits? But to obviate all this Evil, to (lave off the Deftruction and Extirpation of divers Species of Animals, the infinitely wife Prcfcrver of the World hath as wifely ordered the matter \ that, in the firll Place, such as are impatient of Cold, should have such a fpccial Strufture of their Body, particularly of their Hearts, and Circulation of their Blood \bhbb)y as durine that Seafon, not to fuffcr any wafte of their Bod)^ and consequently not to need any Recruits; but that they should be able to live in a kind of flcepy, middle State, in their Places of fafe Retreat, until the warm Sun revives both them and their Food together.

The next Provifion is for such as can bear the Cold, but would want Food thenj and that is in some by a long Patience of Hunger {cccc)^ in others

by

{libhl?) I might n.ime here some of the Species of Birds, the whole Tribe ahnolt of Infcds, and some among other Tribes, that are able to fubfift for many Months without Food, and some without respiration too , or very little ; But it may fuffice to instance only»in the LandTortoife, of the Strudure of whose Heart and Lungs : See Book VI. Chap. 5. Koie {b).

(cccc) Inediam diutifftmi tolerat Lupus, ut v alia omnia carnivora, licet voracilfima ; magna uiiqut natuf£ providcntia ; quoniam efca non fem^cr lu promptu efi. Ray'f Synopf. Quadr.

P- W4.

To the long Abflinence mentioned of Brute-Animals, 1 hope the Reader will excufe me if I add one or two InQanccs of cxtraordmary Ablhnence among Men. One MarthaTaj' lor, born in Derby/Jure, by a Blow on the Back fell into such a Proftration of Appetite, that Hie took httlc Sullcnance,

F % buc

2ii ^refervattonof AniinalsyScc. Book IV

by their notable Inftind in laying up Food beforehand againlt the approaching Winter {dddd). O^ this many entertaining Examples may be given 5 particularly we may, at the proper Seafon, observe not only the little Treaftfres and Holes well-flocked with timely Proviiions, but large Fields (^^^^) here and there throughout befpread with considerable

but some Drops with a Feather, from Chriflmas 1667. for thirteen Months, and flept but httle too all the Time. See Dr. Sampfcni Account thereof in Ephem. Germ. T. 3. Obf. 173.

To this we may add the Cafe of S. Chilton, of Tinjhury, near Bath, who in the Years 1693, 1696, and 97, flept di- "vers Weeks together. And although he would fometimes, in a very odd manner, take Sultenance, yet would lie*a long Time without any, or with very little, and all without any couliderable Decay* See Phil. Tranf. N°. 304.

(dddd) They are admirable Inftinds which the Stent de 'Beanplan relates of his own Knowledge, of the Httle Animals called Bohaques in Ukraine. They make Burroughs like Rabbets, ai7d in Odober flnu themfelvei up, and do not come out

Again till April. Theyfpend all the Winter under Ground^

eating what they laid up in Stiwmer. those that are laz.y

among them, they lay on their Backs, then lay a great handful of dry Herbage upon their Bodies, &C. then others drag those JDrones to the Mouths of thc.r Burroughs, and so those Creatures serve injiead of Barrows, &c. / have often seen thstn fra£Iife this, and have had the Curiofity to observe them whole

Days together. Their Holes are parted like Chambers ; some

serve for Store-houses, others for Burying- Places, &c. Their Government is nothing inferior to that of Bees, &c They never go abroad without pojiing a Centincl upon some high Ground, to give notice to the others whilfl they are feeding. As foon as the Centinel fees any Body, it Jiands upon his Hind- Legs and Tvhijiles. Beauplau'^f description of Ukraine, in Vol.1, of the Colledion of Voyages, c/c

A hke instance of the Northern Qalli^Sylveftres , see ia Chap. 13. Note {g).

As for the Scriptural instance of the Ant, see hereafter BookVWl.Chap.'^. Note^fd).

(eeee) I have in Autumn, not without pleasure observed, not only the great Sagacity and Diligence of Swine, in hunting out the Stores of the Field-Mice ; but the wonderful Precaution alfo of those little Animals, in hiding their Food beforehand

Chap. XI. The Concltifioft. 113

rablc Numbers of the Fruits of the nciglibouiing Trees, hiid carefully up in the Earth, and covered fafc, by the provident little Animals inii.ibiting thereabouts. And not without Plcafurc have I fccn and admired the Sagacity of Ather Animals, hunting out those fubterraneous Fruits, and pillaging, the Treafures of thole little provident Creatures.

And now from this bare tranllcnc View of this Branch of the Great Creator's Providence and Go' vcrment, relating to the Food of his Creatures, wc can conclude no less, than that ilnce this grand Atfair hath such manifell Strokes of admirable and wife Management, that since this is dcmonllratcd throughout all Ages and Places, that therefore ic is God's Handy-Work. For how is Jt pofllblethat so vast a World of Animals ihould be fupported, such a great Variety equally and well fupplicd with proper F'ood, in every Place fit for Habitation, without an efpccial Supcrintendency and Management, equal to, at Icait, that of the moll: prudcnc Steward and Houlholder? How {liould the Creatures be able to 'hn^S out their Food when laid up in fecret Places? And how iliould ihcy be able to gather even a great deal of the common Food, and at last to macerate and digelt it, without peculiar Organs adapted to the Service? And what Icfsthan an infinitely Wife God could form such a Set of curious Organs, as wc find every Species endowed with, for this very Ufe? Organs fb artificially made, so exquifitely fitted up, that the more ihidly wo furvey thepi, the more accurately we view them

forehand against Winter. In the Time of Acorns falling, 1 have, by means of the Hogs, difcovcrci, that ihc Mu« had, all over the ncit^hbouring Fields, treal'ured up lingle Acorn, in little Holes they had fcratchcd, and in whivh ihcy had carefully covered up the Acorn. Thcle tic Hj^. would, pay aficr D.^y, \\\\n: out by their Smell.

(^V^rt

2-14 Of Animals Cloath'ing. Book IV.

(even the meanefl of them with our blell GlafTes) the less Fault we find in them, and the more we admire them: Whereas the bed polifhed, and nio(t exquiiite Works, made by human Art, appear through our Glafit-s, 'as i*ude and bungling, deformed and rnonftrousj and yet we admn-e them, and call'them Works of Art and reason. And lalily, What less than Rational and Wife could endow irrational Animals with various Inftin6i:s, equivalent, in then- fpccial Vv^ay, to reason it self? Infomuch that fomefiom thence have absolutely concluded, that those Creatures had some Glimmerings of reason. Buiir is manifeltly Inftinft, not reason they a6t by, because we find no varying, but that every Species doth naturally purfue at all Times the same Methods and Way, without any Tutorage or Learning: Whereas A£?^/(?;^, without Inftrudion, would often vary, and do that by many Methods, which InfiinH doth by one alone. But of this more hereafter.

CHAP. XII.

Of the Cloathing of Animals.

HAving in the foregoing Chapter fomewhat largely taken a view of the Infinite Creator's wisdom and goodness towards his Creatures, in ordering their Food, I shall be more brief in this Chapter, in my View of their Cloathing {a); ano-

{a') Concerning the C/tf«/^/»^o/ Animals, Arifiotle oUervcs, That fiich A}7imals have Hair as go on Feet and are viviparous ; and that such are covered tvith a Shell, as go on Feet, and are oviparous, hist. Anim. 1. 3. c. 10.

Chap. XII. Of Animals Cloathhig. nether ncceffiiry Appendage of Life, and in which wc have plain Tokens of the Creator's Art, manilelled in these two Pavticiilavs j the SniLihlencJs of uinimah Cloathhig to their Place and Occaftons j and the Garniture and Beauty thereof.

I. The Cloathing of Animals is fiiitcd to tlicir Place of Abode, and Occalions there j a inanifcll Ad of Dciign and Skill. For if there was a Pofllbility, that Animals could have been accoutred any other Way, than by God that made them, it mull needs have come to pass, that their Cloathmg would have been at all Adventures, or all made the same Mode and Way, or Tome of it, at lealf, inconvenient and unfuitablc. But on the contrary , we find all is curious and complcar, nothing too jDUch, nothing too little, nothing bungling, no- , thing but what will bear the Scrutiny of the most txquifite Artillj yea, and so far out-do his belt Skill, rhat his moil exquifitc Imitations, even of the meanell Hair, Feather, Scale, oi* Shell, will be ;iound only as so many ugly, ill-made Blunders and Botches, when llriftly brought to the Tell of good Glalics. But we shall find an Example remarkable enough in the prcfent Cafe, if we only compare the bell of Cloathing which Man makes for hinifclf, with that given by the Creator for the Covering of the irrational Creatures. Of which it may be laid, as our Sa'viour doth of the Flowers of the Field, Alat. vi. ip. That even Solomon^ .in all his Glory, ivas not arrayed like one of theje.

But let us come to Particulars, and conliderthc Suitablenefs of the difi'crent Method the Creator hath taken in the Cloathing of Man, and of the irrational Animals. This Pliny {b) pathetically laments,

{h) Cu]us [Hominis] causa ii/htur cttnfia alia genuijft Natura, ma^n.i v Jivd vierccdt luntra tAtita ft* wnftfra : t$t

P 4 . »"»

21 6 Of Animals Cloathing. Book IV.

ments, and says, // is hard to judge^ whether Nature hath been a kinder Parent^ or more cruel Step- Mother to Man. For, says he, Of all Creatures^ he alone is covered with other'' s Riches^ whereas Nature hath given various Cloathing to other Animals, Shells^ Hides, Prickles, Shag, Brtjlles, Hair, Down, §uills. Scales, Fleeces ; and Trees Jhe hath fenced with a Bark or two againji the Injuries of Cold and Heat. Only poor naked Man, says he, is in the Day of his Birth caji into the wide fV^orld, to immediate crying and /(fualling i and none of all Creatures befides, so foon to Tears in the very beginning of their Life.

But here we have a manifell Demonftration of the Care and wisdom of God towards his Creatures j that such should come into the World with their Bodies ready furnifhed and accommodated , who had neither reason nor Forecaft to contrive, nor Parts adapted to the Artifices and Workman- Ihip of Cloathing j but for Man, he being endowed with the tranfcending Faculty of reason, and thereby made able to help himself, by having

7ion fit fans Jifiimare, Parens melior homini, an trifiior Never ca fuer'tt. Ante omnia unum Animantium cunSlorum alienis velar opihits : ceteris varie tegumenta tributt, tefias, cortices, coria, fpinas, villos, fetas, pilos, plumam, pennas, [qua- }»as, I'ellera. Truncos etiam arborefqtie cortice, interdum gefnino, a frigoribus, c?* calore tutata eji. Hommem tarniim nudum, zsy in nuda. humo, natali die ahjicit ad vagitus Jlatim c?* floratum, nuUumque tot animalium aliud ad lacrymas, O' ht^s protin'M vitA principio. Plin. Nat. hist. 1/7. Prooein.

Let Seneca anfwcr this Complaint of Pliny, although perhaps what he faith might be more properly noted in another Place : Gjuifquis es iniquus Aftimator fortis fjumam, , cogita Cfuanta nobis tribuerit Parens nofler, quanta yalentiora anim^- lia fub jugum miferimus, quanta velociora ajfequamur, quam nihil fit mortale non fub j£Ih nofiro pofitum. Tot virtutes atcepimus, tot artes, animum denique cui nihil non eodem quo intendit momenta pervium efi, Sidertbus velociorem, &c. Senec. de Benef. 1. 2. c. 29.

Thougl^ts

Chap. XII. Of Animals Cloathing. 117

Thoughts to contrive*, and withnl Hands to efFefr, and fufficienc Materials (<r) afforded him from ihc Skins and Fleeces of Animals, and from various Trees and Plants ; Man, I say, having all this Provifion made for him, therefore the Creator

hath

(c) Mirantur pluritni quomoiio tute, cr /jnt vivant homines in horrcndis frigorilus plagt Septentrionalis ; hancque levetn qut" ftionem ultra 30 annos audieram in Italia, prsfei tim ab A^thicpihus, CT" Indis, qmhus onerofus videtur vijiitns fub Zona tcrrida. Gluibtu refpcfidetur, Gaiidct Indus multiplici pinmarum gencrt, magis forfan pro teguwento, quam necejfttate :

rurftti Scytha vtilofo lejlttu Ita Jub pclo ylr^ico adversur

flfperriwoi hyemes opportnna rttnedia faciliter adminijlrat

[Natura], Ligna videlictt in maxima, copia, cr levijfimo ptetio, C/ demum Pedes diverforum antmaliurfi, tam fylvejirium quam dowejiicoriim. Then he gives a Catalogue ot them, and I'aith, Sj^tarum omnium experti peUifices ita tngeniose noverunt mixturas cumponere, ut ptilchcrrimum decorem oflendat varietcK, cj" calldtffunum [omentum adjuni'ta mollities. Ol. Mag. Hifl. 1. 6. c. zo.

To this Guard ag.iinft the Cold, namely, of fire and Cloathing; I hope the Reader will excufe me, if I take this Opportunity of addmg some other Dcfenl'atives Nature, (or rather the gre^t Author of Nature,) hath aflbrded thcfe northern Regions: Such are their high Mountains, abounding, as Ol. Magntii faith, through all Parts; alfo their numerous Woods, which befides their Fire, do, with the Mountains, serve as excellent Screens against the Cold, piercing Air and Winds. Their prodigious Quantities of Minerals, and Metals, alfo afford Heat, and w.Trm Vapours, Mi)2er& fcptentrionaitum regiontim fatis mult£, vjagn^, diverfd, ar opulenti funt, faith the same curious, and (for his Time,) learned Archbi- (hop, /. 6. c. I. and in other Places. And for the Warmth they afford, the Volcano's of ihofe Parts are an Evidence; as are alfo their terrible Thunder and Lightning, which are obferv'd to be tlic most fevere and mifchievous in their metalline Mountains, in which large Herds of Cattle are fometimcs delhoy'd; the Rocks fp rent and fliatter"d, that new Veins of Silver are thereby discover'd ; and a troublefome Kind ot Quinfie is produc'd in their Throats, by the ftench, and poiibnous Nature of the fulphureous Vapours, which they diffolve, by drinking warm Beer and Butter together, as Qlatfs tells us in the same Book, Cha^. ii.

To all which Defenf.uives, I fliali, in the last Place, add,

the warm Vapours of their Lakes, (^fomc of which arc prodi-

■" gioufly

ai8 Of Animals Cloathtng. Book I\/'.

hath wifely made him naked, and left him to fhift for himself, being so well able to help himself.

And a notable A6t this is of the wisdom of God, not only as the more fetting forth his Care and Kindnefs to them that most needed his Help, the helplefs irrational Animals, and in his not overdoing his Work 5 but alfo as it is moil agreeable to the Nature and State of Man (^), both on natural and political Accounts. That Man should cioath himself is most agreeable to his Nature, particularly

gioufly large, of 130 Italian Miles in Length, and not much less in Breadth;) alfo of their Rivers, especially the Vapours which arife from the Sea. Of which Guard against fevere Cold, we have lately had a convincing Proof in the great Trofi, in 1708, wherein, when England, Germany, France, Denmark; yea, the more foutherly Regions of Italy, Switzerland, and other Parts suffer'd feverely, Ireland and Scotland felt very little of it, hardly more than in other Winters ; of the Particulars of which, having given an Account m the Phil. Tranf. K°. 314. I ftiall thither refer the Reader. But it seems this is what doth ordinarily befal those northern Parts; particularly the Ijlands of Orkney, of which the learned Dr. Wallace gives this Account : Here the Winters are generally more fuhjeii to Rain than Snow ; nor doth the Froji and SnatV continue so long here, as in other Parts of Scotland ; bitt the Wind in the mean Time will often blow very boijleroufy ; and it Rains fometimes, not by Drops, but by Spouts of Water, as if whole Clouds fell down at once. In the Tear 1680, in the Month of June, after great Thunder, there fell Flakes of Ice mar a Foot thick. Wall. Account of Ork. Chap. i. p. 4. From which lail PafTage I observe; That although in those Parts, the atmosphere near the Earth be warm, it is exceffively cold above; so as to freeze some of those Spouts of Water in their Defcent, into such great, and almost incredible Mafias of Hail. And whence can this Warmth proceed, byt from the Earth, or Sea, emitting Heat sufficient to ftave off the Cold above? Confult Book II. Chap. 5. Note (c).

{d) Sictit enim ft innata fibi [i. e. Homini] aliqua haberet arma, ilia ei fola femper adejfent, it a ^ Ji art em aliquam Natt*ra fortitus eJJ'et,, reliquas fan} non haberet. ffjj^ia vero ei meliui erat omnibtn armis, omnibufque artibus uti, neutrum eorum Or naturfi ipfi propterea datum est. Galen, de Uf. Part. L I. c. 4.

(among

Chap. XH. Of Animals Cloath'tng. 219

(among other Things,) as being most Hilutarv, and mod fuitable to his Affairs. I'or by this Means, Man can adapt hi* Cloathing to all Scalons, to all Climates, to this, or to any Biilineli. He can hereby keep himself fwcct and clean, fence off many Injuriesi but above all, by tliis Method oF Cloathing, with the natural Texture of his Skin adapted to it, it is that grand Means of Hcaltli, namely, infenjlble Perfftration [e) is pcrform'd, at lead greatly promoted, without which an human Body would be foon over- run with Difeafe.

In the next Place, there are good political reasons for Man's cloathing himself^ inafmuch as his Jndulby is hereby cmploy'd in the Exerciks of his Art and Ingenuity j Ins Diligence and Care arc exerted in keeping himself iweer, cleanly, and neat J many Callings and Ways of JJfe arifc from thence, and, (to name no more,) the Ranks and Degrees of Men are hereby in some Mcallire rcndcr'd viiibic to others, in the fevcral Nations of the Earth.

Thus it is manifcilly best for Man that he should cloath himself.

(c) Concerning infenftble Perfpirat'ion, Samper im chferves. That it much exceeds all the Scnfible put together. De star. Med. Aph. 4. That as much is evacu.ited by infenjible Perfpirat'ion in one Day, as is by Stool in fourteen Days. Particularly, thar, in a Night's Time, about fixiccn Ounces is "commonly lent out by Urine, tour Ounces by Stool; but ^- bovc forty Ounces by infevftble Per/pimtion, A;hor. 59, 60. That if a Man eats and drinks 8 /. m a Day, 5 /. of ic is fpeni in mfenftlle Perfpiration, §. i. Aph. 6. And as lo ilic Time?,

he (aith, Jb afjUtupto cibo 5 horis I / circiter pcrfpira'uilis

exhalare folet, a ja iul nam 3 /. circiter ; u iia ad 16am lix felibram, Aph. 50.

And as to the wonderful Benefits of infoifibU Pirfpimtion, they are abundantly denionflrated by the same learned Tcrfon, ubi fupra ; as alio by Borelli in his fecund Part, De Mot. Anttnd. Prop. 168. who laith, NeceJJ'aria ejl in^enfiiilu TrarfpfratiOf u( vitA Animnlis conftryctttr.

Put

l^o Of Animals Cloathing. Book IV.

But for the poor fhifdefs Irrationals, it is a prodigious A^ of the great Creator's Indulgence, that they are all ready jfurnifhed with such Cloathing, as IS proper to their Place and business (/)» Some covered with Hair (^), some with Feathers

(/) Animant'tHm verb quanta varietas est? ^anta ad earn rstn v'fi, ut tn fuo qusque genere permaneant ? ffluarum alia cori'ti te^A [^nt, ali& vill'ti veftitA, alU [pints h'trjut& : plumd aiietf, altm fquama. videmui obdndien, altM ejfe cornibm armatccff aliiti habere ejfugta pennarum. Cic. de Nat. Deor. 1. 2.

c. 47-.

ig) From Malpight% curious observations of the Hairy I ihall note three Things, r. Their Strufture is fiHulous, or mbular; which hath long been a Doubt among the curious. lift-ilofnm [effe PilumJ demonftrant Itiftratio fdorum a cauda

f^ collo Equorum, &c. prAcipue fetarum Apri, qu-t patentitrem ex fiftulis compofitionem exhibent. est autem diftm Apri

phis Cjlindrictitn eorptts quafi diaphanum fifiularum aggere

conftatuntt C?' fpeciem columns ft.riat& pr& fc fcrt. Componente$ ftftuls. in gjrum fituat& in apice patentiora redduntur ; nam hiaas pilus in gemincts dividitur partes, o" componentes minima fifiul£ liberiores reddits. mamifefiantur, ita ut enumerari

pojfunt; kcti autem io, zj" ultra numeravi. • Expofit& fiftn- Ia • " ' tubulof& funt, cj;' frequent tbtis tunicls tranfverfaliter fitteatis, velnti valvulis pollent. F.t qucniam Spinx, in Erinaceii prdcipui, &c. nil aiiud funt, quam dun ^^ rigidi pili, ideo^ &c. And then he defcribes the Hedgehogs Spines, in which those Tubes manifeftly appear ; together, with medullary Valves and Cells ; not inelegant, which he hath figur'd iii Tak i6. at the End of his Works.

That which this fagacious, and not enough to be comr mended Obferver, took notice of in the Structure of Hair, and its Parity to the Spines; I have my self obferv'd in some measure to be true, in the Hair of Cats, Rats, Mice, and divers other Animals; which look very prettily when view'd with a good Microfcope. The Hair of a Moufe, (the most transparent of any 1 have view'd,) seems to be one fuigle transparent Tube, with a Pith made up of a fibrous Subftance, running in dark Lines; in some Hairs tranverfly, in other? Ipirally, as in Tig. 14, ij. 16, 17. these darker medullary- Parts, or Lines, I have obferv'd, are no other than small Fibres convolved round, and lying clofer together than in other- Farts of the Hair. They run from the Bottom, to the Tor

Chap. XII. Of Animals Qloathing. iii

thcrs {h)^ some with Scales, some with Shells (/), fomc only Skin, and some with firm and llout Armature; all nicely accommodated to the Element in which the Creature liveth, and its occalions there {k). To ^ladrupeds Hair is a commodious Cloathing4 which, together with the apt Texture of their Skin, fitttth them for all Weathers, to lie on the Ground, and to do the (3fhccs of Manj and the thick and warm Furs and Fleeces of others, arc not only a good Dcfenl'ative againll the Cold and Wetj but alfo a foit Bed to rcpofe themfelvcs in •, and to many of them, a comfortable covering, to nurse and chcrifh their tender Young.

And as Hair to Quadrupeds j so Feathers arc as commodious a Drcls to such as fly in the Air, to Birds, and some Infeftsj not only a good Guard againll Wet and Cold, and a comfortable Covcrof the Hair; and I imagine, fcrve to the gentle Evacuation oi:' some Humour out ot the Body; perhaps the Hair fcrves as well for the infenfible Perj'piration of hairy Animals, as to fence againll Cold and Wet. In f/^. 14, 16, is reprefcnted the Hair of a Moufe, as it appears through a small Magnifier; -and in Fig. 15, 17, as it appears when vicw'd wiih a larger Magnifier.

Upon another Review, I imagine. That although in Tig. 14, 15, the dark Paits of ihc Pith leem to be traiifveric ; that they, as well as in the two other Figures, ruu round in a fciewlike Fa(li:on.

(^h) See Book Vir. Chap. r. Note {d) (e).

(i) See Cf;aj> XIV. Note (c).

(t) It is a Sign some wife Artift was a Contriver of the Cioathing of Animals ; not only as their Cloathing varies, as their Way of Living doth ; but alfo bccaufe every Part of their Bodies is furnifli'd with proper fuitable Cloathing. Thus divers Animals, that have their Bodies covcr'd for the moll Part with fliort, fmooth Hair; have fomc Parts left naked, where Hair would be an Annoyance: And fomc Parts befct with long Hair; as the Mane and Tail; And some with ftifF, strong Briftles ; as about the nose : And fometimes within the Nblirils; tx) guard off, or g'vc warning of AuDoyances.

izz Of Animals Cloath'mg. Book IV.

injT to such as hatch and brood their Young; but alio moll commodious for their Flight. To which purpofc they are nicely and neatly placed every where on the Body, to give them an eafie PafTage through the Air (/), and to aflifl in the wafting their Body through that thin Medium. For which Service, how curious is their Texture for Lightrscfs, and withal for Strength ? Hollow and thin for Lightncfs, but withal, context and firm for Strength, And where 'tis necessary they should be filled, what a light and fbong medullary Subftance is it they are filled with? By which curious Contrivances, even the very heaviell Parts made for Strength, are fofar from being a Load to the Body, that they rather afiill in making it light and buoyant, and capacitate it for Flight. But for the Vanes, the lighteft part of the Feather, how curiously are they wrought v.'ith capillary Filaments, neatly interwoven together (?;?), whereby they are not only light, but alio fufiiciently close and flrong, to keep the Body warm, and guard it againil the Injuries of Weather, and withal, to irapower the Wings, like so many Sails, to make strong Impulfes upon the Air in their Flight («). Thus curious, thus artifi-

(/} The Feathers being placed from the Head towards the Tail, in close and neat Order, and withal preened and dreffed by the Contents of the Oil-Bag, afford as eafie a PaflTage through the Air, as a Boat new cleaned and drefTed finds in its passage through the Waters. Whereas, were the Feathers placed the contrary, or any other way (as they would have been, had they been placed by Chance, or without Art) they ■would then have gathered Air, and been a great Encumbrance to the PafTagc of the Body through the Air. See Book VII. chap. I. Kote {h).

(w) In BookVW, Chap. I. Note (e). there is a particular Account of the mechanism of their Vanes, from ioiTie nice Microfcopical Obfcrvaticns, and therefore I (ball take no farther Nonce of it here.

(k) Vid. Borell.de Mot. Animal, Prop. i8i. Vol. I.

cial

Chap.Xir. Of Animals CJoathhig, nj

cial, thus commodious is the Cloathing of Beads and Birds: Conccrninq which, more in proper Place. And no Icfs might I flicw that of Reptiles and Fiflics {p) to be, if it was convenient to enlarge upon this Branch of the Creator's Works. How well adapted are the Annuli of some Reptiles, and the Contortions o'i the Skin of others, not only to fence the Body fufHciently againrt outward Injuries j but to enable them to creep, to perforate the Earth f/>), and in a word, to perform all the Oflices of their Reptile State, much better than any other Tegument of the Body would do ? And the same might he said of the Covering of the Inhabitants of the Waters, particularly the Shells of some, which arc a strong Guard to the tender Body that is within, and confiHent enough with their flower Motion j and the Scales and Skins of others, affording them an eafie and fwift Paflage through the Waters. But

{o) See ^ook IX.

(p) For a Sample of this Branch of my Survey , let us chule the Tegument of Earth-lVortns,, which we (hall find compleatiy adapted to their Way of Life and Motion, being made in the mod compleat Mann^ir pollililc for tercbraiing the Eaith, and creepmg where their Occalions lead them. For their Body is made throughout of small Rings, and ihcle Kings have a curious yt^paratus of muscles, enabling thui'e Creatures with great Strength to dilate, extend, or contract their Annuity and whole Body ; those jinnuit alio are each of them armed with Imall, flift', fiiarp heatds, or Prickles ^ which they can open, to lay hold on, or fliut up close to their Body : And lalUy, Under the Skin there lies a Jliviy J/uce, that they emit, as Occafion is , at certain Pcrturations between the jinnuit^ to lubricate the Body, and facilitate their Pallage into the Earth. By all which Means they are enabled with great Speed, Hafe, and Safety, to iluuft and wedge ihemfelves into .the Earth; which they could not do, had their Bodies been covered with Hair, Feathers, Scales, or such like Cloathing of the other Creatures. Sec more concerning this AiumaJ» heok iX. Chap. i. Kutc (<»).

It

X14 Of Animals Qloathing. Book IV.

it may be sufficient to give only a Hint of thefc Things, which more properly belong to another Place.

Thus hath the indulgent Creator furnifh'd the whole animal World with convenient, fuitable Cloathing.

II. Let us in the next Place take a short View of the Garniture {q)^ and Beauty thereof. And here we shall thus far, at least, defcry it to be beautiful; that it is compleat and workman-like. Even the Cloathing of the most fordid Animals, those that are the lead: beautified with Colours, or rather whose Cloathing may regrate the Eye (r) j yet when we come llri»3:ly to view them, and ferioufly consider the nice mechanism of one Part, the admirable Texture of another, and the exad Symmetry of the Whole ; we difcern such Strokes of inimitable Skill, such incomparable Curiofity, that we may say with Solomon^ Eccl. iii. 1 1. [God] hath made every 'Thing beautiful in his Time.

But for a farther Demonftration, of the fupercminent Dexterity of his almighty Hand, he hath been pleas'd, as it were on purpose, to give furprizing Beauties to divers Kinds of Animals. Wha& radiant Colours are many of them, particularly some Birds and Infc6ts (/), bedeck'd with ! What

a prodi-

(5) Arijiotle, in his hist. An'im. I 3. c. iz. names several Rivers, that by being drank of, change the Colour of the Hair.

(r) For an Example; Let us taice the Cloathing of the Tortolfe and Viper; because, by an incurious View, it rather regrateth, than pleafeth the Eye : But yet, by an accurate Survey, we fiad the Shells of the Former, and the Scales of the Latter, to be a curious Piece of mechanism, neatly made; and so compleatly, and well put, and tack'd together, as to exceed any human Compofures: Of the Latter see more in Book IX. Chap. l. Note (c).

(y") It would be cndlefs to enter into the Particulars of the beautiful Birds and Infers of our European Parts; but especially those inhabiting the Countries between the Tropicks,

which

Chap. XII. Of Animals Cloatlj'ing. iiC

a prodigious Combinarion is Lhcrc often of thcfc, yea, how nice an Air frequently of meaner Colours (/), as to captivate the Eye of all Beholders, and exceed the Dexterity of the moll exquifitc Pencil to copy ?

And now, when we thus find a whole World of Animals, cloiithed in the wilcll Manner, the molt luitable to the hllement in which they live , the Place in which they relide, and their State and Occafions there j when those that are able to fliift for themselves, are left to their own I^ifcrction and Diligence, but the Helplefs well accoutcr'd and provided forj when such incomparable Strokes of Art and Workmanfliip appear in all, and such inimitable Glories and Beauties in the Cloathing of others j who can, without the greatcll Obltinacy and Prejudice, deny this to be QO D\ Handy-work ? The gaudy, or even the meaneil; Apparel which Man providcth for himself, we readily enough own to be the Contrivance, the Work of Man: And shall \vc deny the Cloathing of all the Animal World bcfides (which infinitely furpafleth all the Robes of earthly Majelly, shall we, dare we, deny that) to be the Work of any Thing Ids than of an infinite, intelligent Being, whose Art and Power are equal to such glorious Work !

which are observed as much to exceed our Birds in their Colours, as ours do theirs in their Singing.

{t) The Wr-jntck, at a distance, is a Bird of mean Colour; neither are indeed its Colours radiant, or beautiful, iingly considered: But when it is in the Hand we see its light and darker Colours so curioully mixed together, as to give the Bird a furprt/.ing Beauty. The lame li alio obfcrvable in many Infeds, pariiciilarly of the PhaUna klhd.

CHAP.

226 Book IV.

CHAP. XIII.

Of the houses and Habitation of Animals.

HAving in the last Chapter, as briefly as well I could, furvcyed the Cloathing of Animals, I shall in this take a View of x.hc\x houses ^ Nefts , their Cells and Habitations \ another Thing no less necessary to their Well-being than the last; and in which the Great Creator hath likewife fignalized his Care and Skill, by giving Animals an architec-: tonick Faculty, to build themselves convenient Pla-r CCS of Retirement, in which to repofe and fecure themselves, and to nurse up their Young.

And here, as before, we may consider the cafe of Man, and that of the irrational Animals. Man having (as I said) the Gift of Rcafon and understanding, is able to fhift for himself, to contrive and build, as his pleasure leads him, and his Abilities will admit of. From the meaneft Huts and Cottages, he can eredl himself ftately Buildings, bedeck them with exquifite Arts of Archite6lure, Painting, and other Garniture, ennoble them, and render them delightful with pleafant Gardens, Fountains, Avenues, and what not ? For Man therefore the Creator hath abundantly provided in this refpe6t, by giving him an Ability to help himself. And a wii'e Proviiion this is, inalmuch as it is an excellent Exercife of the Wit, the Ingenuity, the Induftry and Care of Man.

But since Ingenuity, without Materials, would be fruitlefs, the Materials therefore which the Creator hath provided the World with, for this very Service of Building, deftrves our Notice. The

great

Chap. XIII. Of Animals Habitations. 217

great Varieties of Trees {a)^ Earth, Stones and Plants, anfwcring every Occafion and Purpole of Man for this Ufc, in all Ages and Places all the World over, is a great A6t ot the Crcatoi's Goodncfsj as manifcding, that since he has left Man to fliift for himfclf, it Ihould not be without fiifTicicnt Help to enable him to do so, if he would but make ufe of them, and the Scnfe and reason which God hath given him.

Thus futlicient Provifion is made for the Habitation of j^lan.

hw'X no Icfs iTiall we find is made for the rest of the Creatures) who although they want the Power of reason to vary their Methods, and cannot add to, or diminifli from, or any way make Improvements upon their natural Way j yet we find that natural Inftin<Sl, which the Creator's infinite Underitanding hath imprinted in them, to be abundantly fufficicnt, nay, in all Probability, the very best or only Method they can take, or that can be invented for the refpeflivc Ufc and purpose of each peculiar Species of Animals {h). If some Creatures make their Nells in houses, some in Trees,

(4) "Dant utile lignum

Navi^iis Pinos, domihus Cedrofqitc, CiipreJJhfque : time radios trivere Rotis, hinc tympana plaujiris AgricoU, cr pandas ratiius pofuere carinas. Viminibus Salices fnecund.i, frondil'us Ulmi ; At Myrtus validis hajliiibti/s, (j- bona bello Cornus ; Itynos Taxi tcrquentur in arcus. Nee Tilu leves, ant torno rafile Buxutn, Hon formam accibiunt, /eiroque cavantur acuta : Necnon cr torrentum undam levis innatat Alnus MtfJ'a Pado : necnon cr apes examiyja' condunt Corticibufque eavis, -vitioftque llicis alveo.

Virg. Georg. 1. 1. carm. 441.

(b) See Chap 15. and BMVIII. Chap. 6.

Q_ z feme

21 8 Of Animals Hah it at ions . Book IV.

some in Shaubs, some in the Earth [c] ^ some in Stone, some in the Waters, some here, and some there, or have none at all j yet we find, that that Place, that Method of Nidification doth abundantly anfvver the Creatures Ufe and Occafions. They can there fufficiently and well repofe, and fecure thcmfclves, lay, and breed up their Young. We are lb far from ditcovering any Inconvenience in any of their rcfpe^tive Ways, from perceiving any Lofs befal the Species, any decay, any perifhing of their Young j that in all Probability , on the

(c) Many of the Vefp/t-Ichneumonss are remarkable enough for rheir Nidification and Frovilion tor their Young. those thac build in harth (who commonly have golden and black Rings round their Alvij having lined the little Cells, they have perforated, lay therein their Eggs, and then carry into them Maggots troni the Leaves of Trees, and feal them up close and neatly. And another Ichneumon, more of the Vefpa than Mujca- Ichneumon Kind (having a little Sting in its Tail, of a black Colour) gave me the pleasure, one Summer, of feeing it build its Nelt in a little Hole in my Study-Window. This Cell was coated about with an odoriferous, refinous Gum, collected, I suppose, from some Fir-Trees near; after which it laid two Eggs (1 think the Number was) and then carried in divers Maggots, some bigger than it self. these it very fagacioufly fealed close up into the Nell, leaving them there doubtlefs, partly toaffift the Incubation ; andefpecially for Food to the future Young when hatched.

Of this Artifice of these Ichneumons, Arijiotle himself takes Notice, (but 1 believe he was scarce aware of the Egg's fealed up with the Spiders). 'o< 5 £ip^«? l;i;vcjC/Vov6; xstXiifi^oi, Sec. As to the Vefpcie, called Ichneumones, ( less than others) the") kill Spiders, and carry them into their Holes, and having fealed them ftp with Dirt, they therein hatch, and produce those of the same Kind. hist. Anim. 1. 5. c. 2.0.

To what hath been said about these Ichneumon Wafps. I (hall add one observation more, concerning the providential Structure of their Mouth in every ot their Tribes, viz.. their jaws are not only very (Irong, but nicely fized, curved and placed for gnawing and Icraping those compleat little Holes they perforate in Earth, Wood, yea in Stone it self.

con-

Chap. XIII. Of Animals Habitations. 129

contrary, in that particular Way they better thrive, arc more iecurc, and better able toVhif't for, and hcIpthemrcU'cs. IT, Tor Inllancc, Tome Hcalts make to thcmrclves no Habitation, but lie abroad in the open Air, and there produce their ^'oung j in this Ciife we find there is no need it ihould be mhcrwifc, by Realbn they are either taken care of by Man(</), or in no Danger, as other Creatures, from Abroad. If others repolite their Young in Holes {e) and Dens, and iecqre thcmlclvc^ alio therein, it is, becaufc such Guard, luch Security is wanting, their Lives being fought either by the Hollility of Man, or to fatisfie the Appetite of ra* pacious Creatures (/). If among Birds, some build their Neits close, fonic open, some with this, some wiih another Material, some in houses, lome in Trees, some on the Ground (^), some on Rocks gnd Crags on high (of which God himlcl^ hath

given

\(i) Tully having spoken of the Care of some Animals towards their Young, by wliich tliey are nurfed and brought up, faith, Accedit e(iam ad nonnulloruvi anitnuniiutn, o~ carum rtrum qntis terra gi^nit, conjtrvatlonetn, CT" Jaluiem, hc-r minum etiam foUrtia ijr ddigentia. S.im rnults. u- pecttdes, c^ Jiirfes funt, qui. fnif procarationt homhium JaLvi ejje non pofj'u»(. t'ic. de Nat. Dcor. I. i. c. 51.

(e) Prov. XXX. 26, ihf Coaies ate but a feeble Folk, yet wak$ they their Houfci in the Rocks.

V/) See T^oie [l\

(/) It IS a notable Inftin(ft which Ol. Migaui toils of tlic C/flli Sylve/frts in his Noithem Country , to lecurc thenifelvcs againll ilie Cold and btorms of the Winter. Cuvi viirs infiar collinm terr<c fuptrficiem uhique cooferinnt, ratuofnut arhorum diutitti deprtviunt O" condoijant, certos fru.Hm Vein-'

U arhoris : — tn forma lonp Piperis vorant, c g-utiutit i/t'

digcftos; idque tantik aviditate , ac quantit/ite , ttt rejdttum gmtur t<fto corpotf majui appareat. Dnnde partitts aimmihui fefe inter mediot uiviutv coUes immervjtnf, p <i'ertim in j-i*. Tebt. Martio, quando nixes ut turbiries, typhonts, vei tempef^ f<^t*s iF^viJftmx < n.'ibibus dtJcenJuni. C*(*"'ju( cvopntx fimr^

O 1 -t-faUCKlf

13 o Of Animals Habit at'tons. Book IV.

given an instance in tlie Eagle ^ Job xxxix. 27, 28.) And so among the Infeft and Reptile Kinds, if some repofite their Eggs or Young in the Earth, some in Wood, some in Stone, some on one Kind of Plant, some on another, some in warm and dry Places, some in the Water and moill: Places, and some in their own Bodies only, asfliall be shewn in proper Place 3 in all these Cafes it is in all Probability, the best or only Method the Animal can take for the Hatching and Pioduftion of its Young, for their Supplies, Safety, or some other main Pomt of their Being or Well-being. This is manifest enough in many Cafes, and therefore probable in all. It is manifeiV that such Animals, for instance, as breed in the Waters (as not only Fifh, but divers Infers, and other Land- Animals do) that their Young cannot be hatched, fed, or nurfed up in any other Element. It is manifest alfo, that lnfe6ls, which lay their Eggs on this, and that, and the other agreeable Tree, or Plant, or in Flefli, l^c. that it is by that Means their Young are fed and nurfed up. And it is little to be doubted alfo, but that these Matrixes may much conduce to the Maturation and Production of the Young. And so in all other the like Cafes of Nidification, of Heat or Cold, We: or Dry, Expofed or Open, in all Probability this is the best Method for the Animal's Good, most falutary and agreeable to its Nature, most for its Fecundity, and the Continuance and Increafe of its Species; to which every Species of Animals is naturally prompt and inclined.

Thus admirable is the natural Sagacity and Incertis hebdomad:; ciho in gutture colleSlo, egejlo, o" refumpto 'vi- -vunt, Venatornm canibus non produjitur. — ^— — ^iod ft prdfentiunt nivem tmmmere majorem, pr&di6to fruflH, iterum de^ "jorato, al'iud doinictlium captant, in eoque jnanent ufque ad finsm Alariii) &c. Ol. Mag. Hifl. 1. 19, c. 33.

^i'-ft

Chap. XIII. Of Anmals Habitat lOits. 131

flindt (^) of the irrational Animals in the Convenience and Method of their Habitations. And no less is it in the Fabrick of them. Their architc6tonick Skill, exerted in the Curiofity and Dexterity of their Works, and exceeding the Skill of Maa to imitate i this, 1 lay, deleivcs as much or more Admiration and praise, than that of the most: cxquilite Artift among Men. For with what inimitable Arc (/) do chcfe poor untaught Creatures lay a parcel of rude and ugly Sticks and Straws, Mo!s and Dirt together, and form them into commodious Nells ? With what Curiolity do they line them within,, wind and place every Hair, Feather, or Lock of Wool, to guard the tender* Bodies of themselves and their Young , and to keep them warm .'* And with what Art and Craft do many of them thatch over, and coat their Ncfls without, to dodge and deceive the Eye of Spectators, as well as to guard and fence againlt the Injuries of Weather {k) ? With what prodigious Subtiky do

fomc

{h^ It is a very odd Story (which I rather mention for the Reader's Divcrfion, than for its Truth) which Dr. LuA. lie Beaufort relates, Vir side digvus nnrravit mihi, quod chm Jemei, antmi gratia, nidum avicult linno obturafjet, feque occultAfJ'ety CHpidus ziidendi, quid in tali occafinne prxftaret ; ilia chm frti/lra fipiits tentajfet rojlro ilL-id auferre, ca/iis admodum tmpatiens, abiit, O' pofi ali]Uod temporis fpatium reverfa est, roftro gerens planlulam, qui obiuranjcnto applicata, J>aU' lb pofl, iiiud velttti telum eripuir tan fa vi, ut difperfa impetu herbula, ac occafionem ipft, ab avicula, ejus virtutcm difcendi^ pnripuerit. Colmop. divina, Sedt. 5. C'. i. Had he told us what the Plant was, we might hav<; given better Credit to this Story.

it) Of the Subtiity of Birds in Nidification, see Pim. .\'.tt. Hi ft. /.TO. c. 33.

(/.') Among many instances that might be given of this Subtiity of birds, and other Creatures, that of the b::^ faded Titmonfe deferves'observation, who with great Art build? her Nell with MolTcs, Hair, and the Webs of Spiders, call

Q 4 om

^32^ Of Animals Habitations. Book IV.

some foreign Birds (/). not only plat and weave the fibrous Parts of Vegetables together, and cqrioufly tunnel them,and commodiouOy form them intoNefts, butalfo artificially fufpend them on the tender Twigs of Trees, to keep them out pf the reach of rapacious Animals ?

And so for InfeUs^ thpfe little, weak, those tender Creatures > yet, what admirable Artills are they in this business of Nidification ! With what great Diligence doth the little Bee gather its Combs from various Trees {m) and Flowers, the Wafp^

out from them when they take their Flight see Book VIII. chap. 4. Uote [t). with which the other Materials are ftrongly tied together. Having neatly built, and covered her Nell wich these Materials without; (he thatcheth it on the top with the Mufcus arboreus ramofm , or such like broad , whitidi Mofs, to keep out Rain, and to dodge the Speftator's Eye; and withiri fine lineth it with a great Numbex of soft Feathers ; so many, that I cont'cfs I could not but admire how so small a Room could hold them, especially that they could be laid so close and handfomely together, to aftord i'ufficient Room for a Bird with so long a Tail, and so numerous an IfTue as this Bird commonly hath, which Mr. Ray faith (Synopf. Method. Av'tum, p. 74. ) Ova inter omnes aviculas numerofijfima ponit. See more of the Ncft of this Bird, from Aldrovdnd. in WtUugh. Orn'tth. p. 243.

(/) The Ncft of the G«/r<» tangeima, the Uierus minor y and the Jupujuba, or whatever other Name the American Hang-Nefis may be called by, are of this Kind. Of which see Willughbys Ornith. Lib. 2. Chap. 5, Sect, iz, 13. Alfo Dr. Grew's Mufeum Reg. Soc. Part r. SeCi. 4. Cha^. 4." Thcfc Nefts I have divers Times seen, particularly in great Perfecftion in our R. S. Repofitory, and in the noble and well-furniftied Mufeum of my often-commended Friend Sir Hans Sloanei and at the same Time I could not but admire at thq neat mechanism of them, and the Sagacity of the Bird, in Jianging them on the Twigs of Trees, to feci^re their Eggs and Young from the Apes.

(m) I mention Tree?, because I have seen Beej gather thq Gurn of Fir-Trees, v/hich at the same Time gave me thcj pleasure of feeing their way of loading their Thighs therewith ;' performed with great Art and Dexterity.

ftPffl

Chap. XIII. Of Animals Habitat ions. 133

from folid (») Timber ! And with what prodigious geometrical Subtilty do thole little Animals work their deep hexagonal Cells, the only proper Figure that the bell Mathematician could chufc for such a Combination of Houfcs {0) ! With what Accuracy do other Infcfts perforate the Earth (/)), AVood, yea, Stone it self {q)\ For which Service, the compleat Apparatus of their Mouths (;), and Feet (/,!, defervcs particular Obfcrvation, as hath

been

(n) Wafps, at their first Coming, may be obferv'd to frequent PoHi, Boards, and other \Vood that is dry and found; but never any that is rotten. Thele they may be heard to fcrape and gnaw ; and what they so gnaw off, they heap clofc together between their Chin and Kore-Legs, until they have gotten enough for a Ikirden, which they then carry away m their Mouths, to make their Cells wuh.

{0) Circular Cells would have been tlic most capacious ; but this would by no Means have been a convenient Figure, by reason much of the Room would have been taken up by Vacancies between the Circles; therefore it was necellary to make Vit of some of the rcdilincar Figures. Among which only three could be of Ufe; of which Pttpptu Alexandrin. thus difcourfeth ; Cum igitur tres figure, funt, <^ui. per feipfat locum circa idem punflum confiftentem replere pojjunty Triangulum fcil. Oiuadratum CT" Hexa^onum, Apes tliam (jus. ex pluribits anguiii conjlat fapieneer delegerunt, utpote fujpicantes tarn pint mellis capire qnum utramvis reliqnarum. At Apes cfuidem lUud tantum quod ipjis utile ejl cognojcunt, \\i. Hexagontim ^^ladrato c Trtangiilo ejje majtn c />/'« Meliis capere pojje, ntmirum^ 4quaU materia in conflruiltoncm uniufcttjufque confumpti. Kot vera qui plus fapientid quam Apes hal^tre profitemur, aliquid itiam magis tnfigne invcftigabtmui. Collect Math. 1. 5.

(/>) Sec before Note (c).

\q) See Chap. 11. Hoie {x).

(r) See Chap. 11. Note [•^).

(f) Among many Examples, the Legs and Feet of the Mole-Cricket, (Gryllotalpa,) arc very remarkable. The Forcl^egs are very brawny and f^rong; and the Feet armed each vith four flat Itrong Claws, together with a fmali Lamina, with two larger Claws, and a third with two little Claws : Which Lamina is joyntcd to the Bottom of the loot, to be extended, to make the Foot wider, or withdrawn within the f'opt, Xhcfc Feet arc placed to fcratch fomcwhat lidcways,

■■-■■■■ ,,

234 Of Animals Habitations. Book IV.

been, and will be hereafter obferv'd. And further yet ; With what Care and Neatnef? do mod of those little fagacious Animals line those their houses within, and feal them up, and fence them without {t) ! slow artificially will others fold up the Leaves of Trees and Plants {u)-, others house themselves in Sticks and Straws 5 others glue light and floating Bodies together (w), and by that Artifice make themselves floating houses in the Waters,

as well as downward, after the Manner of Moles Feet; and they are very Uke them alfo in Figure. '""

Somewhat of this Nature, Swammerdam observes of the Worms of the Ephemeron. To this purpose, [to dig their Cells,] the wife Creator hath furnifl/d them, (faith he,) 'j:'}th fit Members. For, befides that their two Fore^Legs are formed fomewhat like those of the ordinary Moles, or GryllotaJpa ; he hath alfo fur 7iifhd them with tzvo toothy Cheeks, fomewhat like the sheers of Lobfters, -which fer-ve them ni\)re readily to bore the Clay. SwammerdamV Eplaem. Vit. Publifli'd by Dr. Tyfon. Chap. 3.- . (/) See the before-cited Note (c).

(«) They are f6r the raofl: Part, some of the VhaUnA- Tribe, which inhabit the tunnelled, convolved Leaves, that we meet with on Vegetables in the Spring and Summer. And it is a fomewhat wonderful Artifice, how so small and weak a Creature, as one of those jiewly-hatch'd Maggots, (for doubtlefs it is they, not the Parent-Animal, because flbe emits no Web, nor hath any teftrine Art,) can be able to convolve the ftubborn Leaf, and then bind it in that neat round Form, with the Thread or Web it weaves from its own Body; with which it commonly lines the convolved Leaf, and' flops up the two Ends, to prevent its own falling out; and Earwigs, and .other noxious Animals getting in.

{w) The several Sortt of Phryganea, or Cadetvs, in their Nympha, or Maggot-state, thus house themselves; one Sort in Straws, call'd from thence Straw-Worms; others in two or more Sticks, laid parallel to one another, creeping at the Bottom of Bi ooks ; others with a small Bundle of Pieces of Rufties, Duck-weed, Sticks, ^c. glu'd together, where- with they float on the Top, and can row themselves therein about the Waters, with the Help of their Feet : Both these are call'd Cob-bait. Divers other Sorts there are, . which the Reader may see a Summary of, from Mr. Willuzhby, in Rail Mztboi.

Chap. XIII. Of Anmals Habit ntiovs. i 3 5tcis, to iranfport thcmfclvcs at Plcafurc after their Food, or other ncccflary Occafions of Life! ^nd for a close, let us take the fcriptural Inllance oF the Spider^ Prov. xxx. 28. whicb I's one of the four little Things, which, f. 24. /Jgitr ^ly?, is exceeding Pnfe : The Spider tahth hold ivith her llnnds^ a'l^d is in Kings Palaces {x). I will not difpiftc the Truth of our EugHjJj Tranflation of this Text, but fuppoling the Animal mention'd to. be that which is meant} it is manifell, that the Art of that Species of Creatures, in fpinning their various Webs, and the Furniture then- Bodies afford to tliat Purpofc, are an excellent Inftin(51-, and Provifion of Nature, fctting forth its glorious Author.

And

Infe6l. p. II. together with a good, though very brief description of the PapilionaceotM Fly, that comes from the Cod" bait Cadew. It is a notable archite<ftonick Faculty, wluch ail the Variety of thele Animals have, to gather such Bodies as are titteft for their Purpolc, and then to glue them together; fomc to be heavier than Water, that the Animal may remain at the Bottom, where its Food is; (for which I'lirpofe they life Stones, together with Sticks, Rufives, ^c.) and I'ome to be lighter than Water, to float on the Top, and gather its Food from thence. these little houses look coarlc and fliew no great Artifice outwardly ; but are well tunnelled, and made within with a hard tou-^h Pafte; into which the hinder Part of the Maggot is so fix'd, that it can draw us Cell after it any where, without Danger of leaving it behind; as alfo thruft its Body out, to reach what it wanteth; or withdraw it into its Cell, to guard it againlt Harms.

{x) Having mention'd the Spider, 1 ftialJ take this Occafion, (although it be out of the Way,) to give an InlUnce of the Poyfon of foine of them. Scali^er Exerc. rS^i. rttarei. That in Gafcony, his Country, there are Spiders of that viruiency, that if a Man treads upon thim, to critfii them, if.fir Poyfon wilt pass through the very Holes of his shoe. Boy). Subtil, of Effluv. c. 4.

Mr. Leeivenhoek put a Trog and a Spider together into a Clafs, and having made the Spider Ib'ng tlie Frrg divcr?^ Turcs, the Frog dy'd in about an Hour's Timr. Phil. 'Iran/'. No. i~z.

In the lame Tranfaclion, is a curious Account ol the Manlier how Spiders lay, and gu^rd ihcir tgg<=, viz.. they cnvt

then

t$6 Of j^nimals Habitations. Book IV.

And now from this short and tranfient View of the archite6lonick Faculty of Animals, especially the Irrationals j we may cafily perceive some fuperiour and wife Being was certainly concern'd in their Creation or Original. For, how is it pollible that an irrational Creature Ihould, with ordinary and coarfe, or indeed any Materials, be ever a» ble to perform such Works, as exceed even the Iipitation of a rational Creature ? How could the Bodies of many of them, (particularly the last mention'dj) be furniflVd with architedive Materials?

them not out of the hindermoft Part of tjie Body, but under the upper Part of her Belly, near the Hind- Legs, ^c. Alio there is an Account of the Parts from which they emit their Webs, and divers other Things worth Obfcrvation, with Cuts illuftrating the Whole.

But in Phil. Jranf. N^, li. Dr. Nath. 'Fairfax, from S. Redi, and his own observations, thinks spiders not venomous; several Perfons, as well as Birds, fwallowing them without Hurt: Which I my self have known in a Pcrfon of Learning, who was advis'd to take them medicinally at first, an4 would at any Time fwallow them, affirming them to be sweet, and well tailed: And not only innocuous, but they arc very falutiferous too, in some of the most: Itubborn Difeafcs, if the pleafant Story in Moujfet be true; of a rich London Matron, cur'd of a defperate T'^mpany, by a certain Debauchee, that hearing of her Cafe, and that Ihe was given over by the Docftors, went to her, pretending to be a Phyiician, and confidently affirming he would cure her; which (lie being willing to believe, agrees with him for so muclv Money, one half to be paid down, the other upon Cure. Upon which he gives her a Spider, promifing her Cure in three Days. Uppn which, (not doubting but that he had poifon'd her, an4 fearing he might be call'd to account for it,) he get^ out of 'f'own as faft as he could. But instead of being poiion'd, she foon recover'd. After some Months, the Quack gets privately to Town, when he thought the Buitle might be over; and enquiring how his Patient did, was inform'd of her Cure ; and thereupon vifiting her, and making an Excufe for his Abfence, he receiv'd his Pay with great Applaufe and Thanks. Mouff. Infe6i. I. 2. c. 15.

Having said so much of Spiders, I might here add theif Flight : But of this, see Book Vlll. Chap. 4, j^ou [e).

Chap. XIII. Of Animals Habitations. 13 7

How could they ever discover them to be in their Bodies, or know what Ufe to make of them ? Wc mull therefore ncccfllirily conclude. That the Irrationals either have Rcafon and Judgment, not only Glimmerings thereof, but feme of its fupcriour A6ls, as wisdom and Forc(ight, Difcretion, Art and Care; or elfe, that they arc only pallivc in the Cafe, and aft by Inftinft, or by the Rcafon of Tome fuperiour Being imprinted in their Nature, or feme Way or other, (be it how it will,) congenial with them. That they are Rational, or excel Man in Art and wisdom, none furely will be so foolifh as to say : And therefore we mull conclude. That those excellent Ends they purfue, and that admirable Art they exert, is none of their own, but owing to that infinitely wife and excellent Being, of whom it may be said, with reference to the irrational, as well as rational Creatures, as it is, PiGV. ii. 6. The Lord giveth wisdom i out of bis Mouth conieth Knoivledgc and Under ft anding.

CHAP.

13S Book IV.

CHAP. XIV.

Of Anmals Self-Trefervation,

HAving thus consider'd the Food, Cloathing, and houses of Animals 5 let us in this Chapter take a Glance of another excellent Provifion, the wife Creator hath made for the Good of the animal World J and that is, the Methods which all Animals naturally take for their Self-Preferi)ation ^n^ Safety. And 'here it is remarkable, (as in the Cafes before,) that Man, who is endow'd with reason, is born without Armature, and is deflitute of many Powers, which irrational Creatures have in a much higher Degree than he, by reason he can make himself Arms to defend himself, can contrive Methods for his own Guard and Safety, can many "Ways annoy his Enemy, and flave off the Harms of noxious Creatures.

But for others, w^ho are deflitute of this fupereminent Faculty > they are some Way or other provided with sufficient Guard (a), proportionate to their Place of Abode, the Dangers they are like to incur there (b) ; and in a Word, to their greatest

Occa-

(a) Calient m hoc cunSla animaUa, fciuntqiie non fua modo commoda, 'verhm cr hofiium adver/a; norunt fua tela, norunt cccafiones, partefque dijfidenthim itnbelles. In ventre mollis eji tenuifque cutis CrocodiLo : ideoque fe, ut territi, mergcnt Delpbini, fubeuntefquc alvum illd fecant fpina. Plin. Nat. Hill. ]. 8. c. IS-

(h) Omnibus upturn cfi Corpus Anim& moribus V facultati^ bus : Equo fortibus ungulis c/ juba est ornatum (etenim velox er fuperbum Cy' gencrofum est animal.) Lcont autem, utpote antmofo cr feroci, dentibus ct* unguilus validum, ha autem CT*

Tat&P C2' ^pro ; illi enim Cornua, huic exerti Dentes. 1

Cervo autem O" Lepori (timida- enim funt antmalia) velox cor-

Chap. XIV. OfAn'mmls Sclf-Trefcrvat'ton. 139

Occafions, and Need of Security. Accordingly, lomc arc kiftlcicntly guarded againll all common Dangers, by their natural Cloathing, by their Arr mature of Shells, or inch like liard, and impregnable Covering of their Body {c). Others dclUtuic of this Guard, are aimed, some with Horns (^), fomc with sharp Qiulls and Prickles (Oj some with

Claws,

pUy fed inerme. Tim/dU enim velocitas, arrna auda'cthtu con-

"veniebaiit Homint autem (fapiens cnitn ejl ) tnanui

dedir, infirunjetitum ad cmna aites nccejjarium, pact non minus quarn bello idoneum. Non tgitur indigtiu Ccmu ftht innate cum ff/eliora Cornibiu arma tnatjibut, quar.dcciinque volet, pojjit accipere : Etenim Fnjis CT" Hajla majoia junt Arma,

cr ad liicidtndum pfLmptiora Neque Ccmu, neqiie VngU'

Id quicquam nifi comtnus a^ere pojjhnt ; Hcmimim vera arma €• miniti juxta ac comlnhs a^unt : telum quidcm o" fagitta magn quam cornua. • Non tgitur ejl nudus, neque intrmis. ■

fed tpff efl Thorax ferretis, quandocunque libet, omuibus Cents

difficUiM fauciatu orgarmm. • Nee Ihorax foit'.m fed cr

Dotntu, e>' Alurus, cr lurris, bcc. Galcn. dc Uf. Part. ]. I. c. z.

(c) Shells defexve a Tlace in this Survey, upon tlie Account of their great Variety; the curious and uncouth Make of some, and the beautiful Colouis, and pretty Omamenis of others ; hut it would be cndlcis to dcfcend to Particulars. Omitting others, I shall therefore only take Notice oi the Tortoifejhell, by reason a great deal of Dexterity appears, even in the Simplicity of that Animal's Skeleton. For, befides that the Shell is a Ituut Guard to the Body, and attords a fate Retreat to the Head, Legs and Tail, which it withdraws within the Shell upon any Danger; befides this, I say, the Shell fupplicth the Place ot all the Bones in the Body, except those of the extreme Parts, the Head and Neck, and the four Legs and Tail. So that at firlt Sight, it is fomcwhat lurprizing to see a complcat skeleton confiOing of lo small a Number of Bones, and tiiey abundantly lufKcient for the Creature's Ule.

(d) Dente timentur jipri : defendunt ccrnua Tauross Imbelles Dam& quid fi'ifi pnda fumus ?

NIartiaJ. 1. 13. Epigr. 94.

(e) The Hedghog being an helplefs, ilow, and patient Animal, is accordingly guarded with Prickles, and a Power of rolling it self up ia them. CUtvn tcrtbrari ftbi pedes, v difcindi i

140 Of Anmats Self-TrefervaUon. fiooklV.

Claws, fortie with Stings (/) j some can fhift and change their Colours i£) j some can make their Efcape by the Help of their Wings, and others by

the

cind't vlfcera patient ijfim): ferehat, omnes cultri iflut fine gem'itit plufquam Spartana. nobiittate concoquens. Borrichius in Blaf. de Echino. Pannictilum camofum amplexabatur Mufculus pAne circularis, admirandA fabrics, lac'mias fucu ad pedes, cauda7n, caput, vane exporrigens, cujus mmifierio Echinus fe ad arbitrium in orbem contrahir. Adt. Dan. in Blafio.

Ifle itc^t digitos tcjludine pnngat acuta,

Cortice depofito mollis Echinus erit. Mart. 1. 13. Epig. 86.

(y) The Sting of a Wafp, or Bee, &c. is so pretty a Piece of Work, that it is worth taking Notice of, so far as I have not found others to have spoken of it. Others have obferv'd the Sting to be an hollow Tube, with a Bag of (harp penetrating Juices, (its Poifon,) joined to the End of it, within the Body of the Wafp, which is, in Stinging, inje(fled into the Flefh through the Tube. But there are befides this, two small, fliarp, bearded Spears, lying within this Tube or Sting, as in a Sheath. In a Wafp's Sting, I counted eight Beards on the Side of each Spear, fomewhat hke the Beards of Fifli-hooks. these Spears in the Sting, or Sheath, lie one with its Point a little before that of the other; as is reprefented in lig. 21. to be ready, (I conceive,) to be first darted into the Flefli; which being once fix'd, by Means of its foremoft Beard, the other then itrikes in too, and so they alternately pierce deeper and deeper, their Beards taking more and more hold in the Flcfli; after which the Sheath or Sling follows, to convey the Poifon into the Wound. Which, that it may pierce the Better, it is drawn into a Point, with a small Slit a httlc below that Pomt, for the two Spears to come out at. By Means of this pretty mechanism in the Sting, it is, that the Sting when out of the Body, and parted from it, is able to pierce and Iting us : And by Means of the Beards being lodged deep in the I'leQi, it comes to pass that Bees leave their Stings behind them, when they are difturbed before they have Time to withdraw their Spears into their Scabbard. In Tig. II. is repreit-nted the two Spears as they lie in the Sting. In Fig. 2Z. the two Spears are reprefented" when fqueez'd out of the Sting, or the Scabbard ; in which Latter, lig. A c b, is the Sling, c d, and b e, the two bearded Spears thruft out.

{g) The Camelion 15 fufficiently fam'd on this Account. Beiides which, Phny tells us of a IJeaft as big as an Ox, called the Tarandus, that when he pleafeth, allumes the Colour

of

Chap. XIV. Of Animals Self'Trefervat ton. 141

the Swiftncfs of their Feet j fomc can {cxttx\ thcm- Iclves by diving in the Waters, others by tinging and dilordering the Waters (/j), can make their Elcape J and fomc can guard their Bodies, even in the very Flames, by the Ejeftion of the Juice of their Bodies (/') > and some by their accurate Smell, Sight or Hearing, can forefee Dangers {k) ; othcrs

of an Afsf and Colorem omnium fruticum, arborum, floritmt locorumque reddit, in quihus latet meluens, ideoque raro cafitur. Plin. 1. 8. c. 34.

How true this is, there may be some Rcafon to doubt ; but if any Truth be in the Story, it may be from the Animal's chuling foch Company, or Places, as are agreeable to its Colour: As I have I'een in divers Caterpillars, and other Infers, who I believe were not able to change their Colour, from one Colour to another; yet I have constantly obferv'd, do fix themselves to such Things as are of the same Colour ; by which Means they dodge the Spedator's Eye. Thus the Caterpillar that feeds on Elder, I have more than once seen, so cunningly adhering to the small Branches of the same Colour, that it might be eafily milhken for a small Stick, even by a careful View. So a large green Caterpillar, that feeds on Buckthorn, and divers others. To which I may add the prodigious Sagacity of the Ichneumon Flies, that make the Kermes, (for of that Tribe all the Kermes I ever faw was;,) how artificially they not only inclofe tiieir Eggs within that gummy Skin, or Shell ; but alfo so well humour the Colour of the Wood they adhere to, by various Streaks and Colours, that it is not eafie to dillinguifli them from the Wood it self.

{h) Contra metum V vim, fuii fe armU qutque defendit, CornibM Tauri, Apri dentibtt^, morfu, Leones, alix fuga fe, alii, occultationc tutantur : atramenti efjufione Sepi&, torpors Torpedines. MhUa etiam infet'lantes odoru intolerabili facdirate depellunt. Cic. de Nat Deor. 1. z. c. 50.

(i) A Knight cail'd Corvini at Rome, cafl a Salamander into the Fire, which prefently fwell'd, and then vomited Store of thick flimy Matter, which put out the Coals; to which the Salamander prefently retir'd, putting them out again in the same Manner, as foon as they re- kindled, and by this Means fav'd it self from the Force of the Fire for the Space of two Hours: After which it liv'd nine Months. Vid. Philof. Tranfa£l. No. 21. in Lo-wth. Alridg. Vol. x. p. 816.

((•) Plin'j gives an instance in each. L. 10, c. 69. AquiU

R (lariiit

z/^z Ofj^ntmalsSelf'TreJervafion. Book IV,

thers by their natural Craft, can prevent or efcape them (/) 5 others by their Uncouth Noife {m) } by the horrid Arpe6t, and ugly Gefticulations of their Body (») ; and some even by the Power of their Excrements, and their Stink (o), can annoy

claritts cernunt [quam homines;] Vultures fagac'ths odorantur : iiqujdlus audmni Talp£ abrut& terras tarn denfo atque furdo naturs. elemento.

(l) The DouhVmg of the /f<z/e, .before (he goes to Form, thereby to dodge and deceive the Dogs, although a vulgar observation, is a notable Inftinft for an Animal, less fam'd for Cunning than the Fox, and some others.

(«?) It is natural for many Quadrupeds, Birds and Serpents, not only to put on a torvous angry Afped, when in Danger ; but alfo to fnarl, hifs, or by some other Noife deter their Adverfary.

(n) The lynx, or Wryneck, although a Bird of very beautiful Feathers, and consequently far enough off from being any way terrible; yet being in Danger, hath such odd Contortions of its Neck, and Motions of its Head, that 1 remember have fcar'd me, when I was a Boy, from taking their Nefts, or touching the Bird; daring no more to venture my Hand into their Holes, than if a Serpent had lodged in it,

(o) Bonaftis tuctur fe calcibus CT' fiercore, quod ab fe quatern'ls pajfihus [trium jugcrum longitudine. Pl'tn. Nat. Hifi. I. 8. f. 15,] cjaculatiir, quod fipc cotaburit adeo ut deglabrentur canes. Ray'^ Synopf. Quadr. p. 71.

Camtlus Peruv'ta7ws Clajna dklus nem'tnem offendit, fed miro admodum ingenio fe ab iliatd vindicat injuria, nimirum vomitu vel cibi, TJtl humoris in vexaniem retrorfum cum impetu ejaculate, ob protenfam colli longitudinem. Id. ib. p. 1 46.

Tzquiepail (Anglice Squnck Praef. and one that I faw they caird a Stonck,) Chm qicis earn infeflatur, fundit cum ventris crepitu halitum fcetidijftmum : quin ipfa tota teterrimum exha.- lat odorem, cr nrina ftercufqne est foztidiffimum, atque adeo peftilens, ut nihil fit reperire in noftro orbe, cui in hac re poffit comparari : quo Jit, ut in pcriculo conftituta, ttrinam Qp" fices ad 8 pluriumve paffiium intervallu?n ejiciat, hoc mode fe ab omnibus vindicans injuriis, ac veftes inficiens macuUs lutcis indelebihbus, O' mmquam fatis perfpirante odore : alias innoxium Animal edulcque, hac fold ratione herrendijfimum. Id. ib. p. l8z.

Si Ac'cipiter Ardeam in fublimi molcftat., fiercore immiJJ'o in ttnnas ejus, eas pittrefcere facit ■ ut} Solinus feribit de Bonafoy izc. Ita Q^ Lupus Hrin^am fpargit irt perfequentem: 01. Mag. hist. 1, 19. C.-14. ■ •

their

Clup. XIV. Of Animals Scif-Trefcrvation. 143

their Enemy, and fccuic tlicmfclvcs j and againil Tome (/)), the divine Providence it fclf hath provided a Guard.

By such Shifts and Means as thcfe, a faflicicnt Guard is minitlred to every Species of Animals, ia its proper refpc6live Place j abundantly cnougb ^a fccure the Species from Deltru6lion, and to keep up that Balance, which I have formerly {hew'd, is in the World among every, and all the Species oF Animals -, but yet not enough to fccure Individuals, ffom becoming a Prey to Man, or to other Creatures, as their Neccllitics of Life require. To which purpose, the natural Sagacity and Craft of the one iiitrapping (f), and captivating, being ia forne measure equivalent to that of the other in cvading, is as excellent a Means for the maintaining the one, as preferving the others and if well consider'd, argues the Contrivance of the infinitely wife Creator and Prcfcrver of the World.

(;>) Thus againfl the Crocodile, which can catch its Prey only before it, not on one Side. So \\^c Shark, of which take my often-commended Friend Sir Hans Sloane's Ob.'ervation : It hath this particular to it, with fomt others of its own Triht ; that the Mouth is in its under Part, so that it mu/i t/irn the Belly upwards to Prey, And was it not for that Time it is in turning, in which the purfu'd FiJJjes efcape, there zvould he nothing that could avoid it; for it is very quick in Swimmings and hath a va/I Strength, with the largeji Swallow of any FiJJjy and is very devouring. Sloane'; I'oya^e to Jamaica, p. i],

iq) Sec chap. II. Note (>/;}.

R X CHAP.

2.44 Book IV.

CHAP. XV.

Of the Generation of Animals.

THere remains now only one Thing more of the ten Things in common to Animals, and thac is what relates to their Generation (^), and Confervation

{a) Spontaneous Getjerat'ton, is a Dodrine so generally exploded, that I shall not undertake the Difproof of it. It is so evident, that all Animals, yea. Vegetables too, owe their Produftion to Parent- Animals and Vegetables ; that I have often admir'd at the Sloath and Prejudices of the ancient Philofophers, in so eafily taking upon Truft the Arlfiotelian, or rather, iht JEg'yptian Dodrine oi' equivocal Generation ; that when they faw Flies, Frogs and Lice, for instance, to be Mak and Female, and accordingly to ingender, lay Eggs, c:rc. they could ever imagine any of these Creatures should be fpontanecufly produc'd, especially in so romantick a Manner, as in the Clouds ; as they particularly thought Frogs were, and that they dropp'd down in Showers of Rain. For an answer to this Cafe of Frogs, 1 shall refer to a Relation of my own, which my late most ingenious, and learned Friend, the great Mr. Ray, requefted of me, and was pleas'd to publifli in his lall Edition of his wisdom of God manifejfed, &c. p. 365.

Bnt some will yet afTert the Raining of Frogs; among which the curious Dr. Plot is fomewhat of this Opinion ; telling us of Frogs found on the Leads of the Lord Ajlons Gatelioufe, at Ttxal in Siafordjhire, which he thinks by some such Means came there; as alfo on the Bowling-Green, frequently after a Shower of Rain. Plot's Hifi. Staff, c. i. §. 47.

But we may take a Judgment of this, and an Hundred such Hke Reports, to be met with in considerable Authors, from other the like Reports that have been better inquir'd into. In a Scarcity in Silefta, a mighty Rumour was fpread of its raining Millet-Seed; but the Matter being inquir'd into, 'twas found to be only the SeeJs of the Ivy-leaved Speedivell, or small Menbit, growing in the Place in great Plenty. Eph. Germ. An. 3. Obf. 40. So in the Archipelago, it was thought Afties were rain'd. Ships being cover'd therewith at a hundred Leagues Diltance; but in all ProbabiJity, it was from an Eruption of Vefuvius, that then happen'd. About Warminfter m WtltSt 'twas reported it rain'd wheat ;hm a curious Obferver

Chap. XV. The Generatio?ty dec. 145*

ferver, Mr. Cole, found it to be only Ivy-Btrrie:, blown thither in a considerable Quantity by a Tcmpeft. In the Year i6()6, at Crarftead near Wrotham in Kent, a rallurc- Field was over-fprcad with little young Whittn^i^ fuppos'd to fall from the ('-louds, in a Temped of Thunder and Rain; but doubtlefs they were brought thither with Waters from the Sea by the Tcmpcft. Sec the before-commended Mr. Lowth. Abridg. I'hilof. Iranf^Vol. i. p. 143, 144.

Neither needcth it seem llrange, that jifl)ts, ivy-Berries, small Fi/}}es, or young Frogs, (which yet may have some othcr Conveyance,) should be thus tranl'ported by tempcJluous Winds, coniidering to what Diflance, and in what Quantities the Sea- Waters were carry 'd by the Great-Storw, Nov. z6. I-J03, of which an ingenious Friend lent me iheie Accounts from Lezves in Siiffex, viz. That a Phyfician travelling so en after the Storm, to Tlleliuift, twenty Miles from the 6ea, as h* rode along pluck'd fotnc Tops of Hedges, and cheiving them, found them Snlt : 'Ihat some Gr^Y^cs hanging on the Vines nt Lewes were so too. That Mr. WilliamTon Rnlor of Ripe, found the Tzvigs in his Garden Salt the Monday after the Storm ; and others obferv'd the same a Week after. That the Grafs of the Dozens alout Lewes, wa^ so Salt, that the Sheep zvcuU not feed till Hunger ccmpelfd them : And that the Miller of Berwick, (three Miles from the Sea,) attanpiing with his Man to fecure his Mill, ivere so wajh'd with FlaJJjes of Sea-Wafer, like the Breakings of Waves againfi thje Rocks, that they were altnofl ftrangled therezvith, and forced to give over their Attempt.

1 call'd this Doftrinc of equivocal Generation, an JEgypti/t» BoHrine; because probably It had iis Rife in A'.gypt, co falvc the Hyp.othclis, of the Produdtion of Men, aird other Animals, out ot the F.airh, by the Help of the Sun's Heat. To prove which, the A'.gyptians, (as Died. Sicul. faiih,) produce rhif <ihferxatirn. That about Thebes, when the Earth is moijtned by the Nile, by the Initnfe Heat of ike Sun, an ttmutntrable Number of Mice do spring out. Fjom whence he infers, That all Kinds of Animals, might as well at lirll come likcwifc out of the Earth. And from thcfe the learned Bifhop Stillingfleet thinks other Writers, as Ovid, Mela, Pliny, &c. have, without examining its Truth, taken up th€ same Hypcthefis. V. Stilltngfleet's Orig. Sacr. Part I. Book 1. Chap. r.

The beforc-coi^mended Dr. Harris, from the observations of Dr. Harvey, Sr. Malpighi, Dr. de Graaf, and Mr. Leeivenhoeck, infers three Things concerning Generation as liighly probable, i. 'Ihat Animals are cx Animalculo. i. 'ihat tie .Animalcules are originally in icmine Marium, & non in Fa'- minis. 3. That they can never come forward, or be formed inr to Animals of the refpeilive Kind, without the Ova in Foeminis. His Proofs and Illulbations, fc£ under the Word Gfr.eranon, m his Lfx, Techn. Vel. r.

K 3 C*) 4f

%4^ The Generation Book IV.

vation of their Species {b\ by that Means. It would not be feemly to advance far in this admi" table Work of God j neither ihall I at all in(ift upon that of Man for the same reason. And as for the Irrationals (0, I ihall confine my self to these five Matters.

I. Their natural Sagacity in <?hufing the fitteft Places to rcpofite their Eggs and Young.

II. The fitted Times and Seafons they make ufe of for their Generation.

III. The due and ftated Number of their Young.

IV. Their Diligence and earned Concern in their Breeding up.

V. Their Faculty of Feeding them, and their Art and Sagacity exerted therein.

I. The natural Sagacity of irrational Animals, in chufing the fitted Places to repofite their Eggs and Young. Of this I have given larger Hints already than I needed to have done, v^rhen I fpake of the Architecture (d) of Animals, intending then to have wholly pass'd by this business of Generation: I shall therefore now only fuperadd a few other Indances, the more to illudrate this Matter..

It hath been already diewn, and will hereafter {e) farther appear, that the Places in which the several Species of Animals lay up their Eggs, and

{b) ^t eerie Natura, fi fieri potu'tjfet, maxlrne optafj'et fuum eptficium tjfe itnmcrtals : quod chm per tnateriam nott lueret

(nam quod ■ ex came efi compofitum, incorruptilile eJJ'e non

fotefi) fubfidium quod potuit ipfi ad itntnortalitaiem est facricata, fapient'ts cujufdam urbis conditorh exemplo, &:c. Nam mirabilem quandam rationem invent: , quomodo in demortui animalis locum, novum aliud fufficiat. Galen, de Ufu Part. 1. 14-

C. i2. *

(c) Animantia Bruta Obfietricibus non indigent in edendo Partu, chm indita Natur& vi Umbilicus feipfum occlndat. Oi. Rudbeck in Blafii Anat. Felis.

(d) Chap. 13.

\e) Book Vlil. Chap. 6.

Young,

Chap. XV. of Animals. 147

Young, are the best for that Purpofej Waters (/) for onej Flerti for another j Holes in Wood (^), Earth, or Stone (/j), for others-, -and Ncfh for othcrs; and we shall find, that lo ardent is the Propenfity of all Animals, even of the mcancll Infe6ts, to get a fit Place for the Propagation of their Young } that, as will hereafter appear, there is scarce any Thing that efcapeth the Inquell o^i those little fubtile Creatures. But bcfidcs all this, there are two or three Things more obfervable, which plainly argue the Inflindl of fomc fupcrior rational Being. As,

I. The complcat and neat Order which many Creatures obfervc in laying up their Seed, or Eggs, in proper Rcpofitorics : Of which I shall speak in another Place (/).

(/) The Ephemeron^ as it is an unufual and fpccial instance of the Brevity of Life; so 1 take to be a wonderful Inlhnce of the fpecial Care and Providence of God, in the Coiilervation of the Species of that Animal. For, i. As an Animal, whose Life is determin'd in about five or fix Hours Time, {viz.. from about fix in the Evening, till about eleven a Clock at Night,) needs no l-ood; lb neitiier doih ihe hphemcron cat, after it is become a Fly. z. As to its Generation ; in those five Hours of its Life, it performs that, and all other, nccelfary Offices of Life: For in the beginning of its Life, it flieds its Coat ; and that being done, and the poor little Animal thereby render'd light and agile, it ipcnds the rell of its (hon Time in frifking over the Waters, and at the same 1 ime the Female droppeth her Egg on the Waters, and the Male his Sperm on tliem to impregnate them. these Eggs are fprcad about by the Waters ; defcend to the Bottom by their own Gravity ; and are hatch'd by she Warmtli of the Sun, into little Worms, which make themselves Cafes in the Ciay, and feed on the same without any Need of parental Care. ynd. Ephem. vita, tranflatcd by Dr. T'^son from Sxuammcrdatn. Scc alfo Book VIII. Chap. C. Note (r). •

(l) See Chap. 13. Knte (c), and Book VI IL Chap. 6.

{h) The Wortni in Chap. 11. Note [x), breed in the liolci they gnaw in Stone, as manifclt from their \i^.^i found therein.

(>) See Booh VIII. chap. 6. Njtc (q).

R A z. Thz^^ The GeneraUQu Book IV*.

2. The fuitable Apparatus in every Creature's Body, for the laying-up its Eggs, Seed, or Young, in their proper Place. It would be as endlefs as needlefs to name all Particulars, and therefore an Initance or two of the Infed-Tribe may serve for a Specimen in this Place, till I come to other Particulars. Thus Infeds, who have neither Feet adapted to fcratch, nor Nofes to dig, nor can make artificial Nefts to lay up their Young > yet what abundant Amends is there made them, in the Power they have either to extend the Abdomen (k), and

there-

(k) Many, if not most Flies, especially those of the Flejh- Fly-kind, have a Faculty of extending their Uropygia , and thereby arc enabled to thrull: their Eggs into convenient Holes, and Receptacles for their Young, in Flefti, and whatever elfc they Fly-blow. But none more remarkable than the horse-Fly, called by Pennius, in Monffct, (p. 6i. ) S>soA<«f©-, i. e. Curvicauda, and the Whame or BurreL-Fly, which is vexatious to horses in Summer, not by flinging them, but only by their bombylious Noife, or tickling them in (ticking their Nits, or Eggs on the Hair ; which they do in a very dexterous Manner, by thrufting out their Uropygia, bending them np, and by gentle, flight Touches, (licking the Eggs to the Hair of the Legs, Shoulders, and Necks, commonly of horses ; so that horses which go abroad, arid are feldom drefTed, are fomewhat difcoloured by the numerous Nits adhering to their Hair.

Having mentioned so much of the Generation of this InfetH:, although it be a little out of the Way, I hope I shall be excufed for taking Notice of the long-tailed Maggot , ■which is the Produfl of these Nits or Eggs, called by Dr. Plot, Eruca glabra, [or rather Eula Scabra, it Ihould be] caudata aqnatico-arborea, it being fourtd by him in the Water of an hollow Tree, but I have found it in Ditches, Saw-Pits, Holes of Water in the High-way , and such-like Places where the Waters are naoft dill and soul. This Maggot I mention, as being a fingular and remarkable Work of God, not so much for its bemg so utterly unlike as it is to its Parent £fe-like- Fly, as for the wife Provilion made for it by its long Tail ; which is so joynted at certain distances from the Body, as that it can be, /Withdrawn, or flieathed, one Part within another, to what^'Length the Maggot pleafetb, so as to enable it

to

Ghap.XV. of Animals. 149

thereby reach the commodious Places they could not otherwife come atj or cHe they have some aculeous Part or Inilrument to tercbrate, and make Way for their Eggs into the Root (/), Trunk [m\

Fruit

to readi the Bottom of very fhallow, or deeper Waters, as it hath Occafion, for the gathering of Food. At the end of this tapering is a Ramification of FibrilU , or small Hairs rcprefenting, when fpread, a Star; with the help of which, fpread out on the top of the Waters, it is enabled to hang making by that means a small Deprcflion or Concavity on the Surface of the Water. In the midll of this Star, 1 imagine the Maggot takes in Air, there being a Perforation, which with a Microfcope I could perceive to be open, an(J by the Star to be guarded against the Incurfion of the Water.

(I) The Excrefcences on the Root of Cabbages, Turneps^ and divers other Plants, have always a Maggot in them ; but what the Animal is that thus makes its way to the Root under Ground, whether Ichneumon, Phalsna, Scarab, or Scolofsndra, I could never difcovcr, being not able to bring them to any thing in Boxes.

(m) I prefume they are only of the Jchneumon-Fly-kind, that have their Generation in the Trunks of Vegetables. In Malpigh't de Galits, Fig. 6i. -is a good Cut of the gouty Excrefcences , or rather Tumours of the Briar-Stalk : From which proceeds a fin-i!! black Ichneuwon-Fly, with red Legs; black, fmooth jointed Antenns. ; pretty large Thorax ; and fliort, round Belly, of the Shape of an Heart. It Icapeth as a Flea. The Male, (as in other Infeds,) is leiTer than the Female, and very venereous, in fpite of Danger, getting upon the Female, wkom they beat and tickle with their Breeches and Horns, to excite them to a Coit.

Another Example of the Generation in the Trunks of Vegetables, shall be from the Papers of my often-commended Friend Mr. Ray, which are in my Hands, and that is an observation of the ingenious Dr. Nath. Wood .- ; have (said he) lately observed many Eggs in the common B.ujJ). 0'7e sort are little transparent tlggs, in Shape fomeivhat like a Pear, or Retort, lying within the ^hin, upon, or in the Mc'-iuil.«, jufl /;- gainjl a brovjnijlj Spot on the out-side of the liujh ; zvhich is ap^- parcntly the Crcatrix of the IVound made by the Fly, -vhtn flit puts her F.^ns there, Another Kind, u much longer, and nj>t ja transparent, of a long oval, or rather cyUndmal Jonn; fix,

tighi.

15'd^ The Generation Book IV.

Fruit («), Leaves (o), and the tender Buds of Vegetables (^), or some other such curious and fecurc Method they are never deftitute of. To which we may add,

5. The natural Poifon (^), (or what can I call it?) which many or most of the Creatures, last intended, have, to cause the Germination of such

eighty or more, lie commonly together, acrofs the Ru/h, parallel to each other, like the Teeth of a Comb, and are as long a* the Breadth 0/ the RuJJo. Letter from Kilkenny in Ireland, Apr. 2,8. 1697,

(») See BookVlW. Chap. 6. Note {d).

[p) I have in Chap. 13. f^ote («), and Book VIII. Chap. 6. '^ote (e), (/), taken Notice of the Nidilication and Generation of some Infers on the Leaves of Vegetables, and (hall therefore, for the IHuflration of this Place, chufe an uncommon Example out of the Scarab-kind (the Generation- of which Tribe hath not been as yet mentioned) and that is of a small Scarab bred in the very Tips of Elm- Leaves. Thei'e Leaves, in Summer, may be observed to be, many of them, dry and dead, as alfo turgid ; in which lieth a dirty, whitiftj, rough Maggot. From which proceeds a Beetle of the smallest Kind, of a light, IVeeJle Colour, that leapeth like a Grafhopper, although its Legs are but fliort. Its Eyes are blackifli, Elytra thin, and prettily furrowed, with many Concavities in them ; small club-headed Antenna, and a long Rojlrum like a Probofcis.

The same, or much like this, I have met with on Tips of Oaken and Holly-Leaves. How the Scarab lays its Eggs in the Leaf, whether by terebrating the Leaf, or whether the Maggot, when hatched, doth it, I could never, see. But with great Dexterity, it makes its Way between the up})er and under Membranes of the Leaf feeding upon the parenchymous Part thereof. Its Head is flenderer and (harper than most of Maggots, as if made on purpose for this Work ; but yet I have often wondered at their Artifice in so nicely feparating the Membranes of tKe Elm-Leaf, without breaking them, and endangering their own tumbling out of 'em, confidcring how thin and very tender the Skins of that Leaf (particularly) are.

(p) See Book VIII. Chap. 6. Note (z.).

(q) See BookVlll. Chap. 8. to Note (Jbh),^C.

Balls,

Chap. XV. of Ammals. 25-1

Balls, Cafes, and other Commodious Repofitorics, as are an admirable Lodgment to the Eggs and Young} that particularly aflifl: in the Incubation and Hatching the Young, and then afford them ftifficicnt Food and NourilTimcnt in all their Nfrti'.. pha-Statc^ in which they need Food; and arc afterwards commodious Houfcs and Beds for them in their yftirelia-State^ till they are able to break Prlfon, fly abroad, and fliift for themfelvcs. But thljj shall be taken Notkc of, when J come to treat of Infers .

• IF. As irrational Aniir..ils chufc the fitrcfl Place, so alfo the Httert Times and S^afons for rhcir Generation. Some indeed are indifferent to all Times, but others make ufc of peculiar Sc.ifons (r). those, for fndance, whofc Proviiions arc ready at all Scafons, or who are under the Tuition of Man, pro^' duce their Young without any great regard to Heqt or Cold, Wet or Dry, Summer or Winter. But others, whose Provilions are peculiar, and only to be met with at certain Seafons of the Year, or who, by their Migration and Change of Place, are tied up to certain Seafons ; thcfe (as if endowed with a natural Care and Forefight of what shall happen) do accordingly lay, hatch and nurse up their Young in the moll proper Seafons of all the Year for iheir Purpofej as in Spring, or Summer, the Times of Plenty of Provifions, the Times of Warmth for Incubation, and the moll proper Seafons to breed up their Young, till they arc able to lliift forthcmfelves , and can range about for Food , and fcek Places of Retreat and Safety, by flying long Flights as well as their Progenitors, and palling mto far

■srtiii,^ T ctwhctc-fiit c* tj; x.Tx^l'^t^-)) u-x.. Arill. H:it An. \. 5- c. 8. ut)J plura.

dillani

7ff% The (feneration Book IV.

diftant Regions, which (when others fail) afford those helplefs Creatures tlie Neceflaries of Life.

III. To the fpecial Seafons, I may add the peculiar Number of Young produced by the irrational Creatures. Of which I have already taken some Notice, when I fpake of the Balance of Animals {f). Now, if there was not a great deal more than Chance in this Matter, even a wife Government of the Creation, it could never happen that every Species of Animals should be tied up to a certain Rate and Proportion of its Increafej the inoft ufeful would not be the mod fruitful, and the most pernicious produce the feweft Young, as I have observed it commonly is. Neither would every Species produce such a certain Rote as it is only able to breed up : But all would be in a confufed, huddled State. Inllead of which, on the contrary, we iind every Thing in compleat Order j the Balance of Genera^ Species and Individuals always proportionate and even > the Balance of Sexes the famcj most Creatures tied up to their due Stint and Number of Young, without their own Power and Choice, and others (particularly of the winged (/) Kind) producing then* due Number at

(/) chap. lo.

(/) Mr. Ray alledges good Rcafons to cqnclnde, that al' though Birds have not an exad Power of numbering, yet, that they have of dillingiiidiing many from few, and knowing when they come near to a certain Number; and that they have it in their Power to lay many or few Eggs. All \vhich he manifefteth from Hens, and other domeftick Fowls, laying many more Eggs when they are withdrawn, than when not. Which holds in wild as well as domeftick Birds, as ap' pears from Dr. Lijier's Experiment in withdrawing a S-a^aliow's Eggs, wiich by that Means laid nineteen Eggs fucceffively before (he gave over. v. Ray'i Wifdorn of God, &c. P-I37.

their

Chap. XV. of Ammnls. ^S3

their Choice and Pleafurc j some hrgc Numbers , but not more than they can cover, feed and foftcr i others fewer, but as many as they can well nurfc and breed up. Which minds me,

IV. Of the Diligence and earncft Concern which irrational Animals have of thcProduftion and Breeding up their Young. And here I have already taken Notice of their Sro^y)}', or natural Affeftion, and with what Zeal they feed and defend their Young. To which may be added thefc two Things.

I . The wonderful Inftind of Incubation. It is utterly impolTible, that ever unthinking, untaught Animals should take to that only Method of hatching their Young, was it not implanted in their Nature by the infinitely wife Creator. But so ardent is their Defire, so unwearied is their Patience when they are ingaged in that business, that they will abide their Nefts for several Weeks, deny themselves the Pleafures, and even the Ncccflarics of Life} some of them even ftnrvmg themselves almoll, rather than hazard their Eggs, to get Food, and others cither performing the Office by Turns («), or elfe the one kindly Iceking our, and • carrying Food to the other (-«/}, engaged in the

(m) Palumbes incubat faernina pojl mgridiana in matutinamt citero mat. Colttmbs. mcnbant ambo, inttrtiin Mas, notlu Fcsmina. Plin. Nat. Hill. 1. lo. c. 58.

(w) Ot the common Crow, Mr. Willughby faith, The Fe- Tnales only fit, and that diligently, the Males in the mean tm$ bring them VUiuals, as Arillotlc jaith. in moji other Birds, which pair together, the Male and Fimale fit by Turns. Ornithol. 1. i. §. I. c. 1. §. 1. And I have obfcrved the Female- Crows to be much tatter than the Males, in the Time of Incubatiou, by reason the Male, out of his conjugal Affcaion, almoll lUrves himself, to supply the 1-emalc with Plenty.

Office

25'4 *^^^ Generation Book IV.

Office of Incubation. But of these Matters in a more proper Place (a).

2.^ When the young ones are produced, not only with what Care do they feed and nurCe them, but. with what furprizing Courage do all or most Creatures defend them ! It is fomewhat llrange to see timid Creatures iy\ who at other Times are cowardly, to be full of Courage, and undaunted at that Time J to see them furioufly and boldly encounter their Enemy, infteadof flying from him > andexpofe themselves to every Danger, rather than hazard and forfake their Young.

With this earnell Concern of the irrational Ani-- mals for their Young, we may join in the, ,

V. And last Place, Their Faculty and Sagacity of feeding them. About which I mall take notice of three Things.

I . The Faculty of fuckling the Young, is an ex-^ cellent Provifion the Creator hath made for those helplefs Creatures. And here the Agreeablenefs and Suitablenefs of that Food to young Creatures, defei ves particular observation, as alfo their Delight in it, and Defire and Endeavours after it, even as foon as born {z)^ together with the Willingneis of

{%) See Book VH. Chaf. 4. •- - -

()i) Volucril/us Nutura fiovam quandam, Pullos educandl, ratjonem excogUaii'it : ipfis entm pr&cipuutn quendam amorem in ea qt4£ procrearent, ingeneravit^ quo hnpulfu helium pro pullis cum ferocibus nnitnal'tbus, qux. ante declindrunt, intrep'ide fufcipiunty 'vi^Mmque ipfis convenient em [uppeditant. Galen, de Uf. Part. 1. 14. c. 4.

(t) In lis anifnantibm qus la5le aluntur, omnis fere c'tbus matrnm Utlejcere inc'tpit : eaque, qu,& paulo ante nata funt, fine magi/lro, duce ?iaturd, mammas appetunt, earumque ubertate faturantur. Atque ut intelligamus nihil horum effe fortui' Tnmy O' hu omnia ejj'e provida, [olertifque naturA, qui multiplices foetus procreant, ut Sues, ut Canes, his Mammarum data ejl multitude ; quas eafdem pauccu habent e£ beftii, qud pau* ca gignunt. Cic. dc Nat. Deor. I. i. 0.51. Confule quoque Galen de Uf. Part. 1. i4- C- 4- c?* 1. 15. c. 7.

all,

Chap. XV. of Antnials, t^f

all, even the most favagc and fierce Animals , to part with it, and to adminiller it to their Young, yea, to teach. and inftitutc chcm m the Art of taking It.

And laftl}', to name no more, the curious ^ppar ratus which is made for this Service in the divers Species of Animals, by a due Number of Breaftsy proportionable to theOccafions of each Animal, by curious Glands in those Brealts, to feparate chat nutritive Juice, the Milk, by Arteries and Veins to convey it to them, and proper Rivulets and Chanels to convey it from them, with Dugs and Nipples, 'placed in the mod convenient Part of the Body \aa) of each Animal, to adminiifer it to their Young} all these Things, I Tiy, do manifeftly proclaim the Care and wisdom of the great Creator.

2. As for such Animals as do in another manner breed up their Young, by finding out Food, and putting it into their Mouth, the Provilion made in them for this Service, to Itrike, catch, to pouch

and

iaa) Animaliafolidipeiij, v ruminant'u, vel cornigera, inter femora Marnmas habent, quorum Fjitta Jiatim a partu pedtbus inftjiunt, qttod matres inter la:ianduvi non decumhant, ut Etfua, jifina, &c. Animalia digitata. CT* multipara, m medio 'ventre, fcil. fpatio al> inguine ad pcHus (in Cuntculo ufque ad jugiUum ) duplicem mamwarum Jcriem fortita funt, qtt* omnia decumbentia ttbera fcetibus admozent, ut Urfa^ Le/tna,&CC. Si vera hitc iA Jolo inguine Mammas gererent, propria cura inter decumiendum f'lxtus accejjut?} ad mammas nonnihil prtpedirent. Multeriius Mamms. bins, funt, ut v PapilU, nimirum ut latus lateri conformiter rcfpondeat, cr ut alternatim infant ^ latere in latus inter fugendum tranjeratur , ne corpus ejus uni lateri nimis ajjuejieus quoquo tnodo incurvetur. Simia, homo S'jlveftrvs, &c. Blaf. Anat. Animal. Par. i. Cap. 6, de^ane ex Whartoao'. See here vihzi Plmy hath alio, L. ii. Cap. 40.

,1

1^6 Thi Generation Book iV.

and convey their Prey and Food to their Young {bb)^ is very considerable. And To is alfo their Sagacity in equally diilributing it among them, that among many, all (hall be duly, equally, and in good Order^ fed.

5. There is yet another Initinft remaining, of such Animals as can neither adminitler Suck to their Young, neither lay them in Places affording Food, nor can convey and bring them Food, but do with

In the Elephant, the Nipples are near the Breaft, by reason the old one is forced to fuck her self, and by the help of her Trunk conveys the Milk into the Mouth of her Young. Vid. Phil. Tranf. N«. 336.

ibb) For an Exemplification, I might name many Animals, particularly Birds, whose Parts are compleatly fuited to this Service. They are Charaderifticks of rapacious Birds, to* have aduncous Bills and Talons to hold and tear, and strong brawny Thighs to ftrike and carry their Prey, as well as a (harp piercing Sight to fpy it afar off. Ra'ii Synopf. Method. Av. p. I. The Pelecane alfo might be here named, for its prodigious Bag under its Bill and Throat, big enough to contain thirty Pints. Id. ibid. p. iii. And to name no more, the common Heron hath its most remarkable Parts adapted to this Service ; long Legs for wading, and a long Neck anfwetable thereto to reach Prey, a wide, extenfive Throat to pouch it; long Toes, with strong hooked Talons, (one of •which is remarkably ferrate on the Edge) the better to hold their Prey ; a long fiiarp Bill to Itrike their Prey, and ferrate towards the Point, with ftiarp hooked Beards standing backward, to hold their Prey fall when ftruck ; and lastly, large, broad, concave Wings (in Appearance much too large, heavy and cumberfome for so small a Body, but) of greatest Ui'e to enable them to carry the greater Load to their Nefts at several Miles distance ; as I have seen them do from several Miles beyond me, to a large Heronry above three Miles dillant from me. In which I have seen Plaife, and other Filh, some Inches long, lying under the high Trees in which they build ; and the curious and ingenious Owner thereof, D'Acre Barret, Efq; hath seen a large Eel convey'd by them, nocwithftanding the great Annoyance it gave them in their Flight, by its twtfting this Way and that Way about their Bodies. \

:i their

Chap. XV. of Animals. i^j

^hcir Eggs, lay up Provifions for their future Young. Somewhat of this is reported of some Birds {cc)\ but I have my self with Plcafure, frequently fecn some of the Species of Infc6ls to carry ample Provifions into their dry and barren Cells, where they have feal'd them carefully and cautioufly up with their Eggs, partly, 'tis like, for Incubation fake, and partly as an eafy Bed to lodge their Young > buc chiefly for future Provifion for their Young, in their Nympba-State^ when they (land in need of Food {del).

(cc) This is reported of the American ojlrich, mentioned by Acarette, in Phil. Tranf. N-^. 89. Of which iec BoekV II. Chap 4. Kote {e).

(dd) Hornets, Wafps, and all the Kinds of Bees provide Honey ; and many of the Pfeudofphect, and Ichneumon Wafps and Fiiesy carry Maggots, Spiders, Q^e. into their Nells; of which see above, Note (c) Chap. 13.

CHAP. XVI.

The Conchtjion.

TH U S I have, as briefly as well I could (and much more briefly than the Matters defcrved) difpatchcd the Decad of Things I propofcd in common to the fenfitive Creatures. And now let us pause a little, and refle6t. And upon the whole Matter, what less can be concluded than that there is a Being infinitely Wife, Potent, and Kind, who is able to contrive and make this glorious Scene of Things, which I have thus given only a Glance of ? For wharlefs than Infinite, could Hock so vail x Globe with such a noble Set of Animals? All so contrived, as to minifter to one anotliei's Help some

S Way

i^S The Cone htfion. Book IV.

Way or other, and most of them ferviceable to Man peculiarly, the Top of this lower World, and who was made, as it were, on purpose to observe, and furvey, and set forth the Glory of the infinite Creator^ manifellcd in his Works! Who! What but the Great GOD could so admirably provide for the urhole Animal World every Thing ferviceable to it, or that can be wilhed for, either to conferve its Species, or to minifter to the Being or Well-beingof Individuals! Particularly, who could Feed so fpacious a World, who could pleafe so large a Number of Palates, or fuit so many Palates to so great a Variety ofT^'ood, but the infinite Confervator of the World ! And who but the same great HE^ could provide such commodious Cloathing for every Animal i such proper /ftf^^/^j, Ne ft s 2iudi Habitations; such fuitable Armature and Weapons ; such Subtilty^ Artifice and Sagacity^ as every Creature is more or less armed and furnifhcd with, to fence off the Injuries of the Weather, to refcue it self from Dangers, to preferve it self from the Annoyances of its Enemies i and, in a word, to conferve its Self, and its Species ! What but an infinite fuperintending Power could so equally balance the several Species of Animals, and conferve the Numbers of the Individuals of every Species so even, as not to over or under-people the terraqueous Globe! Who, but the infinite wife Lord of the World, could allot every Creature its most fuitable Place to live in, the moil fuitable Element to breathy and move^ and a6l in, And who but HE could make so admirable a Set of Organs, as those of respiration are, both in Land and Water- Animals! Who could contrive so curious a Set of Limbs, Joynts, Bones, muscles, and Nerves, to give to every Animal the most com- .wiodious Motion to its State and Occafions ! And to name no more, what Anatomift, Mathematician, \Vorkman, yea Angel, could contrive and make so curious, so commodious, and every way so exquifite ;-'•""'" a Sec

Chap^XVI. The Conclujion. 15-9

a Set of Senfes, as the five Scnfes of Animals arcj whose Organs arc To dcxtcroufly contrivcJ, so conveniently placed in the Body, so nearly adjullcd, 'io firmly guarded, and so complcatly fuited to every Occalion, that they plainly set forth the Agency of the infinite Creator and Confcrvator of the World.

So that here, upon a tranfient View of the Animal World in general only, we have such a Throng of Glories, such an enravifhing Scene of Things as may excite us to admire, pnife, and adore the infinitely wife, powerful, and kind CREATORj to condemn all atheiltical Principles j and with holy David^ Pfalm xiv. i. to conclude that he is in good earnclt a Fool^ that dares to say, There is no Gody when we are every where furrounded with such manifelt Characters, and plain Demonllrations of that infinite Being.

But in the next Book wc shall dill find greater Tokens, if pofiibic, when 1 come to take a View of Animals in particular.

S * A SUK^

2 or-

SURVEY

Of the Particular

Trlhcsof ANIMALS.

ll^^^ffiN the foregoing Book, having taken jS^plB^I a View of the Things in common to

|m Animals, my business in the next, will &M ^^ ^° infpefl: the particular Tribes, in ^fe^lJ order to give further Manifeflations of the Infinite Creator's wisdom, Power and goodness towards the Animal World.

B O O K V.

^ SURVEY o/Man.

HE fir ft Genus of Animals that I shall take Notice of, shall be Man, who may juftly claim the Precedence in our Dilcourfe, inafmuch as God hath given him the Superiority in the Animal World 3 Gen. i. 16, uihd Godfaid^ Let us make Man in our Image, after

our

Chap. I. Of Man's Soul. i<Ji

our IJkcncfs •, and let them have Dominion over the FiJIj of the Sea^ and over the Foivl of the Jir^ and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every creeping 'thing that crcepeth upon the Earth.

And as to Man, we have so excellent a Piece of Workmanfhip, luch a Microcofm, such an Abridgement of the Creator's Art in him, as is alone fufii-^ cient to dcmonlliatc the Being and Attributes ot GOD. Which will appear by confidcnng the Soul and the Body of Man.

C H A P. I.

Of the So vh of Man.

Y Survey of Man, I {hall begin with the Soul ^. ^ of Man, by reason it is his his most noble Part {a\ the Copy of the Divine Image in us {b), in which we have enough to fill us with Admiration of the Munifcnce, Power, and wisdom ot the

M"

(4) 54m v«ro Ammum ipfum, Mentemqut hammts, Raticmrn!confUium, PruAtnuam, qm non dtvma cur^frrfiHaer^e perfficit, is his ipfs rebus tnihi videtur curtre. ClC. de Nat,

Pcor. 1.1. c. 59. „. , .^

(b) Senfum a Coeltjit demijjum iraxtvms arct,

Cujus egent prona, <y 1 err am fpeilantta ; mundi Principto indulfit communis Conditor, lU'is lantum Animas; nobis Anitnum quctjue.

Juven. Sat. XV. >^. 144, Et cum non alittr polfent mortalia finp. Adjunxit giminas, ttU cum corpcre lapf* Intereunt : ht( fcla mantt, bttjloque jtiperfies j:^ol(it Claud, dc 4 (Jonful. H'Ui

s }

Infinite

z6l Of Alarms Soul. Book V.

Infinite Creator (c), when we contemplate the noble Faculties of this our fuperiour Part, the vafl: Reach and Compafs of its Vnderjianding^ the prodigious QuickncTs and Piercingnefs of its "Thought^ the admirable Subtilty of its Lrcention^ the commanding I^ower of its wisdom^ the great Depth of its Memory (<^), and in a word, its Divine Nature and Operations.

But 1 shall not dwell on this, tho* the fuperiour Part of Man, because it is the leali known. Only

(c) Na7n fiqu'ti nulli fe6l& addi^us, fed libera ftntentm rerum conjideratso'fjem inierit, conjpicatus m tanta carnhtm ac fuccorum colluvie tantam mentem habitare ; confpicatus item zy cujujvis animalis confirHtlionem fomnia enim declarant Op'ificis Sapientiam) Aientis, qu£ hlmint ineft, excelleniiam wtelliget^ turn opus d» partmfn urjlhjte, quod prius exiguUm effe jibi videbatur, perjetiijjtmd Theologi& verum principium conjlituet : c^un, Theolog'tA multo eji major atque pr^ifianttor tola, Medicind. Galen, dc ulu Part. L. i?- c. i. '

(d) Among many Examples that I could give of Perfons famous for Memory, Seneca's Account of himself may be one, Hatic \_Memonam'] aliqua:-ido in me florin (fe, ut non tamhm ad ufum fufficeret, fed in miraculum ufque procederet, non nego. Nam O" 2000 nojninum rccitata, quo ordine erant d'Ma, reddebam : e?* ab his qui ad audiendum pr&ceptorem noflrum convener unt, fingulos verfus a ftngulis datos, cum plures quam lOO efficerentur, ab ultimo incipiens ufque ad frimum rccitabam. After which, mention is made of the greac Memory of Latro Porchis ( chart jfimi mihi fodalis, Seneca calls him) who retained m his Memory all the Declamations he had ever spoken, and never had his Memory fail him, not so much as in one fingle Word. Alfo he takes Notice of Cyneas, Ambafiador to the Romans from King Pyrrhus, who in one Day had so well learnt the Names of his SpeAators, t\nt poflero die no- •vus homo cjT Seiiatum, CT* omnem urbanam circumfufam Senatuiplebem, nominibus fuis perfalutavit. Senec. controverf. L. I. init. Vid. quoque Plin. L. 7. c. 14. where he alfo adds other Examples, viz. Cyrus rex omnibus in exercitu fuo militibus nomina reddidit; L. Scipio populo Rom. Mithidrates zz gen' tium rex, totidem Unguis jura dedit, pro condone finguias fine

interprete ajfatus. Charmidas (feu potius Carneades) r—

CIU& quii exegerat volnmina in bibliothecii, legentis modo repr&- ]entavit,

there

Chap. T. Of Maris Iiiclinatious. ^63

there arc two Things 1 can't calily pals by, hecaufe they manifcll the erpecial Concurrence and ITefign of the infinitely Wife Creator, as having a }->articular and nccclliiry Tendency to the Mann^cmcnc and good Order of the World's Affairs. The

I. Of which is the various Gemi^ or Inclinitiorjs of Mcni Minds to this, and that, and theorhcr Biilinefs {e). We see how naturally Men betake themselves to this and that Employment : Some delight moll in Learning and Books, feme in Divinity, some in Phyfick, Anatomy and Botany, fomc in Critical Learning and Philolog)', fomc in Mathematicks, some in Metaphyficks, and deep Refcarchesj and some have their Delight chiefly in Mcchu" nicks, Archite61:ure, War, Navigation, Commerce, Agriculture} and some have their Inclinations lie even to the fcrvile Offices of the World, and an hundred Things befidcs.

Now all this is an admirably wife, as well as moH: necessary Provifion, for the eafy and fuie tranfafting the World's Affairs j to answer eveiy End and Occafion of Man, yea, to make Man helpful to the poor, helplefs Beads, as far as his Help is needful CO them } and all, without any great Trouble, Fatigue, or great Inconvenience to Man j rather as a

(f) Dlverfii eten'im gaudet natura minijlr'n, Ut fieri diverfa qucant ornantia terras. Nee patitur ctinclos ad eandetn currcre mctatn, Sed ziarias jubet tie vias, variofque Lil/ores SuJciperCf ttt vario cultu /i: I'tilchrior orl/is.

Paling, in Scorp.

*A»^gai7-<», &c. It a non omnibus homtnibus fua dona da* Deuj, ne^jue bonam indokrn , neque prudentiam , nea, tloqueniiam : Alius narnque "Jiiltum halct defonntm ; fed Dtus formajn elo' quentiA ornat, &c. Homer. Odyf. S. The like alio in Iliad. I, 13.

S 4 Plcafurc^

1^4 Of Man's Invention. BookV.

Plcafiire, and Diverfion to him. For so far it is from being a Toil, that the greatest Labours (/), Cares, yea, and Dangers too, become pleafant to him who is purfuing his Genius-, and whose Ardour of Inclination eggs him forward, and buoys him up under all Oppofition, and carrieth him through every Obflaclc, to the End of his designs and Defires.

If. The next is, The inventi'ue Power of the Soul {g). Under which I might speak of many Things 5 but I shall take Notice only of two, because they manifest the particular Concern and Agency of the infinitely wife Creator. The

I. Is, That Man's Invention should reach to such a great Variety of Matters} that it should hit upon every Thing, that may be of any Ufc, either to himself, or to human Society} or that may any Ways promote, (what in him lies,) the Benefit of this lower Part of the Creation.

For the Illullration of this, I might take a View of all the Arts and Sciences, the Trades, yea, the very Tools they perform their Labours, and Contrivances with, as numerous as their Occafions and Contrivances are various. Indeed, What is there that falleth under the Reach of Man's Senfes, that

(/) Although Solomon declares, Ecclef. xii. ix. That much Study ii a Wearinefs to the Flefh f yet we see with what pleasure and Affiduity many apply themfelvcs to it. Thus Cicero tells of Cato, whom he cafually found in Lucul'us's Library, Ai. Catonem vidi in Bihitotheca fedentem, multis circumfufum Stotcorum librls. Erat enim, ut fc:s, in eo inexhaujla avtdiias legendi, nee fatiari foterat : quippe ne reprehenftonem quidem -julgi inanem reformidans, in ipfd curia foleret legere f£pe, dum

fenatU'S cogeretur ut Heluo librorum videbatur. Cicer.

de finib. L. 3. c. 2.

(^) Mentem hotninh, quamvis earn non videtu, u( Deum nen ■v'ldes, tamen ut Deum agnofcis ex operibtis ejus, fie ex memoria rerHtn, V Inventione, c^r celeritate motus, omniqtte pulchritudine ■virtuiis vim dtvinam mentis agnofcito. Cicer. Tufc. Quaeft. '. ;. c. 20.

I?9

Chap.T. Of Man's Invention. ^6$

he doth not employ to fomc V(e and Piirpofc, for the World's Good? The cclelbal Bodies, the Sun, the Moon, with the other Planets, and the fix'd Stars, he employs to the noble Ufcs of Agronomy, Navigation and Geography. And, What a noble Acumen, what a vast Reach must the Soul be cndow'd with, to invent those curious Sciences of Geometry and Arithmetick, both Specious, and in Numbers > and those nice and various Inlbuments, made ufe of by the Geometrician, Artronomer, Geographer and Sailor? And lafUy, What a wonderful Sagacity is (hewn in the Bufincfs of Optics, and particularly in the late Invention of the Teltfcope ; wherewith new W onders are discover'd among God's Works, in the Heavens, as there are here on Earth, with the Microfcope, and other Glaflcs.

And as for this lower World, What Material is there to be found; what kind of Earth, or Stone, or Metal j what Animal, Tree, or Plant, yea, evcn the very Shrubs of the Field 5 in a Word, what of all the excellent Variety, the Creator has furnifli'd the World with, for all its Ufcs and Occafions, in all Ages ; what, I say, that Man's Contrivance doth not extend unto, and make fomc Way or other other advantagious to himrdf, and ufeful for Building, Cloathing, Food, Phyfick, or for Tools or Utenfils, or for even only Plcafure and Diverfion ?

But now confidcrmg the great Power and Extent of human Invention.

2. There is another Thing, that doth farther demonllrate the Super- intendcnce of the great Creator, and Confervator of the World > and that is, That Things of great, and abfolutcly nccclTary Vi'cy have foon, nnd eafily occurr'd to the Invention of Man > but Things of little Ufc, or very dangerous Ufe, are rarely and flowly discover'd, or Hill utterly undilcover'd. We have as early as the Mojaick Hirtory, an AaCCouhc of the Inventions of the more

ufcfuI

2,66 Of Man's Invent hm Book V.

ufeful Crafts and Occupations: Thus Gen. iii. 25. Adam ivas fent forth front the Garden of Eden, by God himfelfy to till the Ground. And in the next Chapter, his two Sons Cain and Abel; the one was of the same Occupation, a Tiller of the Ground, the other a Keeper of Sheep (/&). And the Pollerity of these, are in the latter End of Ge-a. iv. recorded, Jabal to have been the Father, fif such as dwell in stents {i) ', i. e. He was the Inventor of Tents^ and pitching those moveable houses in the Fields, for looking after, and depafturing their Catttl in the Defarcs, and uncultivated World. Tubal- Cain w^?^ an inflruUer of every Artificer in Brafs and Iron (k), or the Firlt that found out the Art of melting, and malleatitig (I) Metals, and making them ufeful for Tools, and other necefiary Implements. And his Sifter Naamah, whose Name is only mention'd, is by some thought to have been the Inventor of tS^^/V mng and Cloathing. Yea, the very Art of Muftck is thus early afcribed to Jubal {m) j lb indulgent was the Creator, to find a iVIeans to divert Melancholy, to cheer the Spirits, and to entertain and pleafe Mankind. But for Things of no life, or but little Ufe, or of pernicious consequence j either they have been much later thought of, and with great Difficulty, and perhaps Danger too, brought to pafsj orclfe they ttill are, and perhaps will always remain, Exercifes of the Wit and Invention of Men.

Of this we might give divers instances : In Methematicks, about fcjuaring the Circle (») j in Me-

'■ • ■ chanicks

(<&) Gen. iv. 1.. (f) ^. 2C.

{k) a. 22.

(I) 2<pt<29«^©>', the LXX call him, i. e. A Worker with ^ Hammer. (m) f. XI.

"(js) Although the Gluadrature of the CircU, hath in former Ages exercised foiue of the greatest mathematical Wits ; yet

nothing

Chap. I. Of Man's lu'jcnt ion. iGy

chanicks (<)), about the Art of Flying j and in Navigation, about finding the Longitude. Thcfe Things, although Tome oV them in Appearance innocent, yea, perhaps very ulcliil, yet remain for the moll Part lecret j not becaulc the Dircovciy of

nothing has been done in that VV:>y so ecnfiderahle, as in, and iince the Middle of the latt Ctntury; when in the Year 1657, thole very ingenious and grcu NU'n, iMr IVilUam Nedet and my Lord Bronuker, and Sir Chnjicti-Jir Wren afterwards, in the lame Year, geometrically d'onionfUatcd th^- I:,c]uaHty of some Curves to n Ihtlit Line. Scon atttr which, others nt Home, and Abroad, did the like in oth^r Curves. And not long afterwards, this was brought \x\-\AtX an Mn.aly.'ical Calctilui : The first Specimen whcicof, thst \\z% ever publifli'd, Mr. iW/rr4/or gave ill 16P8, in a Demonftration of my Lord Brounker's Quadrature of the Hi^-erlola, by Dr WaUis\ Rcd^iflion of a Fr<u^ion, inro an infinite Sciies by Divifion. Uut the penetrarijig Genius of Sir Ifaac Newton, had diiccver'd a Way of actauiing the Quantity of all quadrible Curves analytically, by his Method or Flnxtons^ some Time before the Year 1668, as I find very propable from an hiflorica! Account, in a long Letter of Mr. Colli/rs, wiitten in his own Hand, and lent to Rtchard Tcvjnleyy hfq; ot' Lancajhire, whoic Papers are in my Hands. In that Letter, Mr. CoWns f.uth. That in September 1668, Mr. Klercntor f-ubUjh'd hh V.ogJirithmotechnia, one pf zvhich he foov fettr t.i l^r. Harrow, -.vhf thereupon fent him up some Papers of Mr. Newton'/, (now Sir Ifaac;] by which, and former ConimHUtcaivms made thereof bj the Author, to the Doctor ;' it appear i tl.M the f^id Method zvas invented some Tears before, by the f aid Mr. Newton, and generally apply d. And then he goes on to give some Account of the Method; what ft performs in tlie Circle, crc. what Mr. Gregory had done in that kind, ivho intended to publifh fomtii'hat in Latin about it, but would not anticipate Mr. Newton, th fr/i Inventor thereof; with much more of th;.< Nature. 'J'he Dcfign, I find, of that indefatigable fromoter of Mithematicks, Mr. Collins, was to acc^uaitit Mr. Toivnh\, in his Letter, with what had been done; mi to get the AlManre of th^t ingenious Gentleman, towards the cumplcating a Body of Algebra.

(0) I do not mention here the /<.v;if//^d/ Afntior, wliich hath exercis'd the mechanical Wits for many Af^es; becanl'c it is a Thing impoflible, if not a Contradifitrm : A."! the bcforccomraendcd Dr. Clarke aircTr*; in Rohani'. Phyf p. 133.

mo ft

^6^ Of Man's Invention. BookV.

mod: of them is more impoflible, or difficult than of many other Things, which have met with a discovery } nor is it for want of Man's Diligence therein, or his careful Purfuit and Enquiry after them, (for perhaps, nothing already difcovcr'd hath been more eagerly fought after j) but with much better reason, (I am fure with greater Humility and Modefty,) we may conclude it is, because the infinitely wife Creator, and Ruler of the World, hath been pleas'd to lock up these Things from Man's Underllanding and Invention, for some reasons best known to himself, or because they might be of ill consequence, and dangerous amongft Men.

As in all Probability the Art of Flying would particularly be : An Art which in some Cafes might be of good Ufe, as to the Geographer and Philofophcrj but in other Refpe6i:s, might prove of dangerous and fatal consequence : As for Inftancc, By putting it in Man's Power to discover the Secrets of Nations and Families, more than is confident with the Peace of the World, for Man to know j by giving ill Men greater Opportunities to do Mifchief, which it would not lie in the Power of others to prevent; and, as one (/>) observes, by ma-^ king Men less fociable : " For upon every crue or " falfe Ground of Fear, or Difcontent, and other " Occafions, he would have been fluttering away " to some other Place j and Mankind, inltead of ^' cohabiting in Cities, would, like the Eagle, have ^ built their Nefts upon Rocks".

That this is the true reason of these Matters, is manifest enough from holy Scripture, and Rea- Ibn (^) alfo gives its Suffrage thereto. The Scrips ture cxpreflly tell us. That e"jery good Gift^ and every

ip) Grcw'f Cofmol. Sacr. /, i. c 5. §. 25. . (a) Nemo igitur vir magnum fine aliquo affiatu divino Hnc^tiam fu'tt. Cic, de Nat. Deor. 1. z, c. 66,

terfei

rje

Chap.T. Of Man's Invent ion » 169

perfect Gift, is from abo'vc, and comet h doiun from the Father of Lights, 5*. James i. 17. Solomon^ Prov. ii. 6, faith, 'The Lord giveth IVifdom-j out of his Month cO' metb Knoiv/edge and Under Jlanding. And Elihit is very cxprefs, Job xxxii. 8. But there is a Spirit in Man, and the Infpiratiun of the yflmighty ^iveth them Undcrjlanding, rivo; 7r«v.'c>t(^T0f0f l^iv >; ^iSoi'Ttixcoc, as the LXX render it, The Infpiratus, the Jjflatus of the Almighty, is their Inflru^or, Miflrefs or Teacher. And in Scripture, not only the more noble, ibperiour A6l:s of wisdom or Science j but much inferiour alfo, bear the Name of wisdom, Knowledge and Underdanding, and are afcrib'd unto GOl3. 'Tis well known that Solomon's wisdom is wholly afcrib'd unto GODj and the wisdom and Under- Handing which GOD is said to have given him, 1 Kings iv. 19. is particularly set forth in the following Verfes, by his great Skill in moral and natural Philoiophy, in Poetry, and probably in Altronomy, Geometry, and such other of the politer Sciences, for which uEgypt, and the eaflern Nations were celebrated of old {r) : And Solomon\f JVijdom exccWd the IVifdom of all the Children of the eall Country, and all the IVijdom of i^gypt. For he was iviftr than all Men, than Kthan, tsfc. And he [pake 3000 Proverbs : And his Songs were loof . And he [pake of Trees, from the Cedar to the iiyJJ'op of the JFall^ (/. e. of all Sorts of Plants >) alfo of Beafls, Fowl, creeping Things, and Fifjes. So likewilc the wisdom of Daniel, and his three Companions, is afcrib'd unto GOD, Dan. i. 17. As for these four

(r) JF.gypt, and some of the eaflem NatiooN, aie celebrated for ilieir Skill in polite I.iteraiure; both in Scripture and protaiie Story: "job was of those I'arts; so were the 'Zt^$\ and M«yo<, the Brachwans and G'jmnojophijli. Mofts and Damet had their Education in ihcle Parts: And Pythagoras, Demecrittts, and others, travell'd into these Paits tor the Sake of their Learning.

Children^

170 Of Man^s Invention. BookV.

Children^ God gave them Knowledge^ and Skill in all Learning and wisdom j and Daniel had Under jiand^ ing in all Plfions and Dreams. And accordingly in the next Chapter, Daniel acknowledgeth and praifech God. ir. 26. 21. Daniel anpwered and [aid ^ Blejfed he the Name of God for ever and ever^ for

Wisdom and Might are his. He glveth wisdom

unto the Wife., and Rnoivledge to them that knozv Underfianding. But not only Skill in the fuperiour Arts and Sciences j but even in the more inferiour niechanick Art, is call'd by the same Names, and afcrib'd unto GOD: Thus for the Workmaniliip of the Tabernacle, Exod.xxx\.z.x.of.6. See^ Ihave caird Bezaleel ; and I have filTd him with the Spirit of God^ in wisdom^ and in Under Jianding^ and in all Manner cf IVorkmanfoip : To devife cunning Works^ to ''juprk in Goldj Silver ^and Brafs 5 and in cutting of StoneSy to set them ; and in carving of 1'imber., to isQork in all Manner of Worhnanjhip. So the Spin- Jhrsy Weavers^ and other Crafts- people, are call'd wife-hearted, Exod. xxxiv. 10. 2f. and other Places. And in Exod. xxxvi. i. &c. the LORD is said to have put this wisdom in them, and Under- Handing to know how to work all these Manner of Works, for the Service of the San6luary, And lastly, to name no more instances, Hiram the chief Architect of Solomon's 'temple^ is in i Kings vii. 14. and 2, Chron. ii. 14. call'd a cunning Man^ fiWd with wisdom and Under flanding^ to work in Gold, Silver^ Brafs^ Irony Stone, Ttmber, Purple, Blue, fine Limn, and Crimfon -, alfo to grave, and find out every Device which fljould be put to him.

Thus doth the Word of God, afcribe the Contrivances and Crafts of Men, to the Agency, or Influence of the Spirit of God, upon that of Man. And there is the same reason for the Variety of Genii, or Inclinations of Men alfo i which from the same Scriptures, may be concluded to be a Defignation, and Tranfadion of the same almighty Governour of the

World'g

Cbap I. Of Man's Invention. ryi

World's Affairs. And who indeed but HE, could make luch a divine Subltance, cndovv'd with those admirable Faculties, and Powers, as the rational Soul hath •, a Bcin^ to bear the great Creator's Vicegcrcncy in this lower World ; to employ the levcral Creatures i to make \JCe of the various Materials j to manage the grand Biifineflcsi and to furvcy the Glories ot all the vifiblc Works of God ? A Creature, without which this lower World would have been a dull, uncouth, and dciblatc kind of Globe. Who, 1 say, or what lels than the infinite GOD, could make such a rational Creature, such a divine Subihince as the Soul ? For if we should allow the Athciil: any of his nonfenfical Schemes, the Epicurean his fortuitous Concourfe of Atoms, or the Cartefian {J') his created Matter put in Motion 5 yet with what tolerable Senfe could he, in his Way, produce such a divine, thinking, fpeaking, contriving Subftance as the Soul is-, endow'd exactly with such Faculties, Power, and Dilpofitions as the various Necellkies and Occafions of the World require from such a Creature? Why should not rather all the A£b, the Difpofitions and Contrivances of such a Creature ;i$ Man, (if made in a mechanical Way, and not con-

(/) As we are not to accufe any /^//v ; so far he it trom me to detract trom lb great a Man as Monfieur Cartes was: Whole Principles, although many have perverted to achcillica! purposes, and whole Notions have, some ot them, but an ill Afpcd ; yet 1 am unwilling to believe he was an Athcill ; since in his I'rmcifta PhUofophU, and other of )iis Works, he vindicates himftlf from this Charge; and frequently ftiews fecmingly s great Re(pc(ft for Religion: Befidci, That many of his fuipici(jus Opinions are capable of a favourable Interpretation, v.hich will make them appear in a better Form : Thus when he difcardcth /w<j/ C<i«/« from his Philofophy, ft is not a Denial of them ; but only excluding the Confidcralion of them, for the Sake of free philolbphifuig; it being tho Bulinel's of a Divine, rather than a PhiJofophcr, to ircit of ihcm.

trivM

271 Of Man^s Invention. BookV.

triv'd by God,) have been the same? Particularly, Why should he not-have hit upon all Contrivances of equal Ufe, early as well as many Ages since ? Why not that Man have efFeded it, as well as this, some thoufands of Years after? Why alfo ihould not all Nations, and all Ages (/), improve

(0 For Ages of Learning and Ignorance^ we may compare the prcfent, and some of the Ages before the Reformation. The last Century, and the few Years of this, have had the Happinefs to be able to vie with any Age for the Number of learned Men of all Profeflions, and the Improvement made in all Arts and Sciences; too many, and loo well known to need a Specification.

But for Ignorance, we may take the ninth Age, and so down to the Reformation; even as low as Queen Elizabeth, although Learning began to flourifti; yet we may guefs how Matters ftood, even among the Clergy, by her 53 Injun^l. N". 1559, Such cu are but mean Readers, Jliall perufe over before, cnce or twice, the Chapters and Homilies, to the Intent they tnay read to the better Under/landing of the People, the more En- (ouragemtnt of Godltnejs. Spar. Colled, p. 8z. But this is nothing, in comparifon to the Ages before, when the Monk laid, GrAcum non efi legi ; or as EfpencAtu more elegantly hath it, Gnce nofj'e fufpeilum, Hebraice prope Hireticum. Which Sufpicion, (laid the learned Hakewill,) Rhemigius furely was not guilty of, in commenting upon difamatus, i Thef. i. 8. who faith, that St. Paul fomewhat improperly put that for divulgatus, not being aware that St. Paul wrote in Greek, and not in £ij/i». Nay, so great was their Ignorance, not only of Creek, but of Latin too, that a Prieft baptiz'd in nomine Patria, v Filia, o" Spiritua fan6la. Another fuing his Pariftiioners for not paving his Church, prov'd it from Jer. xvii. 18. Pa" 'vtant illi, non paveam ego. Some Divines in Erafmus's Time, undertook to prove Hereticks ought to be burnt, because the Apoftle said, Hdreticum devita. Two Fryars difputing about a Plurality of Worlds, one prov'd it from Anrton decern funt facli mundi? The other reply'd, Sed ubi funt novem? And notwithftanding their Service was read in Latin, yet so little was that underllood, that an old Prieft in Hen. VIII. read Mumpfimus Domtne, for Sumpfimus : And being admonifli'd of it, he said, he had done io for thirty Years, and would not leave his old Mumpfimus for their new Sumffimus. Vid. Jiakew. Apol. L. 3. C. 7. Se£l. 1.

Nation

Chap. I. Of Man's Invention. 173

in every Thing, as well as this, or that Age, or Nation («) only? why should the Greeks, the-/frabians, the Perfians, or the jEgyptians of old, so far exceed those of the same Nations now ? Why the Africcim and Americam so generally ignorant and barbarous, and ih^ Europeans , for the moll part, polite and cultivated, addifted to Arts and Learning ? How could it come to pals that the

(«) There is (it seems ) in Wits and Arts, as in all Things hejide, a kind of circular progress : They have their Birth, their Growth, their Flourijhing, their Failing, their Fading ; and within a while after, thtir Refurre^ion, and Refiourijljing again. The Arts flourijhed for a long lime among the Per*

lians, the Chaldaeans, the i^gyptians. But afterxvards

the Grecians got the Jl art of them, and are now become as barbarous themlelves, as formerly they efteemed all befides themselves to be. About the Birth of Chri/i, Learning began to flourid^ in Italy, and fpread all over Chrijiendom ; till the Goths, Huns, and Vandals ranfackcd the Libraries, and defaced almost all the Monuments of Antiquity : so that the Lamp of Learning feemed to be put out for near the Space of looo Years, till the first Manfor, King of Africa and Spain, raised up, and fpurred forward the Arabian Wits, by great Rewards and Encouragements. Afterwards Petrarch opened such Libraries as were undemoliflied. He was fecondcd by Boccace, and 'John of Ravenna, and foon after by Aretine, Philelphus, Valla, 8<c. And those were followed by /Eneas Sylvius, Angelus Politianus, Hermolaus Barbarus^ Marftitus Ficinns , and "Joh. Picus , of Mirandula. these were backed by Rud. Agricola, Reucline, MelanHhon, Joach. CamerariuStJVol/fhlazius, Beat. Rhenanus, Almaincs; By£"- rafmus of Rotterdam ; Vtvei a Spaniard ; Bembus, Sadoletus, Eugubinus , Italians: Tumebus , Muretus , Ramus, Piihsut, Budsus, Amiot, Scaliger, Frenchmen; S\x Tho. More ■nx\(\Ltnaker, Engliftimen. And about this Time, even those Northern Nations yielded their great Men ; Denmark yielded Olaus Magnus, Holjler, Tycho Brahc, and Hemingius; and Roland, Hofius, Frixius, and Crumerus. But to name the Worthies that followed these, down to the prcfentTime, would be endlcfs, and next to impoffible. bee therefore MaktwiU'i Apolog, L. 3. c. 6. §. 1.

T Ufc

174 ^f ^^^'^ Invention. Book V.

Ufe of the Magnet (w), Printing (at), Clocks ()»),

Telefcopes

{xv) Dr, Gilbert, the most learned and accurate Writer on \\\z Magnet, fliews, that its Attrailive Virtue was known as early as Plato and Arifiotle : but its DtreHion was a Difcovexy of later Ages. He faith, Superiori avo 300 aut 400 labentibus annis, Motus Magnettcus in Boream cr Aujlrum referttts, aut ab hojntnibus rurfus recognitus fuit. De Mag. L. I. c. I. But who the happy inventer of this lucky discovery was, is not known. There is some, not inconliderab!?, reason, to think our famous Country-man, Rog. iacon, either discovered, or at least knew of it. But for its Ufe in Navigation, Dr. Gilbert faith, in regno Neapolitano Melphitani omnium primi (utl ferunt ) pyxidcm inftruehant

nauticam, edoSli a. cive quodam \}ol. Goia A. D, 1300.

ibid. If the Reader hath a mind to see the Arguments for the Invention, being as old as Solomons or Plautus's Time, or of much younger Date, he may confult ii^^ezi^i//. ib. c. 10, §.4. or Purchas Pilgr. L. x. c. i. §. i.

As to the Magnetick Variation, Dr. Gilbert attributes the discovery of it to Sebaftian Cabott. And the Inclination, or Dipping of the Needle, was the discovery of cur ingenious Rob. Norman. And lastly, The Variation of the Variation was first found out by the ingenious Mr. H.Gellibrand. Aftr. Prof, of Grejham-Col. about 1634. Vid. GelUbr. Difc. Math, on the Variat. of the Mag. Need, and its Variat. Anno 1635.

But fmce that, the before commended Dr. Halley, having formerly, in Philof. Tranf. No. 148, and 195, given a probable Hypothefis of the Variation of the Compafs, did in the Year 1700, undertake a long and hazardous Voyage, as far as the Ice near the South Pole, in order to examine his said Hypothefis, and to make a Syftem of the Magnetical Variations: Which being foon after publifhed, has been lince abundantly confirmed by the French, as may be seen in fevcral of the late Memoirs de Phyfique CT' de Mathematique, publifli'd by the French Academie des Sciences.

To these Difcovenes, I hope the Reader will excufe me, if 1 add one of my own, which I deduced some Years ago, from some magnetical Experiments and observations I made; which discovery I alfo acquainted our Royal Society with fom.e time since, 'viz.. That as the common, horizontal Nee die is continually varying up and down, towards the E. and W. so is the Dipping-Needle varying up and down, towards

Chap. I. Of Man" s Invention. 275-

Tclefcopcs (;r), and an hundred Things befides, ihould cfcape the discovery of Archimedes^ Anaximandery

wards or fromwards the Zenith, with irs Magnetick Tendency, defcribing a Circle round the Pole of the World, as I conceive, or some other Point. So that if we could procure a Needle so nicely made, as to point exadly according to its Magnetick Diredion, it would, in some certain Numberof Years, defcribea Circle, of about i^gr. Radius round the Magnetick Poles Northerly and Southerly, l^his 1 have for leveral Years fufpeded, and have had some reason for it too, which I mentioned three or four Years ago at a Meeting of our Royal Society , but I have not yet been so happy to procure a tolerable good Dipping-Needle, or other proper one to my Mind, to bring the Thing to sufficient Teft of Experience; as in a fliort Time I hope to do, havmg lately hit upon a Contrivance that may do the Thing.

(x) It is uncertain who was the Inventcr of the Art of Printing, every Hiflorian afcribing the Honour thereof to his own City or Country. Accordingly some afcribe the Invention of it to John Gnttenburg , a Knight of Argentine, about 1440, and lay, that F<j«y?;« was only hisAffiltant. Bertius afcribes it to Laurence 'John, of Harlem, and faith, Tuft or Faiifl, ftole from him both his Art and Tooif. And to name no more, some attribute it to John Fttft or Tauft, and Peter Schoeffer (called by luft in some of his Imprimaturs, Pet. de Gernefliem puer meus. ) But there is now to be seen at Haerlem, a Book or two printed by Lau. Kofter, before any of these, viz. in 1430. and 1431. {See Mr. ¥A\Ws Letter to Dr. Tylbn, in Phil. Tranf. N". iS6.) But be the first Inventer who it will, there is however great reason to believe, the Art receiv'd great Improvements from Fauft and his Sonin-Law Schoejfer, the latter being the Inventer of metalline Types, which were cut in Wood before, lirlt in whole Blocks, and afterwards in fingle Types or Letters. See my learned Friend Mr. lVanley'$ Obfcrvaticns, m Philof. Tranf. No 188, and 310.

(y) Concerning the Antiquity and Invention of Clockt and Clock Work, I refer the Reader to a little Book, called the-Arttficial Clock-maker, chip. 6. Where there is some Account of the Ancients Inventions in Clock-Work, as Archimedes's Sphere, CtcftOius's Clock, o'c.

(i) The Invention of Telefcopes, Hieron. Syrturus gives this Account of, Prod'm Anno 1609, Sti* Gtmns, [tu aU*r

T 2 VtF

^y6 Of Man's Invention, Book V.

mander, jinaximenes^ Poftdonius, or other great Vircuofo's of the early Ages, whose Contrivances of various Engines, Spheres, Clepfydrae and other curious Inftruments are recorded (aa)^ And why

cannot

vir adhuc incognitus, Hollandi fpecie, qui M'tddUburgl in Z$- landid conventt ^oh. Lipperfein • < Jujfit perfpicilla plttra tam cava quam convexa, confici. CondiSto die rediit, abfolittum opHi cupiens, atqtte ut ftatim habuit prs manibm, btna fufcipiens, cavuni fcil. cr convexum, unum v alterum oculo admovebat, CT' fenfim dimovehat five ut pun6lum concurfusy five ut artificis opus probaret^ pofiea abiit. Arttfex, ingenii minime expers, v novitatis curiojus coepit idem facere V itnitari,^c. Vid. Muf. Worm. L. 4. c. 7.

(aa) Among the curious Inventions of the Ancients Archytas's Dove was much famed; of which Aul. Gellius gives this Account : Scripferunt Simulachrum ColumbA e ligno ab Archyta ratione quddam difciplindque mechanicd faHum, v(h- Idjfe : Ita trat fcilicet libramentis fufpenfiim, c/ aura, fpiritus inclufd atque occulta concitum. Nodi. Attic. L. 10. c. ii. The same eminent Pythagor&an Philofopher (as Favorinus in Gellius calls him) is by Hcrace accounted a noble Geometrician too, Te maris extern, numeroque carentis arena Menforem Archyta. Among the rest of his Inventions, Children's Rattles are afcribed to him. Ariftotle calls them *Af- XVTn zs-^iuld-yii, Polit. 8. i. e. Archytas's Rattle. And Diogenianus the Grammarian, gives the reason of his Invention, 'A^yjra -si-XctTccy^ Itt) twv, &c. That Archytas'f Rattle ■was to quiet Children ; for he having Children, contrived the Rattle, which he gave them to prevent their [^tumbling, ^ixtcc- Adl;6-(y(r<] Other Things about the house.

To these Contrivances of Archytas, we may add Regiornontartus's Wooden Eagle, which flew forth of the City aloft in the Air, met the Emperor a good Way off, coming towards it, and having faluted him, return d again, waiting on him to the City Gates. Alfo his Iron-fly, which at a Feaft flew forth off his Hands, and taking a Round, returned thither again. Vid. Hakewill ub. fupr. c. 10. §. i.

As to other Inventions of the Ancients, such as of Letters, Brick and Tiles, and building houses, with the Saw, Rule, and Plumber, the Lath, Augre, Glue, ctt. alfo the making Brafs, Gold, and other Metals ; the ufe of Shields, Swords, Bows and Arrows, Boots, and other Inftruments

of

Chap. I. Of Man's Invent ion. 277

cannot the prcfent or pad Age, so eminent for polite Literature, for Difcovcries and Improvements in all curious Arts and Bufinefles (perhaps beyond any known Age of the World j why cannot it, I say) difcoverthofe hidden ^^^/i/^, which may probably be referved for the discovery of future and less learned Generations ?

Of these Matters, no fatisfaftory Account caa be given by any mechanical Hypothefis, or any other Way, without taking in the Superintendence of the great Creator and Ruler of the World j

of War; the Pipe, Harp, and other Mufical Inftruments; the building of Ships and Navigation, and many other Things belides ; the .Inventors of these (as reported by ancient Heathen Authors) may be plentifully met within Plin. Nat. Hifi. L. 7- c. 56.

But in this Account of Pliny, we may observe whence the Ancients (even the Ro»3d»j themselves m some measure) had their Accounts of these Matters, viz. from the fabulous Greeks, who were fond of afcribmg every Thing to themselves. The Truth is faith the molt learned B;(hop Stillingfieet) there is nothing in the World ufeful or beneficial to Mankind, but they have made a Jliift to find the Author of it among themselves. if we enquire after the Original of Agriculture, we are told of Ceres and Triptolemus; // of Paflurage, we are tcld of an Arcadian Pan ; if of Wine, vjc prefently hear of a L\heT ?zxex; if of Iron Infiruments, then who but Vulcan .-' if of Mufick, none like to Apollo. 1/ we prefs them then with the Htflory of other Nations, they are as well provided here ; if we enquire an Account of Europe, Afia, or Libya ; for the firfi we are told a fine Story of Cadmus'i Sif{er ; for the fecond of Prometheus'f Mother of that Name ; and for the third of a Daughter of Epaphus. And so the learned Author goes on with other particular Nations, which they boafted themselves to be the Founders of. Only the grave Athenians thought Scorn to have any Father ajfigned them, their only Ambition was to be accounted Aborigines 8c gcnuini Terrae. But the Ignorance and Vanity of the Greek Hiftory, that learned Author hath fufiv:iently refuted. Vid. Stilling. Orig. Sacr. Part. i. B. i. c 4.

T 5 who

2,78 Of Maris Invention. Book V.

who oftentimes doth manifest himself in some of the most considerable of those Works of Men, by some remarkable Tranfaftions of his Providence, or by some great Revolution or other happening in the World thereupon. Of this I might inflance in the Invention of Printing {hh)^ fucceedcd first by a train of Learned Men, and the Revival of Learning, and foon after that by the Reformation , and the much greater Improvements of Learning at this Day. But the most considerable instance I can give is, the progress of Chriftianity, by means of the civilized disposition, and large Extent of the Roman Empire. The latter of which, as it made way for human Power; so the former made way for our most excellent Religion into the Minds of Men. And so I hope, and earneftly pray, that the Omnipotent and AUwife Ruler of the World will tranfaft the Affairs of our most Holy Religion, e'er it be long, in the Heathen World ; that the great Improvements made in the last, and present Age, in Arts and Sciences, in Navigation and Commerce, may be a Means to tranfport our Religion, as well as Name, through all the Nations of the Earth. For we find that our Culture of the more polite and curious Sciences, and our great Improvements in even the Mechanick Arts, have already made a Way for ,us into some of the largeft and fartheft

(Jbb) Whether Printing was invente'd in X440, as many imagine, or was fooner pradlifed, in 1430, or 1432, as Mr. Ellts's Account of the Dutch Infcription in Phtl. Tranf, No. z86. doth import; it is however manifest, how great an Influence (as it was natural) this Invention had in the promoting of Learning foon afterwards, mentioned before in note (*). After which followed the Reformation about |he Year 15 17.

diftant

Chap. I. Of Man's Invention. 279

diftant Nations of the Earth j particularly into the great Empire of China {cc).

And now, before I quit this Subjcdt, I cannot but make one Remark, by way of praftical Inference, from what has been lalt said ; and that is, Since it appears that the Souls of Men are ordered , difppled and aftuatcd by God , even in fecular, as well as fpiritual Chrillian Aftsj a Duty arifeth thence on every Man, to purfuc the Ends, and answer all the designs of the divine Providence, in bellowing his Gifts and Graces upon him. Men are ready to imagine their Wit, Learning, Genius, Riches, Authority, and such like, to be Works of Nature, Things of Courfc, Growing to their own Diligence, Subtilcy, or some Secondary causes i that they are Matters of them, and at Liberty to ufe them as they pleafe, to gratifie their Lull or Humour, and fatisfie their depraved Appetites. But it is evident, that thcfc Things are the Gifts of God, they arc so many Talents cntrufted with us by the infinite Lord of

(cc) The Chlnefe being much addided to Judicial Allrology, are great Obfervers ot the Heavens, and the A;;pcarances in them. For which Purpolc they have an ObjervAtory at Pehin, and five Mathematicians appointed to watch every Night; four towards the tour Quarters of the World, and one towards the 2-enith, that nothing inay efcape their Dbl'ervation. Which observations are the next Morning brought to an Office to be regiftred. But notwitliflanding this their Diligence for many Ages, and that the Emperor hath kept in his Service above ico Perfons to regulate the Kalendar, yet are they such mean Aftronomers,.ihat they owe the Regulation of their Kalendar, the Exadnefs in calculating Eclipfes, crc to the Europaam; which renders the if«ro/i4:<7» Mathematicians so acceptable to the Emperor, ihit Father Verbteji and divers others, were not only made Principals in the Obfervatory, but put into I'laces of great Tiujl in the Empire, and had the greated Honours paid them at their Deatiis. Vid. La Qomie Mem. of China. Let(;r i\. arc

T 4 the

x8o Of Man's Invention, BookV.

the World, a Stewardfhip, a Truft repofed in us i for which we must give an Account at the Day when our Lord shall call j according to the parabolical Reprefentation of this Matter by our Blcffed Saviour, Matt. xxv. 14.

Our Duty then is not to abufe these Gifts of God, not to negkSl the Gift that is in us^ not to hide our 'Talent in the Earth 5 but as St. Paul exhorteth Timothy^ 1 Tim. i. 6. we must ftir up the Gift of God which is in us^ and not let it lie idle, concealed or dead 5 but we must ccv«(w7ryf«v to;^<»- e/a-fxct, blow it up^ and enkindle ity as the Original imports i we must improve and employ our Gift to the Glory of the Giver ; or in that Miniftration, that Ufe and Service of the World, for which he gave it. Our Stewardfhip, our Craft, our Calling, be it that of AmbafTadors of Heaven, committed to us, as 'twas to Timothy, (dd) by the laying on of Hands } or be it the more fecular business of the Gentleman, Tradefman, Mechanick, or only Servant ; nay, our good Genius, our Propenfity to any Good, as suppose to Hiftory, Mathematicks, Botany, Natural Philofophy, Mechanicks, Cffc. I say all these Occupations, in which the Providence of God hath engaged Men, all the Inclinations to which his Spirit hath difpofed them, ought to be difcharged with that Diligence, that Care and Fidelity, that our great Lord and Mafter may not say to us, as we said to the unfaithful Steward, huke xvi. z. Give an Account of thy Stewardfhip^ for thou mayefl be no longer Steward ; but that he may say, as 'tis in the Parable before cited. Mat. xxv. 21. Well done thou good and faithful Servant, thou hafi been faithful over a few Things, I will make thee Ruler over many Things, enter thou

{dd) I Tim. iv. 14. 1 Tim. i. 6'.

into

Chap. II. Of Man's ToJIure. i8i

into the Joy of thy Lord. Since now the Cafe is thus, let us be perfuaded to follow Solomon's Advice, Ecckf.iyi. 10. IVhatfoever thy Hand findeth t9 do^ do it "juith thy Might (ee) : " Lay hold on " every Occafion that prclents it self, and improve '^ it with the utmoft Diligcncej bccaufe now is the " Time of A6kion, both in the Employments of " the Body, and of the Mind -, now is the Sea- " son of Undying either Arts and Sciences, or " wisdom and Virtue, for which thou wilt have " no Opportunities in the Place whither thou art " going in the other World, for there is no ^^ork^ " tior Device^ nor Kno'wledge^ nor IVifdom in the '* Grave 'whither thou goeji.

{ee) Bifiiop Patrick in loc.

CHAP. II.

Of Man's Body, particularly /Vj P o s t u r e.

HAving thus, as briefly as well I could, furveyed the Sotil^ let us next take a View of Man""! Body. Now here we have such u Multiplicity of the most cxquifite Workmanfhip, and of the bcft Contrivance, that if we should Ihiftly furvey the Body from Head to Foot, and fearch only into the known Parts (and many more lie undifcovered) wc ihould find too large and tedious a Task to be diffpatchcd. I (liall therefore have Time only to take a tranficnt and general Kind of View ot this admirable Machine, and that some what briefly too, being prevented by others, paititulaily iwo excellent

^J8^ Of Man's Tofture. . Book V.

lent Authors of our own {a\ who have done it on the same Account as my self. And the

I. Thing that presents itself to our View, is the Ere^ Poflure {b) of Man's Body 5 which is far the most, if not the only commodious Poilure for a rational Creature, for him that hath Dominion over the other Creatures, for one that can inventufeful Things, and praftife curious Arts. Iforwithout this ere6b Poilure, he could not have readily turned himself to every business, and on cvery Occafion. His Hand {c) particularly could

not

(4) Mr. Ray in his IVifdom of God manifefted in the Works of Creation , Part i. and Dr. Cockburu'i ^'Jl^y^ on Faith, Part I. Effay 5.

(Jb) Adhanc providentiam Natur&tam diligeritem [of which he had been before fpeaking] tamque folertem adjungi multa foffunt., e quibus intdiigatur, quants, res hotnimbus a Deo, quamque eximiA tribute [tint : qui primhtn eos humo excitatos, celfos CT* ereSlos confiituit, ut Deorum cognitionem, caelum intuentes, capere pojfunt. Sunt enim e terra homines non ut incoU, atque habitatores, fed quafi fpe^latores fuperarum rerum, atque caelejiiuw, quarum fpeSiaculum ad nullum aliud genius animantium pertinet. Cic. de Nat. Deor. L. z. c. 56.

(c) Ut autem fapientiffimum animalium est Homo, ft car Ma - »us funt organa fapientt animali convenientia. Non enim quia Manus habuit, propterea est fapientiffimum, ut Anaxagoras dicd>at ; fed quia fapientijfimum erat, propter hoc Manus habuit, ut retiijftme cenjuit Ariftoteles, Non enim Manus ipfd hominem artes docuerunt, fed Ratio. Manus autem ipf& funt artium organa, &c, Galen, de Uf. Part. L, i. c. 3. After which, in the rest of this first Book, and part of the fecond, he confiders the Particulars of the Hand, in order to enquire, as he faith, ch. 5. Num eam omnino Conftitutionem habeat [manus] qua meliorem aliam habere non potuit.

Of this Part, (and indeed of the other Parts of human Bodies) he gives so good an Account, that I confefs I could not but admire the Skill of that ingenious and famed Heathen. For an Example, (because it is a little out of the Way,) I.ftjall pitch upon his Account of the different Length of the Fingers. L. .1. i. 24. The reason of this mechanism,

Chap.II. OfMansToJiiire. ^^3

not have been in so great a Rcadinefs to execute the Commands of the Will, and Diftatcs of the Soul. His Eyes would have been the most prone, and incommodioufly iituatcd of all Animals i but by this Situation, he can call his Eyes upwards, downwards, and round about him j he hath a Horious Hcmifphere of the Heavens (^, and an ample Horizon on Earth (^), to entertain

^'^^y" • And

nifm, he faith, is. That the Tops of the Fingers may come to an Equahty, cum magnm aliqucn tntles tn circuttu comprehendunty cr chm tn feipfis humtdum vel par-vum corpm continere conantur. Apparent lero in unam circuit ctrcumfertntiam convtnire Diittt quinque in atltontbus hujufmodt Tntxime quando exqtufite fphiricum corpus comprehendunt. And this Lvcnnefs of the Fingers Ends, in grai'ping fphasncal, and other round Bodies, he truly enough iaiih, makes the Hold the firmer. And it seems a noble and pious design he had in so ftriftly furveymg the Parts of Man's Body, which take in his own tranflated Words, Cum multa nawque efl'et apud -veteres, tarn Mtdicos, qukm Philofophos de uttlttate particuUrum difjenfio (qutdam cmm corpora noflra nullim gratia efl'e fa£U exijiimant, nulUque omntno arte ; alii autem CT

altcu'Ui zratia, cr artificios-e, ; pnmum qmdem tants

huit^ dtjfenfionii .ce,:rve/t«» invemre ftudui : detnde vero c unam aliquant univcrfalem tnethcdum conjlituere, qua fingularum partium corporis, V eerum qui Hits accidunt utiittatem invenire poJJemM. Ibid. cap. 8.

(^d) Pronaque cutn fpeHant animalta cetera terram, Os Hommi ftibhme dedit, caelumque tueri ^ujfit, V erecHos ad ftdera tollere vultus.

Ovid. Metam. L. r. car. 84. (e) If any (hould be so curious, to delire to know how far' a Man's Profpeft reacheth, by Means of the Height of his Eye, fuppofmg the Earth was an uninterrupted Globe; the Method is a common Cafe of right-angled pl^in Triangles, where two Sides, and an oppofite Angle are given: Thus in Fig. />,. A H B \% the Surface, or a great Circle of the terraqueous Globe; C the Center, H C us Scmidizmeter, £ the Height of the Eye ; and forafmuch as // II is a Tangent, therefore the Angle at // is a right 'Angle: So that there are given H C 398,386 Miies, or 21034781 F»-

iltft,

i84 Of Man's Tofiure. BookV.

glifh Feet, (according to Book II. Chap. 2. Note {a);) C E the same Length with the Height of the Eye, on the Malt of a Ship, or at only a Man's Height, vc added to it; and £ H C the oppofite right Angle. By which three Parts given, it is eafy to find all the other Parts of the Triangle. And first, the Angle at C, in order to find the Side H £", the Proportion is, As the Side C E, to the Angle at H; so the Side H G, to the Angle at E, which being fubftrafted out of 90 gr. the Remainder is the Angle at C. And then. As the Angle at E, is to its oppofite Side H C, or elfe as the Angle at H is to its oppofite Side C £ ; so the Angle at C, to its oppofite Side E H, the visible Horizon. Or the Labour may be (liortned, by adding together the Logarithm of the Sum of the two given Sides, and the Logarithm of their Difference ; the half of which two Logarithms, is the Logarithm of the Side requir'd, nearly. For an Example, We will take the two Sides in Yards, by reason scarce any Table of Logarithms will serve us farther. The Semidiameter of the Earth is 7011594 Yards; the Height of the Eye is two Yards more, the Sum of both Sides, is 14013190.

Logar. of which Sum is, 7,1468468

Logar. of two Yards (the Differ.) is, 0,3010300

Sum of both Logar. 7,4478768

The half Sum, 3.71393^4

is the Logar. of 5196 Yards = three Miles, which is the Length of the Line E H, or distance the Eye can reach at fix Feet Height.

This would be the distance, on a perfeft Globe, did the vifual Rays come to the Eye in a ftrait Line; but by Means of the Refraaions of the Atmofphcre, diftant Objeds on the Horizon, appear higher than really they are, and may be seen at a greater distance, efpccially on the Sea ; which is a Matter of great Ufe, especially to discover at Sea the Land, Rocks, z^c. and it is a great Ad of the divine Providence, in the Contrivance and Convenience of the atmosphere, which by this Means enlargeth the visible Horizon, and is all one, as if the terraqueous Globe was much larger than really it is. As to the Height of the Apparent abovp the true Level, or how much diftant Objeds are rais'd by the Refradlions, the ingenious and accurate Gentlemen of the Trench Academy Royal^ have given us a Table in their measure of the Earth, Art. ii.

if) See

Chap. 11. Of MatisToJiure. i8^

And as this Ercftion of Man's Body is the mod complcat posture for him j so if we furvcy the Provifion made for it, we find all done with manifed design, the utmoll Art and Skill being employ'd therein. To pass by the particular Conformation of many of the Parts, the Ligaments and Faftnings to answer this posture j as the Faftning, for instance, of the Pericardium to the Diaphragm, (which is peculiar to Man (/)> I Giy, pafling by a deal of this Nature, manifefting this posture to be an Aft of design,) let us ftop a littk at the curious Fabrick of the Bones, those PiW lars of the Body. And how artificially do wc find them made, how curiously plac'd from the Head to Foot ! The Vertebra of the Neck and Back-bone (|), made short and complanated, and firmly braced with muscles and Tendons, for eafy Incurvations of the Bodyj but withal for greater Strength, to fupport the Body's own Weight, together with other additional Weights it may have Occafion to bear. The Thigh-bones and Legs long, and strong, and every Way well fitted for the Motion of the Body. The Feet accommodated with a great Number of Bones, curiously and firmly tacked together, (to which must be added the Miniftry of the muscles {h)y to answer all the

Motions

(/•) See Book VI. Chap. 5. Nott {g).

\g) See Book IV. Chap. 8, Note ^c).

{h) The mechanism oi the Foot, would appear to be wonderful, if I (hould dcfcend to a Deicnption of all its Parts; but tiiat would be too long tor thcfe Notes; therefore a brief Account, (most of which I owe to the beforecommended Mr. Chefelden,) may fcrve for a Sample: In the first Place, It is neccffary the Foot should be concave, to enable us to (land firm, and that the Nerves and Blood- Veffcls may be free from Compreffion when wc stand or walk. In order hereunto, the long lUxin of the Toes

crofs

lU Of Man's Tofture. Book V.

Motions of the Legs and Thighs, and at the same Time to keep the Body upright, and prevent its falling, by readily aflifting against every Vacillation thereof, and with eafy and ready Touches keeping the Line of Innixiony and Center of Gravity in due Place and I?ofture (/).

And as the Bones are admirably adapted to prop } so all the Parts of the Body are as incomparably plac'd to poife it. Not one Side too heavy for the other 5 but all in nice iEquipoife : The Shoulders, Arms, and Side equilibrated on one Part} on the other Part the Vifcera of the Belly counterpois'd with the Weight of the fcapular Part, and that ufeful Cufhion of Flefh behind.

And lastly. To all this we may add the wonderful Concurrence, and Miniftry of the prodigious Number and Variety of muscles, plac'd throughout the Body for this Service ; that they should so readily answer to every Pofturej and comply with every Motion thereof, without any previous

crofs one another at the Bottom of the Foot, in the Form of a St. Axdrezu's Crofs, to incline the lefTer Toes towards the great One, and the great One towards the lefTer. The fiort Flexors are chiefly concern'd in drawing the Toes towards the Heel. The tranfverfalk Pedis draws the Outlides of the Foot towards each other; and by being inferted into one of the fefamoid Bones, of the great Toe, diverts the Power of the abduSlor Mufcie, (falfly so call'd,) and makes it become a Flexor. And lastly, the feron&t'U LongHs runs round the outer Ankle, and obliquely forwards crofs the Bottom of the Foot, and at once helps to extend the Tarfus, to conlbitft the Foot, and to direft the Power of the other Extenjors towards the Ball of the great Toe : Hence the Lofs of the great Toe, is more than of all the other Toes. See alfo Mr. Cowper's Anat. Tab. i8. cj'c.

(f) It is very well worth while to compare here what Borelli faith, de mottt Animal. Par. i. cap. 18. Be fiatione Animal. Prop. 132,, o'c. To which I refer the Reaaer, it being too long to recite here.

Thought

Chap. III. Of Man's Figure. 187

Thought or Reflex afb, so that (as the excellent BorclU {k) faith), ^' It is worthy of Admiration, *' that in so great a Variety 'of Motions, as run- ^' ning, leaping, and dancing, Nature's Laws of " ^Equilibration {hould always be obfcrvcd j and " when negledted, or wilfully tranfgrcflld , that *' the Body must neccflarily and immcdiauly tumble down.

(k) Borel. ibid. Prop. 141.

CHAP. III.

Of the FiGVKEand Shave of Mau*s Body.

TH E Figure and Shape of Man's Body, is the mod: commodious that could poflibly be invented for such an Animal j the moil: agreeable to his Motion, to his Labours, and all his Occafions. For had he been a rational Reptile, he could not have moved from Place to Place fail enough for hisBufinefs, nor indeed have done any almoil. Had he been a racional Quadrupedc, among other Things, he had loft the Benefit of his Hands, those noble Inftruments of the moftufeful Performances of the Body. Had he been made a Bird, befides many other great Incoveniencies, thole before-mentioned of his Flying would have been some. In a word, any other Shape of Body, but that which the All-wife Creator hath given Man, would have been as incommodious, as any posture but that of ered:j it would have rendered him more helplefs, or have put it in his Power to have been more pernicious, or deprived him of Ten thoufand Benefits,

or

HTM *

a88 Of Man's Stature, Book V.

or Pleafures, or Conveniences, which his present Figure capacitates him for.

CHAP. IV. O/'^^^Statuke and Size ofMan'sBoDv.

AS in the Figure, so in the Stature and Size of Man*s Body, we have another manifest Indication of excellent design. Not too Pygmean (^), nor too Gigantick (^), either of which Sizes would in some particular or other, have been incommodious to himself, or to his business, or to the rest of his Fellow-Creatures. Too Pygmean would have rendered him too puny a Lord of the Creation; too impotent and unfit to manage the inferiour Creatures, would have expofed him to the Aflaults of the weakeft Animals, to the ravening Appetite of voracious Birds, and have put him in the Way, and endangered his being trodden in the Dirt by the larger Animals. He would have been alfo too weak for his business, unable to carry Burdens, and in a word, to tranfa6t the greater part of his Labours and Concerns.

And on the other hand, had Man's Body been made too monftroufly Itrong, too enormoufly Gi-

(a) What is here urged about the Size of Man's Body, may ani'wer one of Lucretius's reasons why Nil ex nihilo gignitur. His Argument is

Deniqtte cur Homines tantos natura parare Non potuit, pedibus qui pontum per vada. pojfent Tranfirey v" ma^nos tnanibus divellere monteis ?

Lucret. L. i. Carm. zoo.' (^) Haud facile fit ut quifquam v ingentes corporis vires, c inzeHUitn fuhiile habeat. Diodor. Sic. L. 17.

ganticK

Chap. IV. Of Man's Stature. 2.89

gantick (r), it would have rendered him a dangerous

[c) Altho' we read of Giants before Noah's Flood, Gen. vi. 4. and more plainly afterwards in Numb. xiii. 33. Yet there is great reason to think the Size of Man was always the same from the Creation. For as to the NephiUm or Gian:s, in Gen. vi. the Ancients vary about them; some taking them for great Atheifts, and Monfters of Impiety, Rapine* Tyranny, and all Wickednefs, as well as of nionlUous Stature, according as indeed the Hebrew Signification allows.

And as for the NephiUm in Numb. xiii. which were evidently Men of a Giganrick Siie, it must be considered, that 'it is very probable, the Fears and Difcontentments of the Spies might add foraewhat thereunto.

But be the Matter as it will, it is very manifest, that in both these Places, Giants are spoken of as Rarities, and Wonders of the Age, not of the common Stature. And such instances we have had in all Ages; excepting some fabulous Relations; such as I take to be that of Theutobocchusi who is said to have been dug up, Anno 161 3, and to have been higher than the Trophies, and 26 Feet long; and no better 1 suppose the Giants to have been, that Ol. Magnus gives an Account of in his 5'^ Book, such as Hart hen, and ^tarchater, among the Men; and among the Women, repert a ejl (lailh he) puella in capiie vulnerata, acmortua, induta chlamyJe purpurea, longitudinis cubitorum 50, latituJinis inter humeros quatuor. Ol. Mag. hist. L. 5. c. Z.

But as for the more credible Relations of Goliath (whoft Height wctf 6 Cubits and a Span, I Sam. xvii 4. which according to the late curious and learned Lord Bijhop of Peterborough is fomewhat above 11 Feet Englifl), vid. Bifliop Cumberland of Je-wijfj Weights and measures) of Maximmus the Emperor, who was 9 Feet high, and others in Augujlus, and other Reigns, of about the same Height: To which we may add the Dimenfions of a skeleton, dug up lately in the Place of a Roman Camp near St. Albans, by an Urn infcribed, Alarcus Antoninus; of which an Account is given by Mr. Chefelden, who judgeth by the Dimenfions of the Bores, that the Perfon was 8 Foot high, vid. Philof. Jranf N". 333. these antique Examples and Relations, 1 say, wccanmatch, yea, out-do, with modern Examples; of which we have divers in ^. Ludolph. Comments in hist. JEthiop. L. i. C. i §. 2.Z. Magus, Conringiui, Dr. Hakc-viil, and others. Which later relates from Nannez, of Porters and Archers bcWng-

U »«'3

1^0 Of Man's Stature. ' BookV.

ing to the Eraperor of China, of 15 Feet high ; and others from Purchas, of 10 and 11 Feet high, and more. Seethe learned Author's Apolog. p. 208.

these indeed exceed what I have seen in England; but in 1684, I my self meafur'd an Irijij Youth, said to be not 19 Years old, who was 7 Feet near 8 Inches, and in 1697, a Woman who was 7 Feet 3 Inches in Height.

But for the ordinary Size of Mankind, in all Probability, it was always (as I said) the same, as may appear from the Montimcnts, Mummies, and other ancient Evidences to be seen at this Day, The most ancient Monument at this Day, I prefume is that of Cheops, in the first and faireft Pyramid of JEgypt; which was, no doubt, made of Capacity every "Way sufficient to hold the Body of so great a Perfon as was intended to be laid up in it. But this we find by the nice Meafares of our curious Mr. Greaves, hardly to exceed ou» common Coffins. The hollow Part within (faith he) is in Length only 6,488 Feet, and in Bteadth but z,zi8 leet : The Depth 1,860 Teet. A narrow /pace, yet large enough to contain a most potent and dreadful Monarch, being dead ; to whom liv" ing, all ^gypt was too ftreight and narrow a Circuit. By these Dinienftons, and by such other observations, as have heen taken by me from fever al embalmed Bodies in T^gypt, we may conclude there is no decay in Nature (though the §}uefti' en is as old as Homer) but that the Men of this Age are of the same Stature they were near 30CO Years ago, vid. Greaves of the Pyr. in 1638, in Ray'% CoUedt. of Trav, Tom. i, pag. 118.

To this more ancient, we may add others of a later Date." Of which take these, among others, from the curious and learned Hakewill. The Tombs at Pifa, that are feme thoufand Years old, are not longer than ours ; so is Athelftane's in Malmesbury-Chnrch ; so Sehba's in St. PauCSf of the Year 693; so Etheldred's,dcc. Apol. il6,cc.

The same Evidence we have alfo from the Armour, Shields, Veflels, and other Utenfils dug tip at this Day. The Brafs Helmet dug up at Metaurum, which was not doubted to have been left there at the Overthrow of Afdrubal, will fit one of our Men at this Day.

Nay, befides all this, probably we have some more certain Evidence. Auguflus was 5 Foot 9 Inches high, which was the juft measure of our famous Queen Elizabeth, who exceeded his Height z Inches, if proper Allowance be made for the Difference between the Roman and our Fool. Vid. Hakew, ib. p.iis.

(d) To

Chap. IV. Of Man's Stature. 191

rous Tyrant in the World, too strong {d) in fomc Refpcdbs, even for his own Kind, as well as the other Creatures. Locks and Doors might pcr-

{d) To the Stature of Men in the foregoing Note, we may add some Remarks about their unufual ^trenith. That of Sampfon (who is not said to have exceeded othet Men in Stature as he did in Strength) is well known. So of old, Beilor, Diomedts, Hercules, and yljax are famed ; and fincc them many others ; for which I (hall feck no farther than the before commended Hakewitl, who by his great and curious Learning, hath often most of the Examples that are to be met with on all his Subjedls he undertakes. Of the Af- .ter-Ages he names C. Marius, Maximinus, Aurelian, Scanderberge, Bardeftn, Tamerlane, S\/ka, and Hunniades. AnnO 1519, Klunher, Provoft of the great Church at Alifnia, carry'd a Pipe of Wine out of the Cellar, and laid it m the Cart. Mayolus faw one hold a Marble Pillar in his Hand 3 Foot long, and r Foot diameter, which he tofs'd up in the Air, and catched again, as if it were a Ball. Another of Mantua, and a little Man, named Rodamas, could break a Cable, crc. tLrnando Burg, fetched up Stairs an Afs laden \vith Wood, and threw both into the Fire. At ConftantiKofle. Anno T582, one lifted a Piece of Wood, that twelve Men could scarce raise : then lying along, he bare a Stone that ten Men could but juft roll to him. G. of Fronsl/erge, baron Mindlehaim, could raise a Man off his Seat, with only his middle Finger ; flop, an horse in his full Career; and fhove a Cannon out of its Place. Cardan faw a Man dance with two Men in his Arms, two on his Shoulders, and one on his Neck. Patacoua, Captain of the CoJJ'achs, could tear an horse-Shoe ( and if I miftake not, the same is reported bf the present King Auguftus of Poland) A Gigantick Woman of the Netherlands could lift a Barrel of Hamburgh Beer. Mr. Carew had a Tenant that could carry a But's Length, 6 Bufhel of Wheaten Meal (of 15 Gallon measure) with the Lubber, the Miller of z4 Years of Age, on the top of it. And J. Roman of the same County, could carry the Carcafs of an Ox. Vid. Hakewill, ib. p. 238.

Viroi aliquot moderna memoria tarn a mineralihus, a/n.hn aliis Seuthi<e c'' GothU provinciis adJiicere congruit, t am A fortitudint prdditos, ut qui/que eorum in hurncros fuLlevatum Bquum, vel Bovem maximum, imo vas Jerri 600, 8co, aut 1000 librarum (quale CP* aliquA PuelU levari foff'unlj ad plu- *-tt ftadia portarct. Ol. Mag. ubi fupr.

U Z haps

1^2) Of Man's Stature. BookV,

haps have been made of sufficient Strength to have barricaded our houses j and Walls, and Ramparts might perhaps have been made strong enough to have fenced our Cities. But these Things could not have been without a great and inconvenienE Expence of Room, Materials, and such Neceflaries, as such vast Stru61:ures and Ufes would have occafioned j more perhaps than the World could have afforded to all Ages and Places. But let us take the Defcant of a good Naturalift and Phyfician on the Cafe {e). " Had Man been a Dwarf " (said he) he had scarce been a reafonable Crea- " ture. For he mud then have had a Jolt Hcadj* *' so there would not have been Body and Blood ^' enough to supply his Brain with Spirits j or he "• must have had a small Head, anfwerable to his " Body, and {o there would not have been Brain *' enough for his business — ^Or had the Species of " Mankind been Gigantick, he could not have " been so commodioufly fupplied with Food. For *' there would not have been Flefh enough of the " best edible Beafls, to serve his Turn. And if *' Beails had been made anfwerably bigger, there " would not have been Grafs enough. And so he goeth on. And a little after, " There would not " have been the same Ufe and discovery of his " reason j in that he would have done many " Things by mere Strength, for which he is now " put to invent innumerable Engines — . Neither " could he have ufed an horse, nor divers other " Creatures. But being of a middle Bulk, he is " fitted to manage and ufe them all. For (faith " he) no other cause can be affigned why a Man was not made five or ten Times bigger, but his

ic

.(#) Grew's Cofmol, Sacr. B. i. ch, 5. §, 25.

- .. " Relatiew

Chap.V. Of the StruBurc^^c. 193

" Relation to the rest of the Univcifc. Thus far our curious Author.

CHAP. V.

Of the S T R u c T u RE 0/ ^/;£' Parts of Man's Body.

HAving thus taken a View of the posture, Shape, and Size of Man's Body, let us in this Chapter furvey the Strudurc of its Parts. But here we have so large a Profped, that it would be endlefs to proceed upon Particulars. It mud futlice therefore to take Notice, in general only, how artificially every Part of our Body is made. No Botch, no Blunder, no unneccflary y^/>- paratus (or in other Words) no Signs of Chance {a) ; but e\fcry Thing curious, orderly, and performed in the shortest and bcft Method, and adapted to the molt compendious VCc. What one Part is there throughout the whole Body, but what is compofcd of the fitteft Matter for that Part ;

(a) It is manifeftly an Argument of DeGgn, that in the Bodies of different Animals, there is an Agreement of the Parts, so far as the Occafions and Ortices agree, but a difference of those, where there is a difference of these. In a^ Human Body are many Parts agreemg with those of a Dog for Inlhnce; but in his Forehead, Fingers, Hand, Inliruments of Speech, and many other Paris, there are Mufclcs, and other Members which are not in a Dog. And so contrariwife in a Dog, which is not in a Man. If the Reader is minded to see what particular muscles arc in a Man, that are not in a Dog ; or in a Dog that are not in an Humane Body, let him confult the curious and accurate Anatomill Dr. Douglafi's Myogr, compar.

U 5 naadff

194 Of the StruBure BookV.

made of the most proper Strength and Texture \ fhaped in the eompleatefl Form j and in a word, accouter'd with every Thing necessary for its Motion, Office, Nourifhment, Guard, and what not! What so commodious a Strufture and Texture could have been given to the Bones, for instance, to make them firm and strong, and withal light, as thap which every Bone in the Body hath ? Who could have fhaped them so nicely to every Ufe, and adapted them to ever Part, made them of such jufl Lengths, given them such due Sizes and Shapes^ chanelled , hollowed , headed , lubricated , and every other Thing miniftring, in the bell and most compendious manner to their several Places and Ufes ? What a glorious CoUeftion and Combination have we alfo of the most exquifite Workmanfhip and Contrivance in the Eye, in the Ear^ in the Hand (^), in the Foot (^), in the Lungs, and other Parts already mention'd? What an Abridgment of

{h) Gdt/ew having described the muscles, Tendons, and other Parts of the Fingers, and their Motions, cries out. Consider a igitur tt'iam h\c mirabilem Ckeatoris fapieniiam f DeUf. Part. L. i. c. i8.

(c) And not only in the Hand, but in his Account of the Foot (£. 3.) he frequently takes notice of what he calls ^rtem, Providentiam CT* Sapienttam Conditor'ts. As Ch. 13. An igitur non e,quuro est htc quoque admirari Providentiam Condisorts, qui ad utrumque ufumy etfi certe contrariuoj, exa^e convenientes c^ confentientes invicem fabricatus est totius memhri [tibiae] particulas? And at the end of the Chap. G^ubd fi omnia qu& ipfarum funt partium mente immutaverimus, neque inveaerimus pofitionem aliam meliorem ea quam nunc forlita funt, neque figuram, neque magnitudinem, neque connexi- »ntm, neque (ut paucis omnia comple^ar ) aliud quidquam eorum, qu* corporibus necejfario infunt, perfe^lijfimam pronuniiare oportet, cr undique reSte conftitutam pr^fentem ejus coU" ftru6lionem. The like ?lfo concludes, Ch. 15.

Arts

Cbap.V. of Man's Body. 19^

Art, what a Variety of Ufcs (^), hath Nature lai4 upon that one Member of the Tongue, the grand Inftrument of Tall, the faithful Judge, th^CcntincI, the Watchman of all our Nourifhmcnr, the artful Modulator of our Voice, the neccflary Servant of Mallication, Swallowing, Sucking, and a great deal befidcs ? But I mull defilt from proceeding upon Particulars, finding I am fallen upon what I proposed to avoid.

And therefore for a close of this Chapter, I {hall only add Part of a Letter I receiv'd from the before-commended very curious and ingenious Phyfician Dr. Tancred Roblnfon^ JVhat^ (faith he,) can fojfibly be better contriv''d for animal Motion and Life^ than the quick Circulation of the Blood and Fluids^ which run out .of Sight in capillar:^ Vejfehy and very minute DuHs^ without Impediment^ (except in some Difeafes^) being all direSled to their peculiar Glands and Chanels^ for the different Secretion^ sensible and infenfible ; whereof the lafl is far the grea^ tefi in ^tantity and EffeUs^ as to Health and Sicknefs^ acute Difiempers frequently arifing from a Di' minution ofTranfpiration^ through the cutaneous Chimneysy and some chronical Ones from an Augment iation : Whereas ObftruSlions in the Liver, Panr creas, and other Glands^ may only cause a SchirruSy a 'Jaundice, an Ague, a Dropfy, or other slow Difeafes. So an Increafe of that Secretion may accompany the general Colliquations, as in Fluxes, he^lick Sweats and Coughs, Diabetes, and other Confumptions. What a mighty Contrivance is there to preferve tbefe due Secretions from she Blood, (on which

(li) At enim Opificis indujlr'ti maximum est indicium Cqutmadmodum ante fsfenumero jam diximusj iis qu* ad alium ufum fuerunt comparata, ad alias auoque utilitates abuti, nequg laborare ut fingulis utilitatibus ftngul;K fuiiat propria^ partimlas, Galciu ub. fupr. L. 9. c. 5.

■ ■ ■ - - u ^ liff

z^6 Of the Structure ^ dec. BookV.

Life so much depends^) by frequent j^ttritions, and Communications of the Fluids in their PaJJage through the Hearty the Lungs, and the whole Syfiem of the muscles? IVhat Meanders and Contortions of F'effeJs, in the Organs of Separation? And, What a Concourfe of elajiick Bodies from the Air, to supply the Springs, and continual Motions of some Parts, not only in Sleep, and Refi ; hut in long 'violent Exercifes of the muscles ? whose Force drive the Fluids round in a wonderful rapid Circulation through the minutefi ftuhes, ajfified by the conjiant Pabulum of the At-- mofphere, and their own elafiick Fibres, which imprefs that Velocity on the Fluids.

Now I ha'oe mentioned some Ufes of the Air, in carrying on fever al sun^ions ra animal Bodies j / may add the Share it hath in all the Digefiions of the folid and fluid Parts. For when this Syfiem of Air comes, by divine Permittance, to be corrupted with poyfonous, acrimonious Steams, cither from the Earthy from Merchandife, or infe6led Bodies, What Ha^ vock is made in all the Operations of living Creatures ? The Parts gangrene, and mortify under Carbuncles, and other '7'okens : Indeed, the whole animal Oeconomy is ruined j of such Importance is the Air to all the Parts of it. Thus my learned Friend.

CHAP,

Chap. VI. -97

CHAP. VI. Of the Placing the Parts of Man's Body.

I

N this Chapter, I propofe to consider the Lodgment of the curious Parts of Man's Body, which is no Icfs admirable than the Parts thcmfelvcs, all fct in the most convenient Places of the Body, to minifter to their own fcveral Ufes and Purpofcs, and aflift, and mutually to help one another. Where could those faithful Watchmen the Eye, the Ear, the Tongue, be so commodioufly plac'd, as in the upper Part of the Buildmg? Where could we throughout the Body find so proper a Part to lodge four of the five Senfes, as in the»Head (^), near the Brain (/>), the common Senfory, a Place well guarded, and of little other Ufe than to be a Seat to those Senfes ? And, How could we lodge the fifth Senfe, that of Touching otherwife (Oj than to difpcrfc it to all Parts of the

{a) Senfui, ifiterpretes ac nuntn rerum, in captte, tanquam in arte, m'tnfice ad ufus necejjarios CT* f'aCli, cr colbcati funt. Nam octili tanquatn fpeculatores, altijjmum locum obtintnt ; ex quo piurima confpiaenres, fungantur fuo munerc. Ht anret cum fontim recipere dehea7it, qui naturd m fuhlime fertur ; re- ^e in Hits corporum partialis collocate junt. ClC. de Nat. Dcor. L. 1. c. 56. ubi plura de caeteris Scnlibus.

{b) Galen well ohferves, that the Nerves minidring to Motion, are hard and firm, to be leis fubjedt to Injury; but: those miiiilirmg to Senfe, are soft and tender; and that tor this Reafnn it is, that four of the five Senfes are lodg'd so near the Brain, viz.. partly to partake of the Brain's Sottnels and Tendernefs, and partly for the Sake of the strong Guard of the Skull. Vid. Gal. de Vf. Part. L. 8. C. 5. 6. >

(f) See Book IV. Chap. 6. Note {c),

Body ?

X98 Of the T lacing Book V.

Body? Where cculd we plant the Hand {d\ but juft where it is, to be ready at every Turn, on all Ocgafions of Help and Defence, of Motion, A6bion, and every of its ufeful Services? Where could we set the Legs and Feet, but where they are, to bear up, and handfomely to carry about the Body ? Where could we lodge the Heart, to labour about the whole Mafs of Blood, but in, or near the Center of the Body {e) ? Where could we find Room for that noble Engine to play freely in? Where could we so well guard it again ft external Harms, as it is in that very Place in which it is lodg'd and fecur'd? Where could we more commodioufly Place, than in the Thorax and Belly, the ufeful Fifcera of those Parts, so as not to fwag, and jog, and over-set the Body, and yet to miniiler so harmonioufly, as rhey do, to all the several Ufes of Concoction, Sanguification, the Separation of various Ferments from the Blood, for the great Ufes of Nature, and to make Dif^harges of what is ufelefs, or would be burdenfome or pernicious to the Body (/) ? How could we plant the curious and great Variety of Bones, and of Mu(cles, of all Sorts and Sizes, necefiary, as I have said, to the Support, and every Motion of the Body? Where could we lodge all the Arteries and Veins, to convey Nouriihment j and the Nerves, Senfation throughout the Body ? Where, I say, could we lodge all these Implements of the

(/i) S^am vera aptcis, quamque mult arum art'iutn lainijiras 'Manus natura homini dedit ? The Particulars of which, enumerated by him, see in Cic. ubi fupr. c. 60.

(0 See Book VI. Chap. 5.

(/) Ut in Adificns Architect avertunt ab oculis O" nar'ibm dominorum ea, qui profluentia necejfario tetr't ejfent aliqutd habitura ; fie natura res fimlles (foil, excrementa) procul amandn- -vit a fenfibsti. Cicer. de Nat. Dsor. L. z. c. j.6.

Pody,

Chap. VI. oftheTartsofMatisBody. 2,99 Body, to perform their fevcral Offices? How could we fecuje and guard them so well, as in the verv Places, and in the self same Manner in which they arc already plac'd in the Body ? And lastly, to name no more, What Covering, what Fence could we find out for the whole Body, better than that of Nature's own providing, the Skin C?)? How could we shape it to, or brace it about every Part better, either for Convenience or Ornament? What better Texture could we give it, which although Icfs obdurate and firm, than that of fomc other Animals j yet is so much the more fcnfible of every touch, and more compliant with every Motion? And being eafily defenfible by the Power of Man's reason and Art, is therefore much the propercll Tegument for a reafonablc Creature.

{g) Compare here Galen s observations dt Uf. Part. L. if . C. IS- Alfo L. 1. c. 6. See alfo Cowper. Anat. where ia Tab. 4. are very elegant Cuts of the Skin in divers Parts of the Body, drawn from microfcopical Views; as alfo of the tap'tlls, Pyramidales, the [udoriferous Glandi and Veffels, the Halrst 8cc.

CHAP.

§00 BookV.

CHAP. VII. •

Of the Provision in Man's Boay against Evils.

HAving taking a tranfient View of the Stru- 6ture, and Lodgment of the Parts of human'Bodies > let us next consider the admirable Provifion that is made throughout Man's Body, to ftave off Evils, and to difcharge {a) them when befallen. For the Prevention of Evils, we may take the instances already given, of the Situation of those faithful Sentinels, the Eye, the Ear, and Tongue, in the fuperiour Part of the Body, the better to defcry Dangers at a distance, and to call out prefently for Help. And how well fituated is the Hand to be a fure and ready Gmrd to the Body, as well as the faithful Performer of snoft of its Services ? The Brain, the Nerves, the Arteries, the Heart {b\ the Lungs > and in a

{a) One of Nature's most constant Methods here, is hj the Glands, and the Secretions made by them ; the Particulars of which being too long for these Notes, I ftiall refer to the modern Anatomifts, who have written on these Subjeds; and indeed,, who are the only Men that have done it tolerably: Particularly, our learned Drs.-Coc^^«r«, Keil, Mortand, and others at Home and Abroad: An Abridgment of whose Opinions and observations, for the Reader's Eafe, may be met with in Dr. Harris's Lex. Tech. Vol. 2,. under the Words Glands, and Animal Secretion.

(h) In Man, and most other Animals, the Heart hath the Guard of Bones; but in the Lamprey, which hath no Bones, ^no not so much as a Back-bone,) the Heart is very firangely fecur'd, and lies immur'd, or capfulated in a Cartilage, or grifly Subjlance, which includes the Heart, and its Auricle, ws the Skull — '—doth the Brain in other Animals. Powers Microf. <;)bfer. II,

♦ 6 Word

Chap. VII. Trovifions agatnfl Evils. 301

Word, all the principal Parts, how well are they barricaded, cither with llrong Bones, or deep Lodements in the Ficili, or fonie luch the wifcfV, and titteft Method, moll agreeable to the Office and Aftion of the Part? Bcfidcs which, for greater Precaution, and a farther Security, what an incomparable Provifion hath the infinite Contriver of Man's Body made for the Lofs of, or any Defect in some of the Parts we can least fpare, by doubling them ? By giving us two Eyes, two Ears, two Hands, two Kidneys, two Lobes of the Lungs, Pairs of the Nerves, and many Ramifications of the Arteries and Veins in the flefliy Parts, that there may not be a Defed of Nourifliment of the Parts, in Cafes of Amputation, or Wounds, or Ruptures of any of the Veflels.

And as Man's Body is admirably contriv'd, and made to prevent Evils j so no less Art and Caution hath been us'd to get rid of them, when they do happen. VVheh by any Misfortune, Wounds or Hurts do befal-, or when by our own wicked Fooleries and Vices, we pull down Difcafes and Mifchiefs upon our fclves, what Emunftories (0, what admirable Paflages {d\ are difpei^'d throughout

(c) Ktrt [from the Puftules he obfcrv'd in Monoraotapa,] -were Grounds to admire the Contrivance of our Blood, ivhhi> on some L/Ccafions, so foon as any Thing dtjiruiiive to the Cor." flttution of It, comes into it, immediately by an nuefiine Commotion, endeavoureth to thru ft it forth^ and is not only freed ft cm the new Gueft ; but jcmetimes what Itkczvife 77tay haze

lain lurking therein for a great while. And from heme

it comes to pass^ that most Parr of Mtdianes, when duly rdmmiftred, aie not only fent out of the Body themjelues; out Itktwife great ^luantines of morlijick Matter •• As m baliva/i- «», Sic. Dr. thane's Voy. to Jamaica, p. 15.

(d) ValfalvA dilcover'd some PalVigcs into the Region of l,he Ear-drum, of mighty XJ'ic, (amorg others,) to make L'licharges of Bruifcs, impoflhumcs, or any purulent,- or :. < r-

3 ox Trovijions agatnft Evils. BookV.

out the Body} what incomparable Methods doth Nature take {e) } what vigorous Efforts is she enabled

bifick Matter from the Brain, and Parts of the Head. Of which he gives two Examples : One, a Perfon, who from a Blow on his Head, had difmal Pains therein, grew Speechlefs, and lay under an abfolutc Suppreffion and Decay of his Strength ; but found certain ReHef, whenever he had a Flux of Blood, or purulent Matter out of his Ear ; which after his Death Valfalva difcdver'd, was through those passages.

The other was an apople5lical Cafe, wherein he found a large Quantity of extravafated Blood, making Way from the Ventricles of the Brain, through those same PafTages. Valfat. de Aure hum. c. 1. §. 14. and c. 5. §, 8.

{e) Hippocrates Lib. de Mimentis, tak^s notice of the Sagacity of Nature, in finding out Methods and Paflages for the difcharging Things ofFenfive to the Body, of which the late learned and ingenious Biftiop of Clogher, in Ireland, (Boyle,) gave this remarkable instance, to my very curious and ingenious Neighbour and Friend, D' Acre Barret, Efq; "v'tz.. That in the Plague Year, a Gentleman at the Univerfity, had a large Plague Sore gather'd under his Arm, which, when they expefted it would have broken, difcharg'd it self by a more than ordinary large and foetid Stool; the Sore having no other Vent for it, and immediately becoming found and well thereon.

Like to which, is the Stofy of Jof._Latohm{, of a Soldier of thirty five Years of Age, who had a Swelling in his right Hip, accompany'd with great Pain, crc By the Ufe of emollient Medicines, having ripen'd the Sore, the Surgeon intended the next Day to have open'd it; but about Midnight, the Patient having great Provocations to ftool, disburthen'd himself three Times; immediately upon which, both the Tumor and Pain ccas'd, and thereby difappointed the Surgeon's Intentions. Ephem. Germ. Anno 1690. Obf. 49. More such Initances we find of Mr. Tonget in Philof. TranfaSl. N^. 313. But indeed there are so many Examples of this Nature in our Phil. Tranf. in the Ephem. German. Tho. Bartholine, Rhodius, Stnnertm, Hildanus, &c. that it •would be endlefs to recount them. Some have fwallow'd Knives, Bodkins, Needles and Pins, Bullets, Pebbles, and twenty other such Things as could not find a PalTage the ordinary Way, but have met with an Exit through the Bladder, or some other Way of Nature's ow^n providing. But pafling over many Particulars, I shall only give one instance merci 6 because

Chap. VII. Trovljions against Evils. 303

bled to make, to difcharge the peccant Humours, to correft the morbifick Matter ; and in a Word, to set all Things right again? But here we had bed take the Advice of a learned Phyfician in the Cafe: " The Body, (faith he,) is so contriv'd, as " to be well enough fecur'd againll the Mutati- " ons in the Air, and the lelTer Errors we daily *' run upon; did we not in the Excefles of Eat- « ing. Drinking, Thinking, Loving, Hating, or " some other Folly, let in the Enemy, or lay vio- " lent Hands upon our selves. Nor is the Body " fitted only to prevent 5 but alfo to cure, or mi- " tigate Difeafes, when by these Follies brought " upon us. In most Wounds, if kept clean, and

" from the Air, the Flefh will glew together,

*' with its own native Balm. Broken Bones arc " cemented with the Callus^ which themselves " help to make". And so he goes on with ample Inllanccs in this Matter, too many to be here fpecify'd (/). Among which he inllanceth in the Diftempers of our Bodies, flievving that even many of them are highly ferviceable to the Difcharge of malignant Humours, and preventing greater Evils.

And no less kind than admirable is this Contrivance of Man's Body, that even its Diftempers

becaufc it may be a good Caution to some Perfons, that these Papers may probably fall into the Hands of; and that is, the Danger of fwallowing Phm-ftoncs, Prune-fionts, &c. Sir Francis Butler's Lady had many Prune JJones that made Way through an Abfcefs near her Navel. Phibf. Jranf. N". 265, where are other such like Examples. More alio may be found in N^. 281, 304, trc And at this Day, a young Man, living not far olf mc, laboureth under very troublesome and dangerous Symptoms, from the Stones of itbtt and BuUact, which he fwallow'd eight or ten Years ago. (/) Grew'* CofmoL §. zS. 19.

iliould

304 ^rov'tjions agatnfi Evils. BookV.

ihould many Times be its Cure (^) j that when the Enemy lies lurking within to deftroy us, there should be such a Reluftancy, and all Nature excited with its utmoft Vigour to expel him thence. To which purpose, even Pain it self is of great and excellent Ufe, not only in giving us Notice of the Prefence of the Enemy, but by exciting us to ufe our utmoft Diligence and Skill to root out so troublefome and dellru6txve a Companion.

ig) Nor are Difeafes themselves ufelefs : For the Blood in a Tever, if well govern d, like Wine upon the Fret, difchargeth it self of all heterogeneous Mixtures ; and Nature, the Difeafe, and Remedies, clean all the Rooms of the house ; whereby that which threatens Death, tends, in Conclufion, to the prolonging of Life. Grew ubi fupr. §. 52.

And as Difeafes minifter fometimes to Health; so to 0ther good Ufes in the Body, such as quickning the Senfes : Of which take these instances relating to the Hearing and

Sight. . _#. ,

A very ingenious Phyfician falltn^intd an odd Kind of Fe- *v£r', had his Senfe of Hearing thereby made so very nice and tender, that he very plainly heard soft Whifpers, that zvere made at a considerable Dijiance off, and zvhich were not in ths leaji perceiv'd by the Byfianders, nor vjotild have been by him before his Sicknefs.

A Gentleman of eminent Parts and Note, during a Diflem* per he had in his Eyes, had his Organs of Sight brought to be so tender, that both his Friends, and himself have affur'd me, that when he wak'd in the Night, he could for a while plainly see and diflinguifl} Colours, as well m other ObjeSis, difcernihle by the Eye, as xvus more than once try d. Boy), deter, nat. of Effluv. ch. 4-

Daniel Frafer cominud Deaf and Dumb from his Birth^

till the I7tl"- Year of his Age Af^^^ his Recovery from a Fever, he perceivd a Motion in his Brain, which was very uneafy to him ; and afterwards he began to hear, and in process of Time, to underfiand Speech, &:c. "Vid. Philof. Tranf. No. 311.

CHAP.

Chap.Vlir. " 30J

CHAP. VIII.

Of the Confent between the Parts of Man's Body.

IT is an admirable Provifion the merciful Creator hath made for the Good of Man's Body, by the Confent and Harmony between the Parts thereof: Of which let us take St. PaiW^ description, in i Cor. xii. 8. But noiv hath God set the Members^ every one of them in the Body^ as it hath pleased him. And {f. 21.) The Eye cannot say unto the Hand^ I have no need of thee : Nor again, the Head to the Feet^ I have no need of you. But such is the Confent of all the Parts, or as the Apoftle wordeth it, God hath so temper'' d the Body together^ that the Members should have the same Care one for another .^ ^. 2^. So that whether one Member fiif' fer^ all the Members suffer with it -, or one Member be honoured^ (or affected with any Good,) all the Members rejoyce, [and fympathize] with it^ ^. i6.

This mutual Accord, Confent and Sympathy of the Members, there is no reason to doubt («), is made by the Commerce of the Nerves (^), and

{a) See Book 4. Chap. 8.

{b) Tria propoftta ipji Naturt in Nervorum difiributione fuerunt. I. IJt fenforiis infirumentis Senfum impertiret. 1. Ut motortis Aiotum. 3. Ut omnibus aliis [partibus] daret, ut qud fi dolorem adferrent, dignofcerent. And atterwards, Si quis in diffeCliunibus fpe£lavitt confideravitque juftene, an Jecus Sa~ tura Nervos non tddem menfurd omnibus partibus dijlnbutrit, fed aliis quidem liberalius, aliis vera parcius, eadem cum Htp' focrate, velit noli:, dt Naturd omnino pronunciakity quod eA fcilicet fagax, jujla^ artifictofa, animaliumque provida tjt. Galen, dc Uf. Part. L. j. c. s>.

X their

jo6 Confent of the Tarts. BookV.

their artificial Poficions, and curious Ramifications throughout the wjlole Body, which is admirable and nicomparable, and might deferve a Place in this Survey, as greatly, and manifettly fetting forth the wisdom and Benignity of the great Creator} but that to give a description thereof from the Origin of the Nerves, in the Brain^ the Cerehelium and Spine, and so through every Part of the Body, would be tedious, and intrench too much upon the Anatomift's Province; And there-* fore one instance shall fuffice for a Sample of the Whole J and that shall be, (what was promis'd before (f), the great Sympathy occafion'd by the fifth Pair of Nerves ; which 1 chufe to inllance in, rather than the Par vagum^ or any other of the Nerves j because although we may have less variety of noble Contrivance and Art, than in that Pair 5 yet we shall find enough for our purpose, and which may be difpatch'd in fewer Words. Now this fifth Conjugation of Neri'es, is branch'd to the Ball, the muscles, and Glands of the Eye j to the Ear} to the Jaws, the Gums, and Teeth j to the muscles of the Lips {d) j to the Tonfils, the Palate, the Tongue, and the Parts of the Mouth i to the Pracordia alfo, in ibme measure, by inofculating with one of its Nerves j and laftlyj

(c) Book 4. Chap. 5.

\d) Dr. Willii gives the reason, cur tvHtua Amafiorum ofcula Libiis irfi(>re[fa, turn pmcordia, turn genu alia afficitndo, afnoran ac Libuii/icm tarn facile irritant, to be from the Con- Jeni of those Parts, by the Branches ol:" this fifth Pair. Nerv. H^fcr. c. iz.

And Dr. Sachs judges it to be from the Confent of the i«»- Vui Oris cum Labiis Uteri, that in April 1669, a certain bree-4ing Lady, being affrighted with feeing one that had fcabby i.ips, which they told her were occaiion'd by a peftilential Fever, had fiich like Piifiules brake out in the Labia Uteri. ivpiw^n. Germ. T, i^ Obf. io.

to

Chap. Vlir. Confent of the Tarts. 307

to the muscles of the F.icc, particularly the Cheeks, whofc fanguifcrous VeHlls it twifts about.

From hence it comes to pals, that there is a great Confent and Sympathy {c) between thcfc Parts > so that a guftablc Thing seen or fmelt, excites the Appetite, and affefts the Glands and Parts of the Mouth ; that a Thing (een or heard, that is fhamcful, afFeds the Cheeks -with modeft Bluflies ; but on the contrary, if it pleafes and tickles the Fancy, that it afVe£ls the Pr^ecordia^ and muscles of the Mouth and Face with Laughter j but a Thing caufing Sadnefs and Melancholy, doth accordingly exert it fclf upon the Pracordia^ and dcmonltrate it fclf by cauling the Glands of the Eyes to emit Tears (/), and the muscles of the Face to put on the forrowful Afpeft of Crying. Hence alfo that torvous four Look produc'd by Anger and Hatred: And that gay and pleafing Countenance accompanying Love and Hope. And in short, it is by Means of this Communication of the NenTS, that whatever affeds the Soul, is demonftrated, (whether we will or no,) by a confcntaneous Difpofirion of the Procardia within, and a fuitable Configuration of the muscles and Parts of the Face without. And an admirable Contrivance of the great GOD of Nature this is ; That as a Face is given to Man, and as Pliny faith (^), to Man alone o-f all Creatures ; so it ihould be, (as he observes,) the Index of Sorrow and Chearfuhtcfs^

{e) Confuk Willis ubi fupra.

if) Tears serve not only to moirtca the Eye, to cle«n and brighten the Cornta, and to express our Griet; but alfo to alleviate it, according to thai of L'lyjfgs to Androm^thf, in ^cnecs's Troas, "p. 761.

'Tempus moramque dab'wim, arbitrio tu) Implere latrytnis : Fletus drumnm lev§t. Or) PUn. Nat. hist. L, 11. c. 37.

X Z 6f

3o8 Confent of the Tarts. Book V.

of Compajfion and Severity. In its afcendiyig Part is the Brow^ and therein a Part of the Mind too. Therewith we deny^. therewith we confent. With this it is we shew our Pride., which hath its Source in another Place ; but here its Seat : In the Heart it hath its Birth; but here it abides and dwells ; and that hecaufe it could find no other Part throughout the Body higher^ or more craggy {h)^ where it might re side alone.

Thus I have difpatch'd what I shall remark concerning the Soul and Body of Man. There are divers other Things, which well deferve a Place in this Survey i and these that I have taken Notice of, deferv'd to have been enlarged upon : But "what hath been said, may fuffice for a Tafte and Sample of this admirable Piece of God's Handywork; at least serve as a Supplement to what others have fliid before me. For which reason I have endeavouT'd to say as little wittingly as I could, of what they have taken Notice of, except where the Thread of my discourse laid a Necef- {ity upon me.

(^h) Nihil altius fimul abruptiufe^ue invenlt.

CHAP. IX.

Of the Variety of Mens Faces, Voices, and Hand- Writing.

HERE I would have put an End to my observations relating to Man; but that there are three Things so expreflly declaring the Divine Management and Concurrence, that I shall juft mention them, although taken Notice of more amply by others -, and that is, The great Variety

C^ap. IX. The Variety ofMeiCs Faces^ 8cc. 3 09

cty throughout the World of Mens Faces («), Voices (/^), nnd Hand- writing. Had Man's Body !)ccn made according to any of the atheiftical Schemes, or any other Method than that of the infinite Lord of the World, this wife Variety would never have been : But Mens Faces would have been call: in the same, or not a very different Mould, their Organs of Speech would have found* ed the lame, or not so great a Variety of Notes-, and the same Structure of Mufclcs and Nerves, would have given the Hand the same Direction in Writing. And in this Cafe, what Confufion, what Diiturbance, what Mifchicfs would the World eternally have lain under ? No Security could have been to our Perfons j no Certainty, no Enjoyment of our Pofleflions (c) ; no Juftice between

(a) If the Reader hath a Mind to see Examples of Men's Likenefs, he may confult VaUr. Maximus, (L. 9. c. 14 ) concerning the Likenefs of Pompey the Great, and Vibius and Publkiui Libertinus ; as alfo of Pornpey the Father, who got the Name of Coquas, he being hke Menogena the Cook ; with divers others.

{b) As the Difference of Tone makes a Difference between every Man's Voice, of the same Country, yea, Family; lb a different Dialed and Pronunciation, differs Perfons of divers Countries; yea, Perfons of one and ihe same Country, fpeaking the same Language : Thus in Greece, there were the lonkk, Dorick, Attick, and JEolick Dialeds. So in Great- Britain, befides the grand Diverfity of Englijh and Scotch, the different Counties vary very much in their Pronunciation, Accent and Tone, although all one and the same Language. And the Way of the GiUadites proving the Efhrairnite<, Judg. xii. 6. by the Pronunciation of Shibboleth, with a Schin, ox Siiboletb with a Samech, is well known. So a J.apide faith, the Flemings prove whether a Man be a Trenchman or not, by bidding him pronounce, Acht en tachtsntuh ; which they pronounce, Acl en taclentic, by reason they can't pronounce the Afpirate h.

(c) Regi Ant'tocho unus ex Aqual'tluS'-—— nomine Artemon, ferquam fimilis futjfe traditur. 'jlifept Laodice, uxor Antiochi, fpterfttlo viroy dijimulandt fcelens gratia, in leciulo fenndt

X 3 <i»''-i*

310 The Variety of Men's Faces, ^c. BookV.

tween Man and Man j no Di{lin£tion between Good and Bad, between Friends and Foes, between Father and Child, Husband and Wife, Male or Female 5 but all would have been turn'd topfeyturvey, by being expos'd to the Malice of the Envious and lU-natur'd, to the Fraud and Violence of Knaves and Robbers, to the Forgeries of the crafty Cheat, to the Lulls of the Effeminate and Debauch'd, and what not ! Our Courts of Juftice (^), can abundantly teftify the dire Effefts of miftaking Men's Faces, of counterfeiting their Hands, and forging Writings. But now, as the infinitely wife Creator and Ruler hath order'd the Matter, every Man's Face can diftinguifli him in the Light, and his Voice in the Dark j his Hand-writing can speak for him though abfcnt, and be his Witnefs, and fecure his Contracts in future Generations. A manifest, as well as admirable Indication of the divine Super- intendence and Management {e).

quafi ipfufn Regem Agrum collocavh. Adm'tjfamq^, univerfum fopulum, cj/ fermcne ejus c -vultu coKfimih fefellit : credideruntque homines ab Antiocho monente Laodtcen C7 natos ejut [ib't commendari. Valer. Max. ib.

(d) Sluid TrebeUius Calca .' qtiam affevtranter fefe Clodutm fuUt ! er quidem dum de bojih ejus contetidit, in centumvirale judicium adeo favorahilis defcendit, ut vix juftts O' Aquis fententiis confiematio pcpuli ullum relinqueret locum. Itt ilia tatnen quajiione neque calumnia pet it or is, neque violentid flebis judicantium religio cejfit. Val. Max. ib. c. 15.

(e) To the foregoing Initances of divine Management, with relation to the political State of Man, I fiiall add another Thing, that 1 confefs hath always seem'd to me fomewhat odd, but very providential; and that is, the Value that

, Mankind, at least the civiliz'd Pare of them, have in all Ages put upon Gems, and the purer finer Metals, Gold and Silver; so as to think them equivalent unto, and exchange them for Things of the greatest Ufe for Food, Cloathing, and all other Neceffaries and Conveniences of Life. Whereas those Things themselves are of very little, if any Ul'e in Phyfick, Food, Building or Cloathing, otherwife than for Ornament, or to miniiler to Luxury ; as Suetonius tells us

of

Chap. IX. The Variety of Men's Faces, &c. 3 1 1

of Ntro, who filh'd with a Net gilt with Gold, and lliod his Mules with Silver; but his VVite Poppta, iViod her Horfcs with Gold. I'it. Ner. c. 30. Plin. N. H. L. 33. c. 1 1. So the same Suetonius tells US, 3ul. C4far hy in a Bed of Gold, and rode in a lilver Chariot. But Heliogabalus rode in one of Gold, and had his Clofeftool Pans of the same Metal, And Pitny faith, Vafa Coquinaria ex argento Calvtu Orator fieri queritur. ibid. Neither are fhofe precious Things of greater Ule to the making of Vedcls, and Utenfils, (unless feme little Niceties and Curiofities>) by Means of their Beauty, Imperdibility, and Du(5tility. Of which lall, the great Mr. Bo'^le hath among others, ihefe two Inllance?, in his I'fJ'ay Mbout the Subtilry of Effluviums. Chap 1. Silver, whofc Du^fility, And Tra^ility, are very much inferior to those oj Cold, was, by my procuring, draivn out to so /lender a Hire,

that a fingte Grain of it atnonmed to ttventy feven Veet,

As to Gold, he demonftrates it poflible to extend an Ounce thereof, to reach to ']~-]Cqo Feet, or 155 Miles and an half, yea, to an incredibly greater I^ength.

And as to Gems, the very Stories that are told of their prodigious Virtues, are an Argument, that they have very little, or none more than other hard Stones. That a Utamond (liould discover whether a Woman be true or falfe to her Hufband's Bed; cause Love between Man and Wife; fccure agajnrt Witchcraft, Plague and Poifons; that the Ruby should difpofe to Cheerfulnefs, cause pleafant Dreams, change its Colour against a Misfortune befalling, c^r. that the Sapphire ftiould grow soul, and lofe its Beauty, when vv'orn by one that is Leacherous; that the Emerald should fly to pieces, if it touch the Skin of any unchaftc Perfon in the Aft of Uncleannefs : That the Chryfolite should lofe its Colour, if Poyfon be on the Table, and recover it again when the Poyfon is off: And to name no more, that the Turcoife, (and the same is said of a gold Ring,) ftiould ftrike the Hour when hung over a drinking Glafs, and much more to the same purpose : All these, and many other such fabulous Stories, I say, of Gems, arc no great Arguments, that their Virtue is equivalent to their Value. Of these, and other Virtues, confult Worm in his Mufeum, L. r. §. 1. c. 17, c^c.

But as to Gems changing their Colour, there may be fumcwhat of Truth in that, particularly in the Turcoife iait mention'd. Mr. Boyle obferv'c^ the Spots in a Turcoife, to fl;i:t their Place from one Part to another, by gentle Degrees. So did the Cloud in an Agate-\\7in<\\t of a Knife. A r>;<imond he wore on his Finger, he obferv'd to be more iliuflrious at some Times than others: Which a curious I^ady told him (he had alfo obferv'd in hers. So likewife a rich Bifby did the same. Boyle of Abjol. Rejl in Bodies.

X 4 CHAP,

$1% BookV.

CHAP. X.

T/je Conclufion of the Survey of Mas,

AND now having taken a View of Man^ and finding every Part of him, every Thing relating to him contriv'd, and made in the very best Manner; his Body fitted up with the utmoll Forefight, Art and Care -, and this Body, (to the great Honour, Privilege, and Benefit of Man,) pofiefs'd by a divine Part, the Soul^ a Subftance made as 'twere on purpose to contemplate the Works of God, and glorify the great Creator j and since this Soul can difcern, think, reason, and speak ; What can we conclude upon the whole Matter, but that we lie under all the Obligations of Duty and Gratitude, to be thankful and obedient to, and to set forth the Glories of our great Creator, and noble Benefa- £l:or? And what ungrateful Wretches are we, how JTiuch worfe than the poor Irrationals, if we do notxmploy the utmoft Power of our Tongue, and all our Members, and all the Faculties of our Souls m the Praifes of God! But above all, fiiould wc, who have the Benefit of those glorious A6l:s and Contrivances of the Creator, be such wicked, such bafe, such worfe than brutal Fools, to deny the Creator (a), in some of his nobleft

Works ?

(r) It was a pious, as well as juft Conclufion, the ingenious Laurence Bellini makes of his Opufculum de Motu Cordis, in these Words : De Motu Cordis ifthic. §iu& equidem omnia, fi a rudi intelUgentia Hominis tantum conjilii, tantum ratiocinii, tantum periti& mille rerum, tantum fcientiarum (xigunt, ad hoc, ut inveniantur, feu ad hoc, ut percifiantur pofiquam Jafi(^funt; ilium, cujhs opera, fabrtfa6la funt hAcfwgula, tarn

v^ni

Chap.X. The Conch fm. 313

Works ? Should \vc so abulb our Rcnfon, yea, our very Senfcs j should we be To bclottcd by the Devil, and blinded by our Lulls, as to attribute one of the bell contrived Pieces oF VVorkmanihip to blind Chance, or unguidcd Matter and Motion, or any other luch fottifh, wretched, aihcilHcal Sfuffj which we never law, nor ever heard made any one Being {h) in any Age lince the Creation? No, No! But like wife and unprejudic'd Men, let us with David say, Pfalm cxxxix. 14.

'van'i er'imui atc^ue wanes., ut exijlimtmus effe confdii impotem, rationis expertem, impentum, ant ignarnm omnium rerum .' ^luantum ad tne atttnet, nolim ejje Rationis compos, Ji taniujn tnjuilandum mihi ejjet ad confequcndam intclitgentiam earum rerurn, qua^ fabrefaceret nefcio qu£ Vis, que nihil intelltgerct eorum qui fabrefaceret ; mihi ttenun viderer eJJ'c vile quiddam., atque ndiculum, qui vellem tot am Atatem meam, fanitatem, cr quicquid humanum efi deterere, nihil curare quicquid est ju- (unditaiumy quicquid Uritiarum, quicquid cotnmodorum ; non diviticif, non dignitates ; non pcvnat etiam, c/ viiam, ipfam, ut glonari pojjhn poftremo tnvenijj'e unum^ aut alierum, crjottaffe me inveniffe quidem ex lis innumerisy qui produxiffet, i.efiio quis ille, qui fine labure, fine turd, nihil cogitans, nihil cognofcem, ngn unam aut alteram rem, neque dulii', fed certo produxiffet innumerM innumcrabilitaies rerum in hoc tarn imnienfo fpatio corporum, ex quibu^ totu-s Mundt^ compmgitur. Ah Deum immortalem / Video pr^fens numen tuum m hifce tarn prodigtofis Gencrationis initiis, c in altiffima eorum contemplatione defixusy nefcio quo ocftro admirationis concitcr, cr quafi divine furens cohiberi me mintme pojjiim qum exclamem

Magnus Dominm ! Magnus Fabricator Hcminum Deus I Mag' tius atque Admirabilis ! Conditor rerum Deus qukm Magnus es ! Bellin. de Mot. Cord. fin.

{b) Hoc [i. e. mundiim effici ornatilTimuin, & pukherrimum ex concurfione fortuita) qui exiftimat fitn potuifje, non fntelligo cur non idem puiet, fi innumerabiles unius, c viginti form& literarumy vel aurei, vel qualeflibet, aiiquo cofijiciantur, poJJ'e ex his in terram exctiffts annates Hnnii ut deinceps Itgi poffint, effici, Scc. • - <§luod fi Mundum efjicere potefi concurjus jitomorum, cur porticum, cur templum, cur domum^ cur «riem non potefi f &ua funt minus operofa, cr multo quidem fam (iliora. Cicero dc Nat. Deor, L. z. c. 37.

(with

314 ^he ConcluJiQtu BookV,

(with which I conclude,) / ijoill praise thee^ for I am fearfully and wonderfully made ; marvellous are thy WorkSf and that my Soul knoweth right well.

Having thus made what (confidering the Copioufnefs and Excellence of the Subjed,) may be called a very brief Survey of Man^ and seen such admirable Marks of the divine design and Art > let us next take a tranfient View of the other inferiour Creatures > and begin with Quadrupeds.

BOOK

Chap. I.

I^Si

BOOK VL

/f Survey of CLuadrupeds.

C H A p. I.

Of their Trone posture.

taking a View of this Part of the Animal World, so far as the Scrudure of their Bodies is conformable to that of ,,^^,^„ Man, 1 Ihall pass them by, and only take"noti'ce of some Peculiarities in them, which are plain Indications of Dcfign, and the Divine Super>intendence and Management. And, i. The mod visible apparent Variation is the Prone posture of their Body : Concerning which, I Ihall take notice only of two Things, the Parts miniftring thereto, and tfte Ufe and Benefit thereof.

I. As for the Parts, 'tis obfcrvable, that in all these Creatures, the Legs are made cxadly conformable to this posture, as those in Man are to his cre6b posture : And what is farther oblervablc alfo, is, that the Legs and Feet arc always admirably fuited to the Motion and Excrcifcs of each Animal : In fomc they arc made for Strength only,

to

3i6 The Tojiure of Q^2idtupcds. Book VI.

to fupport a vast, unwieldy Body (a) > in others they are made for Agility and Svvifcnefs (^), infome they are made for only Walking and Running, in Others for that, and Swimming too (c) j in others for Walking and Digging {d}-, and in others for Walking and Flying (e) : In some they are made more lax and weak, for the plainer Lands } in others rigid, ftiff, and less flexible (/), for traverfing

(a) The Elephant being a Creature of prodigious Weight, the largeft of all Animals; Pliny faith, hath its Legs accor- <Iingly made of an immenfe Strength, like Pillars, rather than Legs.

(h) Deer, Hares, and other Creatures, remarkable for Swiftnefs, have their Legs accordingly flender, but withal strong, and every w^ay adapted to their Sv^^iftnefs.

(c) Thus the Feet of the Otter are made, the Toes being all conjoined with Membranes, as the Feet of Geefe and Ducks are. And in Swimming, it is obfervable, that when the Foot goes forward in the Water, the Toes are close ; but when backward, they are fpread out, whereby they more forcibly Itrike the Water, and drive themselves forward. The same may be observed alfo i» Ducks and Geefe,

U'C.

Of the Cajior or Beaver, the French Academifts say, The

StruBure of the Feet was very extraordinary, and fufficiently

demonjlrated, that Nature hath designed this Animal to live

in the Water, asxvell as upon Land. For although it had four

Jeet, like Terrefirial Animals, yet the hindmofi feemed more

proper to fivim than walk with, the Five Toes of which they

were compos' d, being joined together like those of a Goofe by a

Membrane, which serves this Animal to swim with. But the

fore ones were made otherwife ; for there 9vas no Membrane

■which held those Toes joined together : And this zvas requifite

for the Conveniency of this Animal, which ufeth them as

Hands like a Squirrel, ivhen he eats. Memoirs for a Nat.

hist. of Animals, pag. 84.

{d) The Moles Feet are a remarkable instance.

(f) The Wings of the Bat are a prodigious Deviation from

Nature's ordinary Way. So 'tis in the Virginian Squirrel,

whofeSkinis extended between the Fore-Legs and its Body.

(/) Of the Legs of the Elk, the French Academifts say.

Although some Authors report, that there are Elks in Mofcovia.

Chap. I. TheToJiureof Qnadnxpcds. 317

ing the Ice, and dangerous Precipices of the high Moutains (g) ; in some they arc fhod with tough and hard Hoofs, some whole, some cleft j in others with only a callous Skin. In which latter, 'tisobfcrvable that the Feet are compofed of Toes, some short for bare-going •, some long to supply the Place of a Hand (h) j some armed with long and llrong Talons, to catch, hold, and tear the Prey > some fenced only with short Nails, to confirm the Steps in Running and Walking.

II. As the posture of Man's Body is the fitted for a rational Animal, so is the Prone posture of ^adrupeds the most ufeful and beneficial tothemfelves, as alfo moll ferviceable to Man. For they arc hereby better made for their gathering their Food, to purfue their Prey, to leap, to climb, to swim, to guard themselves againil their Enemies, and in a word, to do whatever may be of principal Ufc to themselves j as alfo they are hereby rendered more ufeful and ferviceable to Man, for carrying his Burdens, for tilling his Ground, yea, even for his Sports and Diverfions.

via, whose Legs are jointUfs ; there is great Probability, that this Ofiinion is founded on what is reported of those tlks of Mufcovia, as well as of Caefar'f Alee, and Fliny'j Machlis, that they have Legs so ftiff" and inflexible, that they do run en Ice without flipping ; zvhich is a Way that is reported that they have to fave themselves from the Wolves, &c. ibid. p. Io8,

{g) The common tame G(?.jr (whose Habitation is generally on Mountains and Rocks, and who delighteth to walk on the tops of Pales, Houfcs, crc and to take great and feemingly dangerous Leaps) I have obfcrv'd, hath the Joints of the Legs very ftift' and strong, the Hoof hollow underneath, and its Edges ftiarp. The like, I doubt not, is to be found in the Wild Goat, confuiering what Ur. Scheuchzer hath laid of its climbing the most dangerous Craggsof the jilps, and the Manner of their hunting it. Vid. Iter. Alptn. 3. p. 9.

{h) Thus in Apes and Monkeys, in the Beaver before, and divers others.

And

3iB TheToftiireofCinidixn^tds. Book VI.

And now I might here add a Survey of the excellent Contrivances of the Parts miniflring to this •posture of the four-footed Animals, the admirable Structure of the Bones (/), the Joints and Mufclesj their various Sizes and Strength j their commodious Lodgment and Situation^ the nice j^Equipoife of the Body, with a great deal more to the same purpose. But I should be tedious to infill minutely upon such Particulars, and befides, I have given a Touch upon these Kinds of Things, when I ipake of Man.

Faffing by thei'efore many Things of this Kind, that might dcferve Remark, I shall only consider (bme of the Parts of ^adrupeds^ differing from what is found in Man (^), and which are manifest Works of design,

(i) It is a flngular Provifion Nature hath made for the Strength of the Lion, if that be true, which Galen faith is ■reported of its Bones being not hollow (as in other Animals) but folid: Which Report he thus far confirms, that most of the Bones arefo; and that those in the Legs, and feme other . Parts, have only a small and obfcure Cavity in them. Vli. Galen, de Uf. Part. L. ii. c. i8.

{k) these Sorts of Differences in the mechanism of Animalsy upon the Score of the Pofttion of their Bodies, occur so often,

that it would be no mean Service to Anatomy if any

one would give us a Hiftory of those Variations of the Parts of Animals, which spring from the different Pojlnres of their Bodies. Drake Anat. V. i. B, i, c. 17.

CHAP.

Chap. n. 319

CHAP. II.

O/^^^ Heads ^/QuARDUPEDS.

IT is remarkable, that in Man, the Head is of one Angular Formj in the four-footed Race, as various as their Species. In some I'quare and large, fuitable to their slow Motion, Food, and Abode j in others less, flender, and fliarp, agreeable to their fwifter Motion, or to make their Way to their Food (j), or Habitation under Ground (^). But palling by a great many observations that might be made of this Kind, I shall Hop a little at the Brain, a« the most considerable Part of this part of the Body, being the great Inftrument of Life and Motion in ^adruped:^ as 'tis in Man of that, as alfo in all Probability the chief Seat of his immortal Soul. And accordingly it is a remarkable Difference, that in Man the Brain i$ large, affording Sublfance and Room for so noble a Gueltj whereas in §uadrupeds^ it is but frnall. And another Thing no less remarkable, is the Situation of the Cerebrum and Cerebellum^ or the greater or leffer Brain, which I shall give in the Words of one of the most cxad Anatomifts we have of that

(*i) Thus Swine, for instance, who dig in the Eafth for Roots and other Food, have their Neck, and all Parts of their Head very well adapted to that Service. Their Neck lliort, brawny, and strong; their Eyes set pretty high out of the Way; their Snout long ; their nose callous and Ihong ; and their Senfe of Smelling very accurate, to hunt out and diftinguifh their Food in Mud, under Ground, and other the like Places where it lies concealed.

{b) What hath been said of Swine is no less, rather more remarkable in the Aiy/«, whole Neck, nose, Eyes and f'.ars, are all fitted in the nicett Manner to its fubterranqous Way of Luti.

i Part

3^o The Heads of Qusidrupcds. hookVt

Part (c) : " Since, faith he, God hath given " to Man a lofty Countenance, to behold the " Heavens, and hath alio feated an immortal Soul " in the Brain, capable of the Contemplation of " heavenly Things} therefore, as his Face is ere6V, " so the Brain is see in an higher Place, namely, *' above the Cerebelhim and all the Senfories. But " in Brutes, whose Face is prone towards the " Earth, and whose Brain is capable of Specula- " tion, the Cerebellum^ (whose business it is to " minifter to the Adions and Fun6tions of the " Pracordia^ the principal Office in those Crea- " tures) in them is fltuated in the higher Place, " and the Cerebrum lower. Alfo some of the Or- *' gans oF Senfe, as the Ears and Eyes, are placed, *' if not above the Cerebrum^ yet at least equal " thereto.

Another Convenience in thisPofition of the Cc rebrum and Cerebellum^ the last ingenious Anatomift {d) tells us is this, ••' In the Head of Man, " faith he, x.ht'RTScoi tht Brain zndCerebell^ yea, " of the whole Skull, is set parallel to the Hori- " zon 5 by which Means there is the less Danger of " the two Brains joggling, or flipping out of their " Place. But in ^uadrupeds^ whose Head hangs *' down, the Bafe of the Skull makes a right An- " gle with the Horizon, by which Means the Brain " IS undermoll:, and the Cerebell upperraoft ; so *' that one would be apt to imagine the Cerebell " should not be ftcady, but joggle out of its " Place. To remedy which Inconvenience he " tells us. And lell the frequent Concuffions of " the Cerebell should cause a Fainting, or diforder-

(c) IVilits Cereb. Anat. <;ap. 6. Cumc[ue huic Deus os fublime dcderit, &c.

{d) Id. paulo poll. In ca^ite hftmano Cerebri V Cerebelli, &c.

. « ly

Chap. II. The Heads of Qiiadrupeds. 3 i i

" ly Motion of the Spirits about the Pracordia^ *' therefore, by the Artifice of Nature, sufficient *' Provifion is made in all, by the dura Mcninx " closely cncompafling the Cerebellum j befides *' which, it is (in some) guarded with a llrong " bony Fence; and in others, as the Hare, the " the Coney, and such lefl'er ^tadrupeds^ a pare " of the Cerebell is on each Side fenced with the *' Os Petrofum: So that by this double Stay, its " whole Mafs is firmly contained within the Skull. Befides these Peculiarities, I might take notice of divers other Things no less remarkable, as the Nictitating Membrane of the Eye (^), the different Paflages of the Carotid Arteries \f) through the

(«) Sec Book IV. Ch. z. Note {kk).

(/) Arter'ta Carotis jiliquanto pofterlus in tjomine qttam in alto c^uovii antmaii, Calvanam ingreditur, fcil. juxta illud foramen, per quod finus lateralis in Venam jiigularem defiturut cranio elabitur ; nafh in ceteris hic artcrta juhextretnitate, fed frocejfu acuta ojfis petroft, inter cranium einergtt : verUm incapife humano, cadem, ambage longiori circuntduHa ( ut fanguini$ totrens, ptiufquam ad cerebri or am appellit, fYacto impetu^ leniii! cr placidiits jiuAt ) prope fpecum ab ingnjfu finUs lateral

Us factum, CalvariA ba/tn atttngit ; — w in majorerri

cautclam, tunica injuper afcititid crajfure in%ejlitur. And lo he goes on to ftiew the Convciiiency of this Guard the Artery hath, and its Paflage to the Brain, and then faiih, 5/ hiijufmodi confonnationis ratio inqiiiritur, facile occurrit, in tapite hutnanoy ubi generofi affettus O" inagni animorum impetus ac ardores excttantur, fanguinis in Cerebri oras apfulfunt debere ejfe Itberum v txpediturn. Sec. Atque hoc quidem refpeilu diffcrt Homo li plerifque Brutis, qutbus, Arceria in milt* jurculos divifd, ne fanguinem pleniore alveo, aut citation, quam par efl, curfu, ad cerebrum evehat. Plexus Kstiformts Conflituit, quibt'.s nempe tfjicitur, ut fanguis tarda admodurH, Unique v £qf4ab:li fere JiiUici/iso, in cerebrum tUabatur. And then he goes on to give a farther Account of this Artery, and the Aett mirabili m divers Creatuies, WiUis, ibid, cap. 8,

t Skully

321 The Necks of QusidTupQds. BookVl.

Skull, their Branching into the Refe Alirabile (g)^ the different Magnitude of the Nates, and some other Parts of the Brain in Beails, quite different from what it is in Man ; But the Touches already given, may be Intlances sufficient to prevent my being tedious in inlarging upon these admirable Works of God.

(g) Galen thinks the Rete mirahUe is for conceding and elaborating the Animal Spirits, as the Epididymides, [the Convolutions »/^c-««<5»5 fAix®-] are for elaborating the Seed. JDe Uf. Part. L. 9. c. 4. This Rete is much more confpicuous in Beatls than Man; and as Dr. JF;//;; well judges, serves,

1. To bridle the too rapid Incurfion of the Blood into the m-ain of those Creatures, whose Heads hang down much.

2. To feparate some of the fuperfluoas ferous Parts of the Blood, and fend them to the Salival Glands, before the Blood enters the Brain of those Animals, whole Blood is naturally of a watery Conltitution. 3. To obvjate any Obftruflions that may happen in the Arteries, by giving a free passage through other Veffels, when some are flopped.

In <§luadrupeds, as the Carotid Arteries are branched into t:hc Rete Mirabile, for the bridling the too rapid Current of Blood into the Brain; so the Vertebral Arteries, are, near their Entrance into the Skull, bent into an acuter Angle than in Man, which is a wife Provifion for the same purpose.

CHAP. III.

O//^^ Necks ^/Q^UADRUPEDS.

FROM the Head pass we to the Neck, no principal Part of the Body, but yet a good instance of the Creator's wisdom and design, inafmuch as in Man it is Ihort, agreable to the Ereftion of his Bodyj but in the Four-footed Tribe it is long, anfwerable to the Length of the

Legs

Chip. III. The Necks of Quadrupeds. s'i-^

Legs (li), anditifomeof thcfclong, and hTs strong, ferving to cany the Mouth to the Ground > in others ihortcr, brawny and itrong, fcr.ving to dig, and heave up great Burdens {b).

But that which deferves efpecial Remark, is that peculiar Provifion rriade in the Necks oFall, or molt granivorous ^iadrupeds^ for the perpetual holding down their Head in gathering their Food, by that flrong, tendinous and infcnfible Aponeurofis^ or Ligament {c) braced from the Head to the middle of the Back. By which means the Head, although heavy, may be long held down without any Labour, Pain, or Uneafincfs to the Mufclcs of the

{a) It is very remarkable, that in all the Species of <S)uadrupeds, tliis Equality holds, except only the Elephant; and that there should be a fiifficient fpecial I'rovifion made for that Creature, by its Probofcis or Trunk. A Member so admirably contrived, lb curiouily wrought, and n'lth lb great Agihty and Readinefs, applied by that unwcildy Creature to all Its several Occalions, that 1 take it to be a manifelt In- (lance of the Creator's Workmanfliip. See its Anatomy in Dr. A. Aloulen's Anat. of the Elephvtnt, p. 33. As alio in Mr. Blair's Account in Phil. Tranf. N". 316.

Aliorum ea est humilitas ut cibum terreftrem rcftris facilt continuant. ^£ autem dltiora 'funt, ut Anferes, ut Cygni^ ut Grues, ut Cameli, adjuvantur proceritate collorum MantM etiam data Elephantii, qtti propter magnitHdinem corporit difficiles aditui habebant adpaftu7n. Cic. de N. D. L. 1. c.47.

(^od iis aniwalibus quA pedes haber.t fijfos in digitos^ Collum brevius Jit fadum, quam ut per ipjuTn Cibum ori admovert queant : its verb qnd ungulas habent fclidas, aut bi/ida>, tongius, ut prona atque inclmantia pafci queant. Glul ,d e:iatn opui non fit Arcificis utilitatis memoris ? Ad hic quod Grues ac Ciconia, cum crura haherent longiora, ob earn caufam Ro- Jlrum etiam magnum , ^ Collum longius habucrint. Pifcts autem neque Collum penitus habuere, utpote qui neque Crura, habent. (^0 pai'to non id etiam est admirandum ? Galen, dc Uf. part. L. IT. c. 8.

(b) As in Moles and Swine, in Ch. 1, ^ote {a).

(c) Called the Whitdtather, Packwax^ Taxwax^ and "BtX' fax.

Y z Neck,

3^4 1"^^^ Stomachs of Quadrupeds. Book Vf .

Neck, that would otherwife be wearied by being lb long put upon the Stretch.

CHAP. IV.

0///j^ Stomachs <?/ Quadrupeds.

FROM the Neck, let us defcend to the Stomachy a Part as of abfolate necessity to the Being and Well-being of Animals, so is in the several Species of ^adrupeds^ lized, contrived, and made with the utmoft Variety and Art. {a) What Artift, what Being, but the infinite Confervator of the World, could so well adapt every Food to all the several Kinds of those grand Devourers of i: ! Who could so well fute their Stomachs to the Reception and Digeftion thereof j one kind of Stomach to the Carnivorous, another ta the Herbaceous Animab > one fitted to digeft by bare Mafticationi and a whole set of Stomachs in others,, to digeft with the Help of Rumination I Which kft Ad:, together with the Apparatus for that Service, is so peculiar, and withal so curious an Artifite of Nature, that ic might juftly deferve a more

{a) The peculiar Contrivance and Malie of the Tyromedar^/'s or Camel's Stomach, is very remarkable, which I will give from the Parifian Anatomifis: At the top of the Second [of the 4 Ventricles] there were several fquare Holes., which were the Orificei of about 30 Caziities, made like Sacks placed between the tvjo Membranes, which da compofe the Sub/lance of this Ventricle. The View of these Sacks made tis to think that the'j might well be the Refervatories, where ?\\x\y faith, that Camels do a long Time keep the Water, which they drink in great Abundance - - to supply the Wants thereof in the

dry Defarts, Sec. Vid. Memoirs, c^c. Anat. of Dromedary, p. 39. See alfo Peyer, Merycol. L. i. c. 3.

particular

Chap. V. The Hearts of Quadrupeds. 3 1 f

particular Enquiry J but having formerly mcntiond it (/^), and kail 1 should be too tedious, 1 fhal! pals it by.

{b) Book IV. ch. II.

CHAP. V. Of the Hearts?/ Qu a d r u p e d s.

IN this Part there is a notable Difference fonnd between the Heart of Man and that of Bcalh, Concerning the latter, of which I might take notice of the remarkable Confirmation of the Hearts of Amphibious ^adrupeds^ and their Difference from those of Land-Animals, some having but one Ventricle {a)^ some three (^), and some but two (like Land-Animals) but then the Fora-men Oiah therewith {c). All which may be jullly ellecmed

as

{a) Frogs are generally thought to have but one Ventricle in their Hearts.

{b) The Tortoife hath three Ventricles, as the Pariftan Academifts in their Memoirs affirm. Befides these two I'entricles [before spoken of] which were in the hinder Part of thti Heart, xvhtch faceth the Spine; there was, fiy they, ^ thtr/i in the Fore-fart, inclining a little towards the Right-side, ^c. Memoirs, crc. p 2S9- ^^^ ^'^'" B«///cr(r charges this as a Mirtake in those ingenious Gentlemen, and aflerts there is bur one Ventricle in the Tortoife's Heart. See his DcfcnpHon of the Heart of the Land Tor tot/e, in Philof. Tranfatl. N*^. 3x8.

(c) The Sea-Calf is said by the French Academift;, to have this Provifion, and their Account of it is this: its Heart iva< round and fiat. Its Ventricles appeared very large, and its Amrides small. — Underneath the great Aperture, through

■which the Trunk of the Vena Cava convey td the Blood into ^hf right VtfltTtclt V the Heart, there ivm afifthtr, ivhtch pt-

Y 3 fi<t*at%i

3i6 The Hearts of Cin^idm^Qds. Book VI.

as wonderful, as they are excellent Provifions for the Manner of those Animals living. But I shall content my self with bare Hints of these Things, and speak only of two Peculiars more, and that but briefly.

One is the Situation of the Heart, which in Beads is near the middle of the whole Bodyj in Man, nearer the Head (d). The reasons of which I fhcill give from one of the most curious Anatomifts of that Part (<?). " Seeing, faith he, theTrajec- " tionand Diftributionof the Blood depends whol- " iy on the Syftole of the Heart, and that its Li- " quor is nor driven of its own Nature so readily *' into the upper Parts as mto Veflels even with it, " or dov/nwards into those under it : If the Situa- " tion of the Heart had been further from the Head, " it must needs either have been made stronger to " cast out its Liquor with greater Force j or elfe " the Head would want its due Proportion of " Blood. But in Anmials that have a longer Neck, " and which is extended towards their Food as it " were, the Heart is fcated as far from the other Parts J and they find no Inconvenience from it, because they feed with their Head for the most part hanging down 5 and so the Blood, as it hath farther to go to their Head than in others, so it; goes a plainer and often a lleep Way (/).

The

cc

cc cc

netrated into the Arteria Venofa, and from thence into the left Ventricle, and afterwards into the Aorta. This Hole called the Foramen Ovale in the Foetus, makes the Anaftomofis, iy the Means of which, the Blood goes from the Cava into the Aorta, ivithout faffing through the Lungs. French Anatomifts, p. 124.

{d) T^Ts Kec^Siuv 'Z^ li (Jiia-ov tsxIw cv 'A',(^a7Fa>t^Z. Arift.

hist. An. L. 2. c. 17.

(c) Dr.. Lower, de Corde, c. I.

(/) 1 might have mentioned another wife Provifion from the same Author, which take in his own Words : in vmlis

Chap. V. The Hearts of Qi\2ii}im^cdiS. 317

The other peculiar Mutter is, the Fallning (I formerly mentioned) which the Cone of the Peri' car (Hum hath in Man to the Diaphragm (^), whereas in all ^fadrupcds it is loofe. By which Means the Motion of the Midriff in that neccfUiry Aft of Rcfpiration, is aililted both in the upright Po- Iturc of Man, as alfo in the prone Pollurc o[' ^ladrupeds (b), which would be hindred, or rcndrej. more difficult, if the Cafe was otherwife ; " Which " mull needs be the Effect of wisdom and Dclign, ^ and that Man was intended by Nature to walk '' ere^l, and not upon all-lour, as ^ladrupeds do: To express it in the Words of a great Judge in such Matters (;').

CT* Fquis, imo plerique al'tii ani>?ialiiiis majoribus, non fol.tt propagints a Nervo j'exri parti tit in Homine, fed etiam pLurimtu a Nervo intercoftalt, ubi refla cor tran/it, cor accedere, Wio in parenchyma ejm dimitti : cr hoc idea a Natura nuafi fubfidium Brutis comparatiim, ne capita qu& tcrram pronti fpe- ^ant, non fat if facile aut copiose Spiritus Animales impertirent, Blafii An:\t. Animal. Par. r. c. 4. ex Lowero, dc Corde.

(j) Diaphragmatu circulo nerveo firmiter adhtret [Pericardium] quod Homini fngiilare ; nam ab eo in Canibus cy Simiis di/lat, item in aim animaUbta omnibus. Bartholin, Anar. L. z. c. 5.

(h) Ftnalem canfam quod atrinet, chmfre-^ttufit Uotnin'u incelftnatque figura,eoque faciliiis abdominis vifcc a fuo pondere defcendant, minore Diaphragtnatls nixu arque Syjiole ad Infptrationem optii ejl : porro, cum in lixfpiratione pariter neceffanum (it Diaphragma relaxari, cum capfula cordis omnino conneHendum Juit, in Ho/nine, ne forte, quatndiu ereSltti incedit, ab Hepatis aliorumque vijcerum appenforiim pondere dear um adeo deprimsretur^ ut neque Pulmo fatis concidere, neque Exfpiratio debito modo peragi potuerit. &uocirca in o^jadrMpedibui, ubi abdominis vifcera in ipfum Diaphragma incumbunt^ ip,t4mque inpeHorls cavitatem fuo pondere impellunt, iftapunium accretio Exfpirationi qutdem tnutiits, Jn/piraiioni auterft debitam Diaphragmatis tenfionemitnpcdundo, prorfiu incoinmo- 4a fuij]'et. Low QT, ib. p. 8.

(i) Dr. Tylbn'f ^nat. of the Orang-Outang in Ray'i IVifd, if God, p. 161.

Y4 CHAR

3i8 Book VI

CHAP. VI.

Of the difference between Man and Quadrupeds in the Nervous Kind.

THere is only one Difference more between Man and ^adrupeds that I shall take notice ofj and that is the Nervous Kind : And because it Would be tedious to infift upon many Particulars (^), 1 shall, for a Sample, infill chiefly upon one, anq that is, of Nature's prodigious Care for a dueCompiunication and Correfpondence between the Head and Heart of Man, more than what is in the fourfooted Tribe. For this Purpofc, befides the Correfpondence those Parts have by Means of the ]>Jerves of the Par Vagum (common both to Man and beast) there is a farther and more fpecialCommunicatjon and Correfpondence occafioned by the Branches) {h) of the intercQftal Pair fent from the Cervical Plexus to the Heart, and Pracordia. By which Means the Heart and Brain of Man have a

{a) Amongft these, I might name the Site of the Nerves proceeding from the Medulla Spinalis, which Dr. Lower ukes notice of. In beasts, whole Spine is above the rest of the Body, the >?erves ter\d diredly downwards ; but in Man, it being ereift, the Nerves spring out of the Spine, not at Right, but m Obhque Angles do\Ynwards, and pass alfo in the Body the same Way. ibid. p. i6.

(b) Inplerifq; Brutis tantitm hac via (i. e. by the Parvafum) €/ "i^'ix omnino per ullos Paris Intercofialis nervos, aditits ad cor aut Appendices ejrts patefcit. Verittn in Homtne, Ner- •vus Inter co/lalis, prater nfficia ejus in imo ventre huic cum c&~ tfris animalibui communia, etiam ante peSieris claufira internuneii fpecialis loco efi, qui Cerebri c^ Cordis fenfa mutua ultr^ ^itraquf^ referf. Wilhs Nervor. defer. & ufus, Cap. i6.

piutua)

Chap. VI. //r Quadrupeds. 319

mutual and very intimate Corrcfpondcnceand Concern with each other, more than is in other Creatures; or as one of the most curious Anitomifls and Obfervers of these Things faith (c), " Brutes " are as 'twere Machines made with a fimplcr, " and less opero(e y^pparatus^ and endowed thcre- " fore "with only one and the same Kind of Mo- " tion, or determined to do the same Thing ; f Whereas in Man, there is a great Variety of " Motions and A6liops. For by the Commerce f of the aforcfaid Cervical Plexus (d) he faith, <' The Conceptions of the Brain prefcntly affedt " the Heart, and agitate its Veffels and whole " Appendage, together with the Z)/^/>/?7r^^7». From <' whence the Alteration in the Motion of the '* Blood, the Pulfe and respiration. So alfo on " the contrary, when any Thing affefts or alters *' the Heart, those Impreflions are not only rc- ^ torted to ^hc Brain by the same Du£fc of the " Nerves, but alfo the Blood it fclf (its course '' being once changed) flies to the Brain with 9 " different and unufual course, and there agita- " ting the animal Spirits with divers Impulfcs, " produceth various Conceptions and Thoughts " in the Mind. And he tells us, " That hence ^ it was that the ancient Divines and Philofophcrs " too, made the Heart the Seat of wisdom ; and

(c) Id. ib. Dum hanc utriufque fpeciei differentiam perpendc , fuccurrit animo, Bruta ejfe velut tTj/ichimu, &c.

(_d) That our great Man was not millaken, there is great reason to imagine, from whnt he observed in dilTccflmg a Fool. Befides, the Brain being but small, he faith, Pnapua auicm difcnminis neta quam inter tlltm CT" viri cordati panes advertimm, htccc erat ; ne:rjpt quod pr£di6ltis Nervi Intercaco/lalii Plextti, qucm Cerebri cr Cordis internuncmm z/ Horn:- TJti proprium diximin, in Stulto hoc valde txiliSf tr minor$ ii(rvoi:Hm fatellitio Jitpatus fuerit. I bid.

'^ certainly 0 4

330 The Nervous Kmd^Scc. Book VI.

« certainly (faith he) the Works of wisdom and '' Virtue do very much depend upon this Com- " merce which is between the Heart and Brain : " And so he goeth on with more to the same pur^ pofe. Upon the Account of this Intercojlal Commerce with the Heart, being wanting in Brutes, there is another fingularly careful and wif& Provifion the infinite Creator hath made in them , and that is. That by reason both the Par Vagum and the Intercojlal too, do not fend their Branches to the Heart, and its Appendage in Brutes, therefore, left their Heart should want a due Proportion of Nervous VefTels, the Par Vagum fends more Branches to their Heart than to that of Man. This as it is a remarkable Difference between Rational and Irrational Creatures j so it is as remarkable an Argument of the Creator's Art and Carcj who altho' he hath denied Brute- Animals reason, and the Nerves miniftring thereto, yet hath another Way fupplied what is necessary to their Life and State. But let us hear the same great Author's Defcant upon the Point {e) j " In- " afmuch, faith he, as beasts are void of Difcre- '^ tion, land but little fubjed to various and diffe- *' rent Paflions, therefore there was no need that " the Spirits that were to be convey'd from the " Brain to.the Pracordm^ Ihould pass two different « Ways, namely, one for the Service of the vital '^ Fundiohs, and another for the reciprocal Impref- " (ions of the Affedions j but it was fufiicient that " all their Spirits , whatever Ufe they were de-= *' figned for, should be conveyed one and the famfe «' Way.

(«) Id. ib. cap. ip. In quantum Bejii* prttdentia careat, c/ varits diverftft^ue ^ajftenibfts, &C.

Her?

Chap. VII. The Cone In/ioH, 33i

Here now in the Ner'uous Kind we have mnnifeft Afts of the Creator's Dcfipn and WifJom, in this lb manifelt and diflin6t a Provifion tor Rational and Irrational Crcaiiircs 5 and that Man was evidently intended to be the one, as the Genus of (Quadrupeds was the other.

CHAP. VII,

T/je Conclusion.

AND now 'tis Time-topaufe 3 while, and ref]c6t upon the whole. And as from the Confidcrations in the preceding Book, we have efpccKil reason to be thankful to our infinitely merciful Maker, for his no less kind than wonderful Contrivances of our Body > so v.'e have reason from this brief View I have taken of this lall Tribe of the Creation, to acknowledge and admird the same Creator's Work and Contrivances in them. For we have here a large Family of Animals, in every particular Refpccft, curiously cfintrived and made, for that efpecial Pollute, Place, Food, and Office or business which they obtain in the World. So that if we consider their own. particular Happinels and Good, or ^ian's Ule and Service j or if we view them throughout, and consider the Parts wherein they agree with Man, or those cfpccially wherein they differ, we shall find all to be io far from being Things fortuitous, undcfigncd, or any way accidental, that every Thing is done for the bell i a^l wifely contrived, and incomparably fitted up, and every way worthy of the great Creator. And he that will fhut his E-ycs, and not see

God

33V The Conclujion. BookVL

God {a) in these his Works , even of the poor beasts of the Earth, that will not say (as Elihu. hath it, Job XXXV. lo, 1 1.) Where is God my Maker ^ lahoteacheth us more than the Beajis of the Earthy and maketh us wifer than the Fowls of the Heaven ? Of such an one we may ufe the Pfalmift's expression, P/^/. xlxix. 12. That he is like the Beafis {b) that per ijh.

^^^ I. Deum namque ire per omnes

Terra/que traCiufque Maris, Coelumque profundum. Hinc Pe^udes, Armenia, viros, genus emne Ferarum.

Virgil Georg. L. 4.

{h) llloi qui nullum omnino Deum ejfe d^xerunt, non moda

non Philofophos, fed ne homines quidem fuijfe dixerim ; qui,

mutts fimilitmi, ex fob corpore cenfliterunt, nihil videntes an'p-

Pftt. Ladant. L. 7. c. 9.

BOOK

Chap.L

BOOK Vll.

A Survey ^/ Birds.

AV I N G briefly, as well as I could^ dilpatch'd the Tribe oi ^adrupeds^ I shall next take as ferief and tranficnc a View of the feathered 'tribe. And here we have another large Province to expatiate in, if we should defccnd to every Thing wherein the Workmanfhip of the Almighty appears. But I must contract my Survey as much as may be j and shall therefore give only such Hints and Touches upon this curious Family of Animals, as may serve for Samples of the rcll of what might be obferv'd.

CHAP. L

Of the Motion of Birds ^ and the Parts m'tnijiring thereto.

AS this Tribe hath a different Motion from that of other Animals, and an amphibious Way of Lifej partly in the Air, and partly on the Land and Waters j so is their Body accordingly {hap'd, and all their Parts incomparably fitted for that Way of Life and Motion j as will be found by a curfdry View of some of the Particulars. And the

I. And

334 Motion and Tarts of Birds. BookVIL

I. And most visible Thing, is the Shape and Make of their Body, hot thick and clumfy, but JnGomparably adapted to their Flight ; Sharp before, to pierce and make Way through the Air, and then by gentle Degrees riling to its full Bulk. To which we may add,

II. The neat Pofition of the Feathers throughout the Body J not ruffled, or difcompds'd, or plac'd some this, some a contrary Way, according to the Method of Chance J but all artificially plac'd {d)^ for facilitating the Motion of the Body, and its Security at the same Time, by way of Cloathing : And for that End, mod of the Feathers tend backward, and are laid over one another in exadt and regular Method, armed with warm and soft Down next the Body, and more ftrongly made, and curiously clos'd next the Air and Weather, to fence •olf the Injuries thereof. To which purpose, as aUb for the more eafy and nimble gliding of the Body through the Air, the Provifion Nature hath made, and the Inftin6b of these Animals to peen and drefs their Feathers, is admirable ; both in refpe6t of their Art and Curiofity in doing it, and the Oyl-bag (^), Glands, and whole Apparatus for that Service.

(a) -See before Book IV. Chap. ii. Note (I).

(^) Mr. WlUiighb'j faith, there are two Glands for the Secretion of the unctuous Matter in the Oyl-bag, And so they appear to be in Geefe. But upon Examination, I find, that in moll other Birds, (such at least as I have enquir'd into,) there is only one Gland : In which are divers little Cells, ending in two or three larger Cells, lying under the Nipple of the Oyl-l>ag. This Nipple is perforated, and being prefled, or drawn by the Bird's Bill, or Head, emits the liquid Oyl, as it is in some Birds, or thicker unftuous Greafe, as it is in others- The whole Oyl-bag is in its itrudure fomewhat conformable to the Breafts of such Animals as afford Milk.

III. And

ChAp.I. 7 he. Wings of Birds. 335-

III. And now having (aid thus much relating to the Body's Motion^ let us Ibivey the grand Inllrumcnt thereof, i\\zlVings. Which as they arc principal Parts, so arc made with great Skill, and plac'd in the mod commodious Point oF the Body (V), to give it an exa^ Equipoife in that fubtile Medium, the Air.

And here it is obfervable, with what incomparable Curiofity every Feather is madcj the Shaft exceeding Ibong, but hollow below, for Strength and Lightnefs fake j and above, not much Icfs Urong, and fill'd with a Parenchyma or Pith^ both strong and light too. The V^anes as nicely gaug'd on each Side as made ; broad on one Side, and narrower on the other j both which incomparably minifter to the progrcllive Motion of the Bird, as alio to the Union and Clofenefs of the Wing {d).

And

(c) In all Birds that fly much, or that have the most occafion for their Wings, it is manitefl that their Wings are plac'd in the very bed Fart, to balance their Body in the Air, and to give as fwift a ProgrefTion, as their Wings and Body are capable of: For otherwife we should perceive them to reel, and fly unlleadily; as. we see them to do, if we alter their yEqiiipoife, by catting the End of one of the Wings» or hanging a Weigiit at any of the extreme Parts of the Body. But as for such Birds as have as much occaiion for Swiinniing as Flying, and whose Wings arc there lore set a little out of the Center of the Bodies Gravity, See Book IV. Cha^. 8. Kott ^q). And for such as have more occafiun for Diving than l*"iying, and whose Legs are for that reason set more backward, and their Wings more forward. Chap.\\. Noie(^k) of this Boch.

{{{) The wife Author of Nature h.uh afforded an [•'.xample of the great Nicety in the Formation of Buds, by the Nicety obferv'd in a Part no more considerable than the Vanes of the Flag-feathers of the Wing. Among others, these two Things are obfervable: i. The Edges of the exterior or narrow Vanes bend downwards, but of the interior wider Vanes upwards; by which Means they catch, hold, and lie clofc to one another, when the Wing is Ipread; so that not one Feather may mifs its full Force and Impulfc

upon

336 The Wings of Birds. BookViL

And no less exquifite is the textrine Art of the Plumage (e) alfo 5 which is so curiously wrought j

upon the Air. 2. A yet leffer Nicety is obferv'd, and that is, in the very iloping the Tips of the Flag- feathers : The interiour Vanes being neatly flop'd away to a Point, towards the outward Part of the Wing; and the exterioiir Vanes flop'd towards the Body, at least in many Birds; and in the Middle of the Wing, the Vanes being equal, are but little flop'd. So that the Wing, whether esjtended or (Kut, is as neatly flop'd and form'd, as if constantly trimm'd with a Pair of Sciffors.

(e) Since no exa<fl Account that I know of, hath been given of the mechanism of the Vanes, or Weh of the Feathers, luy observations may not be unacceptable. The Vane consists not of one continu'd Membrane; because if one broken, it would hardly be reparable : But of many Lamim, which are thin, ftifF, and fomewhat of the Nature of a thin Quill. Towards the Shaft of the Feather, (especially in the Flagfeathers of the Wing,) those Lamina are broad, crc. of a femicircular Form ; which serve for Strength, and for the clofer fhutting of the Lamina to one another, when Impulfes are made upon the Air. Towards the outer Part of the Vane, these Lamim grow flender and taper: On their under Side they are thin and fmooth, but their upper outer Edge is parted into two hairy Edges, each Side having a different Sort of Hairs, laminated or broad at Bottom, and flender and bearded above the other half. I have, as well as I could, reprefented the uppermoft Edge of one of these Lamina in Fig. 18. with some of the Hairs on each Side, inagnify'd with a Microfcope. these bearded Briftles, or Hairs, on one Side the Lamina, have (trait Beards, as in Fig. 39. those on the other Side, have hoo'k'd Beards on one iide the flender Part of the Briftle, and ftrait ones oh the other, as ia Fig. 20. Both these Sorts of Briftles magnify'd, (only fcattering, and not dofe,) are reprefented as they grow upon the upper Edge of the Lamina f. t. in Fig. 18. And in the Vane, the hook'd Beards of one Lamina, always He next the ftrait Beards of the next Lamina; and by that Means lock and hold each other; and by a pretty mechanism, brace the Lamina close to one another. And if at any Time the Vane happens to be ruffled and difcompes'd, it can by this pretty eafy mechanism, be reduc'd and repair'd. Vid. Book IV. Chap. xz. Hou (m).

a;

hi

Chap. I. The Tails of Birds. 3 3 7

and so artificially interwoven, that it cannot be viewed without Admiration, efpccially when the Eye is anilled with GlafTes.

And as curioully made, so no less curiously are the Feathers placed in the Wing, exactly according to their several Lengths and Strength : The Principals set for Stay and Strength, and thefc again well lined, faced, and guarded with the Co" *vert and Secondary Feathers^ to keep the Air from pafling through, whereby the stronger Impulfes are made thereupon.

And lastly, To say no more of this Part, that deferves more to be said of it, what an admirable jipparatus is there of Bones^ very strong, but withal light and incomparably wrought? of Joynts^ which open, fhut, and every way move, according to the Occafions either of extending it in Flight, or withdrawing the Wing again to the Body ? And of various muscles; among which the peculiar Strength of the Peroral muscles deferves efpecial Remark, by reason they are much Wronger (/) in Birds than in Man, or any other Animal, not made for Flying.

IV. Next the Wings, the Tail is in Flight con- Cdcrable j greatly aflilting in all Afcents and De-

(/) PedoraUs Mufcuki Hom'mh fieSlentes humeros, farvi KT parum carnofi funt ; non /cquant ^oam aut -joam partem omnium Mufculorum Hominis. E contra in Avibusy Petlorales Mufculi vaftijftmi funt, c:' iquant, imo excedtint, a" magii pendent, quam reitqui omnes Mufculi ejufdem Avis jimul fumptt. BorcU. de Mot. Animal. Vol. I. I'rop. 184.

Mr. Wtllu^hby having made the like observation, hath this Refledion on it, whence, if it be possible for Man to fly, tt n thought by them who have curtoufly weighed and confidcred the matter, that he that would attempt such a Thing with Hopes ef Succefs, mufi so contrive and adapt his Wings, that he may make ufe of his Legs, and not his Arms tn managing them : (because the muscles of the Legs arc stronger, as he ob- Icrvcs) Willugh. Ornitb. L. i- c. i. §. 19.

2" kents

338 The Tails of Birds. Book VH.

fcenrs in the Air, as alfo ferving to fteady {g) Flight, by keeping the Body upright in that fubtile and yielding Medium^ by its readily turning and anfwering every Vacillation of the Body.

And now to the Parts ferving to Flight, let us add the nice and compleat Manner of its Performance} all done according to the ftrifteft Rules of mechanism (-6). What Rower on the Waters, whatArtifl on the Land, what acuteft Mathematician could give a more agreeable and exaft Motion to the Wings, than these untaught flying Artifts do theirs ! Serving not only to bear their Bodies up in the Air, but alfo to waft them along therein, with a fpeedy progreflive Motion, as alfo to fteer and turn them this Way and that Way, up and down, falter or flower, as their Occafions require, or their pleasure leads them.

V. Next to the Parts for Flight, let us view the Feet and Legs miniftering to their other Motion : Both made light, for eafier Tranf^ortation through the Airj and the former fpread, some with Membranes for Swimming (?), some without, for Heady

Going,

(g) Mr. Wlllughby, Ray, and many others, imagine the principal ufe of tae Tail to be to fteer, and turn the Body in the Air, as a Rudder. But Borellt hath put it beyond all doubr, that this is the leall ufe of it, and that it is chiefly to alM the Bird in its Alcents and Defcents in the Air, and to obviate the Vacillations of the Body and Wings. For as for turning to this or that Side, it is performed by the Wings and Inclination of the Body, and but very little by the help of the Tail,

(h) Szt Borellt ubi fupr. Prop. iSi.crc.

{t) It IS coniiderable in all VVater-Fowl, how exac?)ly their Legs and Feet correfpond to that way of Life. For either their Legs are long, to enable them to wade in the Waters: In which cafe, their Legs are bare of Feathers a good way above the Knees, the more conveniently for this Purpofc. Their Toes alfo are all abroad ; and in fucb as bear the

Name

Chap. t. The Legs of Birdf. 339

Going, for Perching, for Catching and Holding of Prey (^), or for Hanging by the Heels to gather their Food (/), or to fix themfclvcs in their Places of Retreat and Safety. And the latter, namely the Legs ^ all curved for their cafy Perching, Roolting, and Red, as alfo to help them upoa their Wings in taking their Flight, and to b^ therein commodiouHy tucked up to the Body, so as not to obltru6b their Flight. In fomc long, for Wading and Searching the Waters j in fonae of a moderate Length, anfwcrable to their vulgar Occafionsj and in others as remarkably fliorr, to answer their efpecialOccafions and Manner of Life (»»)» To all which let ug add the placing these last men*

tioned

Name of Mudfuckers, two of the Toes are fomewhat join* ed, that they may not calily fink in walking upon boggy Places. And as for such as arc whole- footed, or whose Toes are webbed together (excepting some few) their Legs are generally short, which is the molt convenient Size for Swimming. And 'tis pretty enough to see how artificraliy they gather up their Toes and Feet when they withdravr their Legs, or go to take their Stroke ; and as artificially again extend or open their whole Foot, when they prefs upon, or drive themselves forward in the Waters.

(k) Some of the Charaderifticks of Rapacious Birds, are, to have hooked, strong, and jharp-pointed Beaks and Talotu, fitted for P.apine, and tearing of Flefh ; and firong and brawny Thighs, for flriking down their Prey. Willughby Ornith. L. 1. c. r. Raii Synopf. Av. Method, p. i.

(/) Such Birds as climb, particularly those of the Wood pecker Kind, have for this purpose {'xs'iAx.\vHlughby oblcrves, L. i. c. 4.) I. Strong and mufculous Thighs. 2. Short Legs and very strong. 3. Toes standing two forwards and two backwards. Their Toes alfo are close joined together, that they may more ftrongly and firmly lay hold on the Tree they elimb upon. ^. All of them have a hard ftifFTail bending alfo downwards, on which they lean, and so bear up themselves in chmbing.

{m) Swifts and Swallows have reinatkably ihort Legs, efpctially the former, and their Toes graCp any Thing very ^' Z 1 ftrongly.

340 The Heads of Birds. Book VII.

tioned Parts in the Body. In all fomewhat out of the Center of the Body's Gravity («), but in such as swim, more than in others, for the better rowing their Bodies through the Waters, or to help them in that Diving (o) too.

llrongly. All which is ufeful to them in building their Nefls, and other /uch Occafions as neceflitate them to hang frequently by their Heels. But there is far greater ufe of this Strudure of their Legs and Feet, if the Reports be true of their hanging by the Heels in great Clufters (after the manner of Bees) in Mines and Grotto's, and on the Rocks by the Sea, all the Winter. Of which latter, I remember the late learned Dr. Fry told this Story at the Univerlicy, and confirmed it to me since, "vh. That an ancient Fiflierinan, accounted an honeft Man, being near some Rocks on the Coaft of Cornwal, faw at a very low Ebb, a black Lift of fomething adhering to the Rock, which when he came to examine, he found it was a great Number of Szvallotus, and, if Imifremember not, of Swifts Mo, hanging by the Feet to one another, as Bees do; which were covered commonly by the Sea- Waters, but revived in his warm Hand, and by the Fire. All this the Fiftierman himself afTured the Dodor of. Of this, see more. Chap. 3. Note {d) of this Book.

(») In Birds that frequent not the Waters, the Wings are in the Center of Gravity, when the Bird lies along, as in Flying; but when it stands or walks, the Eredlion of the Body throws the Center of Gravity upon the Thighs and Feet.

(0) See Chap. 4. Note (/;).

CHAP. II.

Of the Head, Stomach, and other ^arts of Birds.

THus having difpatched the Par^ principally concerned in the Motion of the Feathered Trihy let us proceed to Tome other Parts not yet

ani-

Chap. II. The Heads of Birds. 3 41

animadverted upon. And we will begin with the Head., concerning which I have already taken notice of its Shape for making way through the Air ; of the m.ikc of the Bill^ forgathering Food, and other Ufes j the commodious Situation of the Eye j and I might add that of the Ear too, which would be in the way, and obfl:ru6l Flight, if 'twas like that of moll other Animals : Alfo I might say a great deal of the Conformation of the Rrain^ and of the Parts therein wanting, and of others added, like to what is obfervable in Fifhes; whofcPoffurc in the Waters resembles thatof Birds in the Air (^), and both very different from Man and beasts j and lallly, to hint at no more, I might furvcy the peculiar Stru6lure of the Laryn>i (^), the

7'ongue

{a) Cerebra Hcminum v ^tadrupedtim in plerifque fimil'ta

txiftunt. Capltibus Volucrum cr Pifcium contenta, ab

utrtfque prionbus longe divcrfa, t amen inter fc, quoad pr£Cipuas iyxtfiixti partes, Symbola reperiuntur. The Particulars wherein the Brains of Birds and Fidies agree with one another, and wlierein they differ from the Brain of Man and beasts, see in the same juftiy famous Author, Willis Cereb. Anat. c. 5.

{h) Circa bifurcationem Afpert Arterii, tle^ans Artificis lihere agentis indicium detegitur ex Avium comparatione cum Gluadrupedibus : cum Vocts gratia in diverjis Avibus dtverfam mufculorum fabricam bifurcationi Afpert. Arteri& dederit, quorum nullum vefiigium extat in Homtne zsr §luadrupedibus mihi vi/is, ubi omnes vocis mufculos capiti Arterii junxit. In Aquila, &c. fupra bifurcationem, 8cc. Steno in Blaf. Anar. Animal. P. i. c. 4.

Tiie Afpera Arteria is very remarkable in the Szvan, which is thus described by T. Bartholin, viz. Afpera Arteria admirandi fatts flruclurt.. Nam pro Colli longitudine deorfum Oefophagi comes protenditur donee ad Jiernum perveniat, in cujus capfulam fe incurvo flexu inftnuat CT* recondit, velut in luto loco CT* t/?eca, mixque ad fundum ejufdem cdvitatis delata furfum refieditur, egrcditurque angujlias Srerni, u- Claviculis medtir ccncenfis, quibus ut fulcro nititur, ad Thoracemfe fletlit - — Miranda hcrcle tnodit omnibus con flit utia c Refpirariani

Z 3 infer vit

34X ^be Heads of Birds, Book VIl,

7'ongue (c)y the inner Ear (d)^ and many Matters

he sides J

infervit o" Voci. Nam cum in flagnorum fundo edttlia pro •viSiu qaxrat, longijfimo indiguit collo, ne longa mora fujfocatien'ts incurreret periculum. Et certe dum dimidiam fere horam toto Capite ^ Coll$ pron'ts vctdo immergitur, pedibus in altum elatis eoeloque chverfis, ex ea, ArteriA q»£ pe^oris diSid, vagina reclufa efi portioned tanquam ex condo promo fpiritum haunt, Blaf. ib. CIO. •

(c) The StruAure of the Tongue of the Wood- Pecker is -verj lingular and remarkable, whether we look at its great Length, its Bones and muscles, its encompaffing part of the Neck and Head, the better to exert it self in Length ; and again, to retradl it into its Cell ; and lastly, whether we look at its (harp, horny, bearded Point, and the glevvy Matter at the end of it, the better to ftab, to ftidc unto, and draw out little Maggots out of Wood. Uiilis en'im Picis (faith Cotter ) ad Vermiculos, Formicas, aliaque InfeSia venanda talis Lingua for et. Siquidem Picusy innata fua fagacitate cum defrehendtt alibi in arboribusy -vel carte, vel alia de cauia cavatis. Vermes infe£laque delitefcere, ad illas volitat, fefeque dir ptis, ungulifque poflerioribus robuftijfimis, ^ Cauda pennis rigidifftmis fufientaty donee valtdo ac per acuta Rofiro arborempertundat ; arbore pertusd, foramini rojirum immittit, ac quo animacula flridore excitet percellatque, magnam in arboris cava emittit vocem, infedia vociferatione hac cencitata hue illucque. repuiit ; Picus v. linguam fuam exerit, atque aculeis, hamifque animalia infgit, tnfixa attrahit v" devorat. Vid. Blafii U' bi fupra. P.i. c. 14,

{d) I have before, in Book IV. Chap. 3. Note («), takea iiotice of what others have observed concerning the inner Bar of Birds, referving my own observations for this Place: Which I hope may be acceptable, not only for being some of them new, but alfo fhcwing the mechanism of Hearing in general.

In this Organ of Birds, I shall take notice only of three Parts, the Membranes and Cartilages ; the Columella ; and the Conclave: The Drum, as some call it, or Membrana Tympani, as Others, consists of two Membranes, the Outer, which covers the whole Meatus, Bafon or Drum, (as some call it) and the inner Membrane, To fupport, diftend and relax the outcrmoft, there is one fingle Cartilage, reaching from the Side of the Meatus, to near the middle of the Membrane. On the top of the Columella is another Cartilage, confining of three Branches, a. b. c in Fig 13. The

longelt

Chap. II. The Heads of Birds. 343

Jongeft middle Branch a. is joined to the top of the fingl« tipper Cartilage before spoken of, and adllh it to bear up the upper outer Membrane : The two Branches, h. e. arc joined to the Os Pttrofum, at some diftancc from the outer Membrane: Upon this inner CartUagc, is the inner Membrane fixed, the two outer Sides of which, a. b. and a. t. are joined to the outer Membrane, and make a kind of threc-fquare Bag. The design of the two Branches or Legs of the Cartilage, h. c. are I conceive to keep the CariiUge and ColumelU from wavering side-ways, and to binder them .from flying too much back: There is a very fine (lender Ligament extended from the oppofite side, quite crofs x\\c Meatus or Bafon, to the Bottom of the Cartilage, near its joining to the ColumelU. Thus much for the Membrarnt Tyni' fani, and their Cartilages.

The next Part is the Columella (as Schelhammer calls it.) This is a very fine, thin, light, bony Tube ; the Bottom of which fpreads about, and gives it the Rclemblance of a wooden Pot-lid, such as I have seen in Country-houses. It cxaftly fliuts into, and covers a Foramen of the Conclave^ to which it is braced all round, with a fine fubtile Membrane, compofed of the tender Auditory Nerve. This Bottom or Bafe of the Columella, I call the Operculum.

The last Part, which some call the Labyrinth and Cochlea, consisting of Branches more like the Canales Semicircularet in Man, than the Cochlea, I call the Conclave Audit/is. It is (as in most other Animals) made of hard context Bone. In most of the Birds I have opened, there are f/rc«/4rC<i»<i/;, some larger, some lefier, croffing one another at right Angles, which open into the Conclave. But in the Coo/e it is otherwife, there being cochleous Canals, but not like those of other Birds. In the Conclave, at the Side oppofite to the Operculum, the tender Part of the Auditory Nerve enters, and lineth all those inner retired Parts, vi^;.. the Conclave and Cnnals.

As to the Pajfages, Column*, and other Parts obfcrvable in the Ear of Birds, I (hall pass them by, it being fuiricient to my purpose, to have described the Parts principally concerned in the Adl of Hearing. And as the Ear is in Birds the most fimplc and incomplcx of any Animals Ear ; so we ma7 from it make an eafy and rational Judgment, how Hearicg is performed, viz. Sound being a Tremor, or Undulation in the Air, caufed by the Collifion of Bodies, doth as it moves along, (!rike upon the Drum, or Mcjnbrana Tympani of the Ear: Which Motion, whether strong or languid, flinll or soft, tuneful or not, is at the same Infiant inipreflcd upon the Cartilages, Columella, and Operculum, and so communi-r cated to the Auditory i^frve in the Conclave,

Z 4 Anci

344 The Heads of Birds. BookVIT.

befidesj but for a Sample, I shall only infill upon the wonderful Provifion in the Bill for the judging of the Food, and that is by peculiar Nerves lodged therein for that purpose } small and less numerous in such as have the Affiftance of another Senfe, the Eye 5 but large, more numerous, and thickly branched about, to the very End of the Beak, in such as hunt for their Food out of Sight in the Waters, in Mud, or under Ground (e).

And

And now if we compare the Organ and Ad of Hearing, ■with those of Sight, we ftiall find, that the Conclave is to Hearing, as the Retina is to Sight ; thatfonorous Bodies make their Impreffions thereby on the Brain, as visible Objeds do by the Retina. AL'b, that as there is an Apparatus in the Eye, by the opening and (liutting of the Pupil, to make it correfpond to all the Degrees of Light, so there is in the Ear to make it conformable to all the Degrees of Sound, a noble Train of little Bones and muscles in Man, o'c. to ftrain and relax the Membrane, and at the same Time to open and fliut the Bafis of the Stapes (the same as what I call the Operculum in Birds:) But in Birds, there is a more fimplc, but fufl&cient Apparatus for this purpose, tender Cartilages, instead of Bones and Joints, to correfpond to the various Impreffions of Sounds, and to open and fliut the Operculum. Befides which, I fufped the Ligament I mentioned, is only the Tendon of a muscle, reaching to the inner Membrana Tympanic and joined 'thereto (as I find by a ftrider Scrutiny) and not to the Cartilage, as I imagined. By this muscle, the inner Membrane, and by Means of that the Outer alfo can be diftended or relaxed, as it is in Man, by the Malleus and its muscle, vc

(e) Flat- hilled Birds, that grope for their Meat, have three Pair of Nerves, that come into their Btlls, whereby they have that Accuracy to dijiingtiijl} tvhat is proper for Food, and what to be rejedledtby their Tafle, when they do not see it. This ivas mofi evident in a Duck's bill and Head; a Duck having larger Nerves that ccme into their Bills than Ceefe, or any other Bird that I have fecn ; and therefore quajfer and grope out their Meat the mofi. But than I discovered none of these Nerves in round lill'd Birds. But since, in my Anatomies in. the Country, t7i a Rock, 1 firfi observed two Nerves that came down betwixt the Eyes into the upper Bill, but confiderably

; smaller

Chap. II. The Stomach of Birds. 34^

And now from the Head and Mouth, pass wc to its near Ally, the Stomach, another no Icfs notable than ufeful Part j whether we consider the Elegancy of its Fibres and Mufclcs, or its Multiplicity ; one to foften and macerate, another to digcft i or its Variety, fuited to various Foods, fomc membraneous, agreeable to the frugivorous, or carnivorous Kind 5 Ibme mufculous and strong (/), fuited to the Comminution, and grinding of Corn and Grain, and so to supply the Defed: of Teeth.

And now to this Specimen of the Parts, I might add many other Things, no Icfs curiously contriv'd, made and fuited to the Occafions of ihefe Volatilesj as particularly the Strufture and LodgfmalUr than any of the three Pair of Nerves, in the Bills of Ducks, but larger than the Nerves in any other round-bill' J> Birds. And 'tis remarkable that these Birds, more than any other round- bill' d Birds, seem to grope for their Meat in CoU" 'dung, &c. Mr. J. Clayton, in Fhilof. Tranlaa. N". io6.

lobferv'd three Pair of Nerves in all the broad-bill'd Birds that 1 could meet with, and in all such ns feel for their Food out of Sight, oi Snipes, Woodcocks, Curleivs, Geefe, Ducks, Teals, Widgeons, &c. Jhefe Nerves are very large, equalling aim cfi

the Optic Nerve in Thicknefs. Tivo are diflnbuted nigh the

End cf the upper Bill, and are there very much expanded, passing through the Bone into the Membrane, lining the Roof of the Mouth. Dr. A. Moulcn. Ibid. N". 199. Or both in Mr. Lcuthorp's Abridg. V. i. p. JJ61, S61.

(/) The Gizzard is not only made very strong, erpccially in the Granivorous; but hath alfo a Faculty ot Grinding what IS therein. For which purpose, the Bird fwalloweth rough Stones down, which, when grown fmooth, are rejeaed and cast out of the Stomach, as ufelels. This Grindmg may be heard in Falcons, Eagles, a-c. by laying the Ear dbfc to them, when their Stomachs are empty, as the famous Dr. Harvey faith. De Generat. F.xer. 7.

As to the Strength of the Gizzard, and the ure of Stones to the Digeftion of Fowls, divers curious Experiments may be met with, try'd by Seigneur Redi, with gl^il's Bubbles, lolid Glafs. Diamonds, and other hard Bodies, bee hii £.%/>. Nat.

t

mcnt

54^ l^f^s Lungs of Birds. Book VIL

ment of the Lungs {g)-, the Configuration of the Breafl^ and its Bone, made like a Keel, for commodious Paflage through the Air, to bear the large and strong muscles, which move the Wings, and to countcrpoife the Body, and fupport and rest it ppon at rooft. The Neck alfo might deferve our Notice, always cither exadly proportion'd to the Length of the Legs, or elfe longer, to hunt out Food, to fearch in the Waters {h) j as alfo to ^ounterpoife the Body in Flight (/). And lastly,

I might

{g) It is no less remarkable in Birds, that their Lungs adhere to the Thorax, and have but httle play, than that in other Animals they are loofe, and play much, which is a good ProvifiOn for their ftcady Flight. Alfo they want the Diaphragm, and instead thereof, have divers large Bladders made of thin tranfparcnt Membranes, with pretty large Holes out of one into the other. these Membranes seem to me to serve for LigamentSy or Braces to the Vi/cera, as well as to contain Air. Towards the upper Part, each Lobe of the Lungs is perforated in two Places, with large Perforations; whereof one is towards the outer, the other towards the inner Part Of the Lobe. Through these Perforations, the Air hath » passage into the Belly, (as in Book I. Chap. i. Note (/?);) that is, into the foremention'd Bladders; so that by blowing into the afpera Arteria, the Lungs will be a little rais'd, and the whole Belly blown up, so as to be very turgid. Which doubtlefs is a Means to make their Bodies more or less buoyant, according as they take in more or less Air, to facihtate thereby, their Afcents, and Defcents: Like as it is in the Airiladdsrs of Fiflies, in the last cited Place. Note (i).

(^) Such Birds as have long Legs, have alfo a long Neck ; for that otherwife they could not commodioujly gather up their Food, either on Land, or in the Water: But on the other Side, those which have long Necks, have not ahvays long Legs, as in Swam

• "Zvhtift Necks serve them to reach to the Bottom of Rivers^ &c. Willughby'j Ornithol. L. i. c. i. §. 7.

(i) We have sufficient instances of this in Geefe, Ducks, &c. whofc Wings, (their Bodies being made for the Convenience of Swimming,) are plac'd out of the Center of Gravity, nearer the Head. But the extending the Neck and Head ia iplight, caufeth a due ^quipoife and Libration of the Body upon the Wings, Which is another excellent Ufe of the

^OD^

Chap. III. Migration of Birds. 347

I might here take Notice of the Dcfed of the Diaphragm, so neccflary in other Animals to Rtfpiration ; and alfo of divers other Parts redundant, dcfedlive, or varying from other Animals. But ic would be tedious to infift upon all -, and therefore to the Examples already given, 1 would rather recommend a nice Infpc£lion (-^), of those curious Workj of God, which would be manifell Dcmonllrations of the admirable Contrivance and Oeconomy of the Bodies of those Creatures.

From the Fabrick therefore of their Bodies, I (hall pass to a Glance of one or two I'hings, relating to their State \ and so conclude this Genus ot the animal World.

long Necks of thefc Birds, befides that of reaching and fearching in ihc Waters for their Food.

But in the Heron, whose Head and long Neck, (although tuck'd up in Flight,) over-balance the hinder Fart of the Body; the long Legs are extended in Flight, to countcrpoifc the Body, as well as to supply what is wanting in the Tail, from the Shortnefs of it,

(k) Steno thus concludes his Myology of the Eagle, Imper* feita hic Mujculorutn dejcrif>tio, non minus arida ejl Legentihus, quiim Infpe^lantibus futrit jucunda eoru7idtm prAparatio, F.UgantiJftma enim Mechanlces artificia, creberrime in Hits ob~ •oifiy verbis non nifi obfcure exprirnHntur, carnitim auftm du' Huy tendinum colore, tnfertionum proportione, CT* trochlearutn diftributione oculis eipofeta omnem fuperattt admirationem. StC* no in Blaf. Anat. Animal. V. i. c. 4.

CHAP. III.

Of the Migration of Birds.

Concerning the State of this Tribe of jfni' mals^ the firfl Thing I shall speak of, (by reason God himfclf inftanccth in it,) shall be their Migration, mention'd, Jer. viii. 7. 2>a, tht Stork in the Hea'ven knoweth her appointed Timesy

and

348 Migration of Birds. Book VII.

and the 'Turtle.^ and the Crane, and the Swallow oh' fewe the lime of their Coming j but my People, &c.

In which A6t of Migration, there are two Things to me, exceedingly notable. One is what the Text speaks of, their knowing their proper Times for their PaJJage, when to come {a), when to go; as alfo that some should come when others go J and some others go when these come. There is no doubt but the Temperature of the Air, as to Heat and Cold, and their natural Propenfity to breed their Young; may be great Incentives to those Creatures to change their Habitation : But yet it is a very odd Inftind, that they should at all fhifc their Habitation : That some certain Place is not to be found in all the terraqueous Globe, affording them convenient Food and Habitation all the Year, cither in the colder Climes, for such as Delight in the colder Regions, or the hotter, for such Birdi cf Pajfage as fly to us in Summer.

Alfo it is fomewhat Grange, that those untaught, unthinking Creatures, should so exa6tly know the befl and only proper Seafons to go and come. This gives us good reason to interpret the rv-^y\a appointed 'Times {b), in the Text, to be such Times as the Creator hath appointed those i.'\nimals, and hath accordingly, for this End, imprinted upon their Natures such an Inftin6t, as exciteth and

(4) Curio/a res eji, fcire, quam exaEVe hoc genus avium [Gruiim] quotannis obfervet tem^ora fui redltus ad nos. Anna 1667. prim£ Grues ccrmparuertint in cawpefiribus Pif& 20 Feb. &c. F. Redi Exp. Nat. p. 100. ubi plura.

(6) ¥\0Vit'y9'^ indixit, conflituit, fcil. locum, veltempus, ubi vet quando aliquid fieri debet. Biixt. in verb.

He volnntate fua certtorem reddidit. Con. Kircher concordant. Pars. I. Col. 1846. lyiD Generaltter pro re aliqua certcty attefiatA, CT* definita accipitur. i. Pro tempore certo <0' conftituto. 2. Deinde pro fcfio fe:i Solennitate, qui certo ^ Jla- <o tempore celebratur. 3. Pro loco certo conjlituto. Id. ibid. CpI. 1847.

moveth

Chap. III. Migration of Birds. 349

moveth them thus, at proper Times, to fly from a Place that would obllruft their Generation, or not afford convenient F'ood for them, and their Young, and betake thcmfclvcs to another Place, affording all that is wanting for Food or Incubation.

And this leads me to another Thing remarkable in this A61: of Migration} and that is. That those unthinking Creatures Ihould know what Way to fteer their course {c) and whither to go. Whac but the great Creator's Inftind: should ever move a poor foolifli Bird, to venture over vail Trails of Land, but especially over large Seas ? If it should be said. That by their high Afcents up into the Air, they can see crofs the Seas j yet what should teach or perfuade them, that that Land is more proper for their Purpofc, than this? That Britain^ (for Inllance,) should afford them better Accommodations than /Egypt {cl)^ than the Canaries^ than Spain,

or

(c) gw/i non cum admiratlone videat ordinem o' politiam peregrinantium jivium, in innere, turmatim volantium, per Iongos terrarum o" maris traclui abfque Acu marina? ^btis

eas ctrtum iter in aeris mutabili regione docuit ? S^jjis pntentA figna, CT* futurs. vis. indicia ; quis eas ducit, nutrit, o^ vit^t necejjaria minifirat ! &uis infulas v hofpitia, ilia, in quibus vii'lum reperiant, indicavit ; modumque ejufmodi Icca in peregrinationibus fuis inveniendi ? Hic fane fuper ant hominum capturn zjr indtiflriam, qui non nifi longis experientiis, multis iiinerariis, chartis geographies, cr actis magnesia benef.cio,

'ejufmodi marium o" terrarum tradlus confcsre tentant qjaudent. Lud. de Beaufort. Cofmop. divina Sect. ^. c. r.

{d) I instance particularly in JEgypt, because Mr. Willughhy thinks Swallows fly thither, and into M:hinpta, &c. ami that they do not lurk in Holes, oi under Water, as Olaus Magnus Reports. Vid. Omith. L. 2. c. 3. But Ftmullcr puts the Matter out of doubt; who faith, Meminime plures, quam quas Medimnus caperit, Hirundines ar6ie coacervatas intra Pifcin& cannas, fiib glacie prorfus ad fenfum exanimes pulfanttt tamen, reperiijfe. Etmuller Differt. z. c. 10. §. 5. This as it is hkc what Ol. Magnus' Uiih, so is a Confirmation of it. The Archbifhop's Account is, In Septtntrtonalibus aquis fapius cafu Pifcatoris txtrahuntur Hirundines, in tnodmn conglt-

• mtrat*

3 5*0 Migration of Birds. BookVIL

or any of those many intermediate Places over which feme of them probably fly.

And lastly, to all this, let us briefly add the Accommodations these Birds of Pajfage have^ to enable them to take such long Flights, wz. the Length of their Wings, or their more than ordinary Strength {e) for Flight.

wiratA majji, quA ore ad os, cr ala ad alam, a' pede ad pedetn pofi principmm auttimni feft inter cunnai defcenfurd. coLliga.runt, ■ ■ ■ 'MajJ'a autem ilU per imperifos adolefcentes ~ ~ ■ ~ extra^a, atque in &ftuaria portata, caloris acceJJ'u Hirundinei refolutA, ■volar e quidem incipiunt, Jed exiguo tempore durant, Ol. Mag. hist. L. 19. c. 20.

Since my penning this Note, we had, at a Meeting of the Royal-Society, leh. it. 1711-13. a farther Confirmation of Swallows retiring under Water in Winter, from Dr. Colas, a Perfon very curious in these Matters ; who fpeakiiig of their Way of Fifliing in the northern Parts, by breaking Holes, and drawing their Nets under the Ice, faith, that he faw fixteen Swallows so drawn out of the Lake of Samrodt, and about Thirty out of the King's great Pond in Rofineden ; and that at Schlebttten, near an house of the Earl of Dolma, he faw two Swallows juft come out of the Waters, that could scarce stand, being very wet and weak, with their Wings hanging on the Ground : And that he hath obferv'd the Swak lows to be often weak for some Days after their Appearance.

(<) As Swallows are well accommodated for long Flights, by their long Wings, so are §lHails by the Strength of their feSloral Alufcles, by the Breadth of their Wings, o'c For Quails have but short Wings for the Weight of their Body j and yet they fly from us into warmer Parts, against Winter, and to us in Spring, crofTing our Seas. So divers Travellers tell us they crofs the Mediterranean twice a Year, flying from Europe to Africa, and back again : Thus Bellonius in Mr. Williighby, faith, When we fail'd from Rhodes to Alexandria of ^gypt, many Quails flying from the North towards the South, where taken in our Ship; whence 1 am verily perfuaded, that they fnft Places: For formerly alfo, when I fail'd out of the Ifle of Zzni to Morea, or Negropont, in the Spring Time, I had obfervd Quails flying the contrary Way, from South to North, that they might abide there all Summer. At which Time alfo, there ivert a great many taken in our Ship, Ornith. p. 170.

CHAP.

Chap. IV. 3jr

CHAP. IV. Of the Incubation of Birds.

ANother Thing relating to the State of this Tribe of Animals, is their Incubation. And first, the E^ it fclf deferves our Notice. Its Parts within, and its crufty Coat without, arc admirably well fitted for the business of Incubation. That there should be one Part provided for the Formation of the Body ((?), before its Exit into the World, and another for its Nourifhmcnt, after it is come into the World, till the Bird is able to fliift for, and help it self j and that thefc Parts ihould be so accurately brac'd, and kept in due Place (^), is certainly a design'd, as well as curious Piece of Workmanlhip.

And

{a) The Chicken is form d out of, and nourijh'd by the Whitt alone, till it be grown great. The Tolk serves for the Chicken's Nourifl}ment, after it is well grown, and partly alfo after it is hatch'd. For a good Part of the lolk remains after Exclufiov^ being received into the Chicken s Belly ; and being there reftrvd^ as in a Store-house, it by the [Appendicula, or Dudus intcftinalis,] M by a tunnel, convey'd into the Guts, and serves itt' flead of Milk, &c. Willugh. Ornich. L. i. c. 3. Ipfum animal ex albo liquore Ovi ctrporatur. Cibus ejus in lutco ejl, Plin. L. 10. c. 53.

Arijlotle faith, The long fltarp Eggs bring Temales ; the round ones, with a larger Compafs at the fljarptr End, Males. Hilt. An. L. 6, c. X. After which, he tells of a Sort at Syraeuje, that fate drinking so long, till Eggs were hatch'd; as alfo o£ the Cuftom of A^gypt, of hatching Eggs in Dunghills.

{b) As the Shell and Skin keep the Yolk and two White* together; so each of the Paris, (the Yolk and inner White at least,) are fcparated by Membranes, involving them. At each End of the Egg is a Treddle, so cajl'd, because it was

J formerly

35'2. Incubation of Birds. Book V 11.

And then as to the A£l it self, of Incubation^ What a prodigious Inftinft is it in all, or almost all the several Species of Birds, that they, and only they, of all Creatures, should betake themselves to this very Way of Generation ? How should they be aware that their Eggs contain their Young, and that their Production is in their Power (<r)? What should move them to betake themselves to their Nefts, and there with Delight and Patience to abidc the due Number of Days ? And when their Young are gotten into the World, I have already (hewn how admirable their Art, their Care, and ^•xo^yn is in bringing them up until, and only until, they are able to ihift for themselves.

formerly thought to be the Sperm of the Cock. But the Vfe of these, (faith Dr. Harvey in Willugh. Ornith. c. 3.) i$ to he as 'twere, the Poles of this Mkrocofm, and the, Connetl'tons of all the Membranes twified and knit together, by which the Liquors are not only conferv'd, each in its Place, but do alfo retain their due Pofition one to another. This, ahhough in a great measure true, yet doth not come up to what I have my self obferv'd ; for I find, that these Chalaz£, or TreddleSf serve not barely to keep the Liquors in their Place, and Portion to one another; but alfo to keep one and the same Part of the Yo^k uppermoft, let the Egg be turn'd nearly which way it will ; which is done by this mechanism : The ChalazA are fpecifically lighter than the Whites, in which they swim ; and bemg brac'd to the Membrane of the Yolk, rot exacftly in the Axis of the Yolk, but fomewhat out of it, caufeih one Side of the Yolk to be heavier than the other; so that the Yolk being by the Chalaz&mz^c buoyant,', and kept fwimraing in the Midit of two Whites, is by its own heavy Side kept with the same Side always uppermoft ; which uppermoil Side I have some reason to think, is that, on which the Cicatncula lies; that being commonly uppermoil in the Shell, especially in some Species of Eggs more I think than others.

(c) All Birds lay a certain Number of Eggs, or nearly that Number, and then betake themselves to their Incubation; but if their Eggs be withdrawn, they will lay more. Of which, see Mr. Rays Wif. of God, p. 137.

And

Chap. IV. Incubation of Birds. 15*3

And lartly, when almofl the whole Tribe of Birds, do thus by Incubation, produce their Young, it is a wonderful Deviation, that fomc few Families only, should do it in a more novercal Way (^), without any Care or Trouble at all, only by laying their Eggs in the Sand, expofcd to the Heat and Incubation of the Sun. Of this the Holy Scripture it self gives us an Inftancc in the Oftrich : Of which we have an Hint, Lam. iv. 5. The Daughter of my People is become cruel^ like the Ofiriches in the IVildernefs. This is more plainly exprcflcd in 'job xxxix. 14, if, 16, 17. [The Ollrich] leavcth her Eggs in the Earthy and ivarmetb them in the Duft^ and forgetteth that the F'cot may crujh them, or that the Wild- Be aft may break them. She is hardened againjl her Toung ones, as though they •were not hers : Her Labour is in 'vain^ ivithout Fear, because God hath deprived her of IVifdom, neither hath he imparted unto her Underfianding. In which Words I (hall take notice of three Things, i . Of this anomalous Way of Generation. It is not very ftrange, that no other Incubation but that of

(i) The Jahon is a Bird no bigger than a Chicken, but is said to lay an Egg larger than a Goofe's Egg, and bigger than the Bird it lelf. these they lay a Yard deep in the Sand, where they are hatch'd by the Warmth of the Sun; after which they creep out, and get to Sea for Provifions. Navarett's Account of China in Colleil. of Voyages, Vol. r. This Account is in all Probabihty borrow'd from Nieremherg, or Hernandez, (that copy'd from him,) who call this Bird by the Name of Daie, and its Eggs Tapun, not the Bird it self, as Navareite doth. But my Friend Mr. Ray faith of it, Hijlorta ifihtc proculdubio fabulofa o" falfa ejl. ffljamvii entm Aves nonnulU maxima ova parium, ut v. g. Alkae, LomwidE, Anates, Ardicae, arc. hujufmodi tamen unum duntaxat, non plura ova ponunt antequam mcubent : nee ullam in reruTH natura avem dari exifltmo cujfts ova albumme cartanr. Cum Albumen pncipua ovi pan fit, quodque primnm foetui 4limcntHTn [ukminifirat. Rah Synop. Av. Method, p. iss-

A a the

354 Incidation of Birds. BookVll.

the Sun, (hould produce the Young j but 'tis very odd and wonderful that any one Species should vary from all the rert of the Tribe. But above all, 2. The fingular Care of the Creator, in this Cafe, is very remarkable,, in fupplying some other Way the Want of the Parent-Animals Care and Xto^- yvi {e)y so that the "Young should notwithllanding be bred up in those large and barren Dcfarts of Arabia^Lud Africa^ and such like Places wh-ere those Birds dwell, the most unlikely and unfitting (in all human Opinion) to afford Suftenance to young helplefs Creatures i but the fitteft therefore to give Demonitrations of the wisdom, Care, and efpecial Providence of the infinite Creator and Confervator of the World. 3. The last Thing I shall remark is. That the Inffmds of Irrational Animals, at least of this fpecified in the Text, is attributed to G o D. For the reason the Text gives why the Ofirich is hardened againfi her Toung Ones^ as thougjj they nvere not hers^ is, because GOD hath deprived her .of tVifdom^ and not imparted Under' standing to her ; /. e. he hath denied her that wisdom, he hath not imparted that Underflanding, that Sto^^v), that natural Inilin6t to provide for, and nurle up her Young, that most other Creatures of the same, and other Tribes aie endowed with.

{e) Ihe Eggs of the Oftrich being buried in the Sand, are chenjJicd only by the Heat of the Sun, till the Toung he exclpi' ded. For the Writers of Natural Hifiory do generally agree^ that the old Birds, after they have laid and covered their Eggs in the Sand, forjake them, and take no more Care of them. Willugh.Ornith. L. 2,. c. 8. §. r.

But there is another Oftrich [of America'] which Acaret tells us of, that takes more Care of her Young, by carrying four of her Eggs, a little before (lie hatcheth, to four Parrs ©f her Neft, there to breed Worms for Food for her Young. Afaret'i Difc, in Philof Tranf N^. 89.

Thus

Chap. IV. N'tdiJication,3cc. of Birds. ^Sy

Thus I have difparchcd what I intend no inlilt upon concerning the State of this Set of Animals ; of which, as alfo of their admirable Inilin6Vs, a great deal more might delerve our cfpecial Obfcrvationi particularly the admirable Curiolity, Art, and Variety of Nidification (/), ufcd among the the various Species of Birds ; the great Sagacity, and many Artifices ufcd by them in the Invelligation and Capture of their Prey (g)^ the due Proportion of the more and lei's ufeful, the Scarcity of the Voracious and Pernicious, and the Plenty of the Manfuete and Ufeful {b). /\lfo the Variety of their Motion and Flight might dcferve consideration, the Swiftnefs of such whose Food is to be fought in far dillant Places, and different Seafons (i) f the flower Motion and ihort Flights of others more domeftick j and even the Aukwardnefs of some others to Flight, whbfe Food is near at hand, and to be gotten without any great Occafion of Flight (k). these and divers other such like Things as these, I Hiy, I might have spoken more largely unto j but 1 Ihall pass them by with only a bare Mention, having already taken notice of them in the Company of other Matters of the like Nature, and manifclted them to be A€ts of excellent design, wisdom, and Providence, in the great Creator.

(/) See Book IV. ch. 13.

(g) See Bookl\'. ch. 11. and 14.

{h) See Book IV. ch. 10. beginn.

(1) See Book IV. ch. 8.

{k) The ColyfhOi, or Douckers, having their Food near at hand in the Waters, are remarkably made tor Diving therein. Their Hcadi are Imall , Bills flvarp pointed , Wings finall, Legs flat and broad, and placed backward, and nearer the Tail than in other Birds; and lastly,- their Feet; feme are whole footed, iame cloven- footed, but withal fin-toed. Vfd. WillHgh, Ornith, L. 3. §, 5.

A a 1 CHAP.

Ss6 Book VII.

CHAP. V. The Conclusion.

AN D now, if we refle6t upon the whole Matter, we shall here find another large Tribe of the Creation, abundantly fetting forth theWif* dom and G4ory of their great Creator. We praise the Ingenuity and Invention of Man, for the Contrivance of various pneumatick Engines > we think them witty, even for their unfuccefsful Attempts ^o swim in, and fail through that fubtle Element the Air j and the curious mechanism of that Artift is had in Remembrance, and praifed to this Day, who made a Dove, or an Eagle (a) to fly but a {hort Space. And is not therefore all imaginable Honour and praise due to that infinite Artiit, that hath so admirably contrived and made, all the noble Variety of Birds j that hath with fueh incomparable Curiofity and Art, formed their Bodies from Head to Tail, without and within, that not so much as any muscle, or Bone, no, not even a Feather {b) is unartificially made, mifplaced, redundant, or defcdlive, in all the several Families of this large Tribe? But every Thing is so incomparably performed, so nicely fitted up for Flight, as to furpafs even the Imitation of the moll ingenious Artificer among mortal rational Beings. .

(a) Vid. Book V. ch I. Note {aa).

(b) Dens non folum Angelum^ o' Hominem, [ejcL ntc exlgui cr conteinptibtlis antmantis vifcera, ntc Avis pennulam, nee Herbii fiofculum, nu Arboris Joltutn fine fttarum parlhim conysnientia dereliquit* Augultin. de Civ, Dei, L. 5. c. 11.

BOOK

Chap. I. 3f7

BOOK VIII.

0/ Insects ariri Reptiles.

CHAP. I.

Of Insects hi general.

AVING difpatch'J that Part of the animal World, which ufed to be accounted the more perfed, those Anifn#lsllyled less perfect or imperfed, will next dcfcrve a Place in our Survey, bccaufe when ftridly enquired into, we shall find them to be so far froni dcfcrvingto be accounted mean and dcTpicable Parts of the Creation, owing their Original and Production to Putrefactions, (3c. as some have thought, that we shall find them, I say, noble, and most admirable Works of God. For, as the famous Natural Hiftorian, Pliny (<«), prefaceth his Treatifeof insects^ to prevent the Reproach of condefcending (as might be thought) to so mean a Subje61:: In great Bodies^ faith he, Nature bad a large and eafy Shop to work upon obfequious Matter. Whereas^ faith he, in i he fe so finally and as it "were no Bo' dies, -what Footfteps of reason, -uhat Power, what

(a) In magnls fiquidcm corporilus, see. Plin. Nat. Hid. L. ir. c. z,

Aa 5 great

S^B Of Infers. Book VIIL

great Perfe6lion is there ? Of this having given an instance or two of the exquifite Senfes, and curious Make of feme Infeds (^), he then goes on, PFe admire^ faith he, tiirrigerous Shoulders of Elephants^ the lofty Necks and Crejis of others-, hut^ faith he, the Nature of 'Things is never more compleat than in the leafl 'Things. For which reason he intreats his Readers (as I do mine) that because they flighted many of the 7'hings themselves which he took notice of^ they would not therefore difdainfully condemn his Accoimts of them^ since^ faith he, in the Contemplation of Nature^ nothing ought to seem fuperfiuous.

Thus that .'eminent Naturalift hath made his own, and my Excufe too j the Force and Verity whereof will farther appear, by what 1 (hall say of these Animals which (as defpicable as they have been, or perhaps may be thought) we shall find as e^quifitely contrived , and curiously made for that PM:e and Station they bear in the World, as as any other Part of the Animal World. For if we consider the innumerable Variety of their Species, the prodigious Numbers of Individuals, the Shape and Make of their little Bodies, and every

(^) Vb'i tot fenfus collocavit in Cultce? Et funt alia, di£lu minora. Sed ubi Vifum in eo pr*tendit : Ubi Gu/latum appltcavit ? Ubi Odoratum inferuit ? Ubi vera truculentam illam e?* portione maximam iiocem ingeneravit ? Ojua, fubtilitate Pennas adnexuit ? prAlongavit Pedum crura f Difpofuit jejunatn Caveam, utl Atvum ? Avidafn Sanguinis, z^ potilfimum humanly fitim, accendit ? Telptm vera perfodiendo tergori, quo fpicula-vit ingenio ? Atque ut in capaci, citm cerni nan pojjftt exilitas, ita reciproca geminavit arte, ut fodlendo acuminatum par iter forbendoque fifiulofum ejjet. Sjues Teredini ad perforanda Rolora cum fono teftc denies a/fixit f Potijfimumque f ligno cibatum fecit : Sed ttirrigeros Elephantcrutn tniramur humeros, Taurqrumque colla, Cf truces in fubitme jaSlus, Tigrium rapinas, Ltonum jubas, cum rerum natura nufquam magis quam in mi" nimis, tota Jit. Piin. ibid.

Part

Chap. II. The Shape of htfcCls, 3^9

Part thereof, their Motion, their In(lin<5ls, their regular Generation and Produftion ; and, to name no more, the incomparable Beauty and Lullrc of the Colours of many of them, what more admirable and more manifefl Dcmonltration of the infinite Creator, than even this little coniemned Branch of the Animal World? But let us take a Ihort View of Particulars.

CHAP. II.

Of the Shape ^7«^Stru6ture i>/ 1 n s e c t s.

L

ET us begin with the Shape and Fabrick of

their Bodies. Which although it be fomewhat different from that of Birds, being particularly, for the mod: part, not so fliarp before, to cut and make way through the Air, yet is better adapted to their manner of Life. For confidering that there is little NecefTity of long Flights, and that the Strength and Aftivity of their Wings doth much furpafs the resistance their Bodies meet with from the Air, there was no great Occafion their Bodies should be so fliarpened before. But the Condition of their Food, and the Manner of gathering it, together with the great necessity of accurate Vifion by that admirable Provifion made for them by the reticulated Cornea of their Eyes ; these Things, I say, as they required a larger Room, so were a good Occafion for the Largenefs of the Head, and its Amplitude before. But for tht rest of rheir Body, all is well made, and nicely poifed for their Flight, and every other of their Qccafions.

A a 4 And

36o The Shape of InfeHs. Book VIII.

And as their Shap ; so the Fabrick and Make of their Bodies is no less accurate, admirable, and fingularj not built throughout with Bones, and cover'd with Flefh and Skin, as in mod other Animals ; but cover'd with a curious Mail of a middle Nature (^), ferving both as Skin and Bone too, for the Shape, as well as Strength and Guard of the Body, and as it were on purpose to shew that the great Contriver of Nature is not bound up to one Way only.

{a) Infe5la non videntur Nervos habere, nee Ojfa, nee Spinas ^ tiec Carttlaglnetn, nee Pinguia, nee Carves, ne cruftam quidem fragilem, ut qn^dam marina, nee qu& jure dicatur Cutis : fed mediA cujufdam inter omnia h&c natur& corpus^ &c. Plin. N. H. L. II. c. 4.

CHAP. III.

Of the Eyes and Antennse of Insects.

TO this lafl-mention'd Guard, we may add, that farther Guard provided in the Eyes and Antenna. The Structure of the Eye, is, in all Creatures, an admirable Piece of mechanism 5 but that obfervable in the Eyes of insects so peculiar, that it rauft needs excite our Admiration; Fenced with its own Hardnefs, yea, even its own accurate Vifion, is a good Guard against external Injuries; and its Cornea^ or outward Coat, all over befet with curious, tranfparenr, lenticular {a) Inlets, enabling

-* *

(«) The Cornea of Flies, Wafps, zsre. are so common an Entertainment with the Microfcope, that every body knows it is a curious Piece of Lattice-work. In which this \% remarkable.

Chap. III. Eyes and Antenna of In fc6ts. i6t

abling those Creatures to see, (no doubt,) very accurately every Way, without any Interval of Time or Trouble to move the Eye towards Objc6ts.

And as for the other Part, the ylntennx^ or Feelers^ whatever their Ufe may be in cleaning rlic Eyes, or other such like Ufej they are, in all Probability, a good Guard to the Eyes and Head, in their Walk and Flight, enabling them, by the Senfe of Feeling, to discover such Annoyances, which by their Proximity may perhaps efcape the Reach of the Eyes and Sight {b). Bc-

(ides

markable, that every Foramen is of a lenticular Nature; so that we see Objct'ts through them topfcy-turvey, as through so many convex Glafles: Yea, they become a small Telefcope, when there is st due focal distance between them and the Lens of the Microfcope.

This lenticular Power of the Cornea, fupplies, (as I imagine,) the Place of the Cryftalline, if not of the vitreous Humour too, there being neither of those Humours that I could ever find, (although for Truth Sake, I confefs I have not been so diligent as I might in this Enquiry;) but instead of Humours and Tunichs, I imagine that every Lens of the Cornea, hath a diftincfl Branch ot the opiich Nerve miniftring to it, and rendring it as so many diftin(ft Eyes. So that as iTioft Animals are binocular, Spiders for the most Part o<ftorocular, and feme, (as Mr. WHlNghby thought. Rait Hiji. Infccl. p. II.) fenocular; so Flies, crc. are multocular, having as many Eyes as there are Perforations in their Corned, By which Means, as oth^r Creatures are ohlig'd to turn their Eyes to Objeds, these have some or other of tlieir Eyes ready plac'd towards Objeds, nearly all round them : Thus particularly it is m the Dragon-Fly, (Libella,) the greatest Part of whose Head is pofTefs'd by its Eyes : VVhich is of excellent Ufe to that predarious Infed, for the ready feeing and darting at small Flies all round it, on which it prcjrs.

(b) It is manifed, that Infe(fts clean their Eyes with their Fore-legs, as well as Jntennt. And confidering, that as they walk along, they are perpetually feehng, and ftarching before thera, with their Feelers, or Antenm; therefore 1 am apt to think, that befides wiping and cleanuij; the Eyes, the- Ufes here nam'd may be admitted. For as their Eyes are

immove-

3^2, Eyes and Antenna of InfeBs. Book VIII.

sides which, they are a curious Piece of Workmanfhip, and in many, a very beautiful Piece of {c) Garniture to the Body.

immoveable, so that no Time is requir'd for the turning their Eyes to Objedls; so there is no Neieffity of the Retina, or optick Nerve being brought nigher unto, or set farther off from the Cornea, (which would require Time,) as it is in other Animals: But their Cor?;^^ and optkk Nerve, being always at one and the same distance, are fitted only to see diftantial Objedls, but not such as are very nigh : Which Inconvenience the Feelers obviate, left it ftiould be prejudicial, in occafioning the Infed to run its Head against any Thing.

And that this, rather than the wiping the Eyes, is the chief Ufe of the Feelers, is farther manifest from the Antenn£ of the Flejij-Fly, and many other Infedls, which are (liort, and ftrait, and incapable of being bent unto, or extended over the Eyes : As alfo from others enormoufly long, such as tho^e oi the Capricorni, ox Goat-chifers, thii.Cjtdew- Fly ^ and divers others, both Beetles and Flies. ...

(c) The lamellated Antenna of some, the clavellated of others, the neatly articulated of others, the feathcr'd and di^ vers other Forms of others, of the Scarab, Papilionaceous Gnat, and other Kinds; are furprizingly beautiful, when view'd through a Microfcope. And in some, those Antenm diftinguifli the Sexes : As in the Gnat-kind, all thole with Tufts, Feathers, and Brufli-horns, are Males ; those with, short, fingle (liafted Antenm, are Females.

CHAP. IV.

Of the Parts and Motion of Insects.

FROM the Head, pass we to the Members, concern'd in their Motion. And here we have a copious Subjeft, if I was minded to expatiate. I might take Notice of the admirable mechanism in those that creep j the curious Oars iq

those

Chap. IV. Tarts and Motion of bife&s. 3 63

those amphibious Infcfts that swim and walk (rt)} the incomparable Provifion made in the Feet of inch as walk, or hang upon Iniooth Surfaces {b) ; the great Strcngih and Spring in the Legs of such as leap {c), the lliong and well-made Feet and Talons of such as dig {d): And to name no more, the admirable Faculty of such as cannot fly, to convey themselves with Speed and Safety, by the Help of their Webs (c), or some other Artifice to

make

{d) All the Famiiies of Hydrocanthari, Notonedi, dec. have their hindmoft Legs made very nicely,, with commodious Joyius flat, and Brillles on each Sides towards the Lnd, ferving for Oars to swim ; and then, nearer ihe Body, are two ftifF Spikes, to enable them to walk when Occafion is.

(^) I might here name divers Flies, and other Infeifts, who, belides their ftiarp hook"d Nails, have alfo skinny Palms to their Feet, to enable them to Hick on Glafs, and other fmooth Bodies, by Mpans ot" the Prefl'urc of the Atmofphcre. But because the Example will illui^rate another Work of Nature, as well as this, I fhal! chufe a fmgular Piece of mechanism, ill one of the largelt Sorts of Hydrocanthari. Of thele large ones chere are two horts, one largeft, all black, with Aritenm handfomely emhofs'd at the Ends. The other fomewhat lesser, hardly lb black, with capillary Antenru; the Forehead, Edges of the VapnA, and two Rings on the Thorax, of a tawncy Colour. The Female hath I'agim prettily furrow'd, the Male fmooth. But that which is moil to our purpose in this Male, is a Flap, or hollowifh Cap near the middle Joynt of the Forelegs ; which when clap'd on the Shoulders of the Female in Coitit, fticks firmly thereon : After the Manner as I have fcen Boys carry heavy Stones, with only a wet Piece of Leather clap'd on the Top of the Stone.

(c) Thus Crafiwppers and Crickets liave brawny flrong Thighs, with tong, (lender, but fttong Legs, which enable them to leap with great Agility and Strength.

{d) I have wonder'd to see with wh.u great Quicknef?, Art and Strength, many Vrfp£- Ichneumons, Wild Bees, and Beetles, perforate the Earth; yea, even Wood it self: Bur the moll remarkable Aniirial in this Way, is the Mole-Cnckct in Book IV. Chap. T3. Note (f).

(e) 1 have with Pieafuie often seen Spiders dart out their Webs, and fail away by-ihe Help thereof. For the Manner

ox"

3^4 ^arts and Motion of InfeBs. Book VIII.

make their Bodies lighter than the Air (/) : these, and a Multitude of other such like Things as these,

I might,

of which, see Mr. Lczvth. Abridg. Vol. i. p 794. from Dr. Lifttr and Dr. Hulfe, who both claim'd the discovery therecf. And do both seem to have hit thereupon, without any Foreknowledge of what each other hath discover'd, as is said in the last cited Place, and as I more particularly find by Mr. Eay'% Philof. Letters, Printed Ann. 1718. p. 95, vc^ -By which alio I find the two ingenious Dodors were very modeft in their Claims, and very amicable in the Matter. In one of Dr. Li/ler's to Mr. Ray, he thinks there is a fair Hint of the Darting of Spiders in Ar'iftot. Hiji. An. L. 9. c. 30. And in Plmy, L. 11, c. 14. But for their Sailing, that the Ancients are filent of, and he thinks it was ieen firil by him. And in another Letter, Jan. 20, 1670, fpeaking of the Height Spiders are able to fly, he faith. The lafi Odober, CT'f. / took Notice, that the Air was very full efWebs, I forthwith mounted to the Top of the highefl Steeple »n the Minfter, [in York,] and could thence difcern them yet exceeding high above me. Some that fell, and were intangled upon the Pinacles, 1 took and found them to be Lupi ; which Kind feldom or never enter houses, and cannot be fuppos'd to have taken their flight from the Steeple.

(/) There are, (I imagine,) divers Animals, as well as^ Spiders, that have some Way of Conveyance, as little known to us, as that of Spiders formerly was. Thus the SquilhiU, fulices Arborefcente;, and microfcopical Animalcules of the Rzg~ Dating Waters, so numerous in them, as to difcolour fometimes the Water, and make them look as if they were tinged Red, Yellow or Green, or cover'd with a thick greei>. Scum ; all which is nothing but Animalcules of that Colour. That these Creatures have some Way of Conveyance, I conclude; because most ftagnating Waters are ftock'd with them ; new Pits and Ponds, yea, Holes and Gutters on the Tops of houses and Steeples. That they are not bred there fcy equivocal Generation, every ingenious, conlidering Phiiofopher will grant; that they have not Legs for travelling so far, is manifest from Infpefiion : And therefore I am apt to think, that they have some Faculty of inflating their Bodies, - or darting out Webs, and making their Bodies buoyant, and lighter than Air ; or their Bodies, when dry, may be lighu cr than Air, and so they can swim from Place to Place; or the Eggs of such as are oviparous, may be light enough to fioat in the Air. But then the Viviparous, (as my late ingeiiious_

Chap. IV. Tarts and Motion oflnfeBs. ^ 6$^ I might, I fiiy, take Notice of, as great Evidences of the infinite Creator's wisdom: But Icll I ihould be too tedious, I will confine my Obfcrvations to the Legs and Wings only. And thcfe, at first View, we find to be incomparably fitted up tor their intended Service, not to over-load the Body, not in the kail to retard it i but to give it the molt proper and convenient Motion. What, for Example, can be better contriv'd, and made for this Service, than the Wings? Dirtcnded and ftrcngthen'd by the fined Bones, and thcfe cover'd with the fineft and lightelt Membranes, some of them adorn'd with'^neat and beautiful Feathers {g)\ and many of them provided with the finelt Articulations, and Foldings, for the Wings to be withdrawn, and neatly laid up in their Vagirne^ and Cafes, and again readily extended for Flight [jo).

And

nious Friend, Mr. CharUi King, flievv'd me the PHlicei aquaf. arboref. are ; these I say,) can't be this Way accounted tor* The Caule of these latter Sufpicions was, that in the Summer Months, I have seen the Puiices arboref. and the green Scum on the Waters, (nothmg but Animalcules, as I laid,) lie in a Manner dry on the Surface of the Waters; at which Time, (as I have thewn in Book IV. Chap. ri. Note {n),) those Animalcules copulate; and perhaps, they may at the same Time change their Quarters, and feek out new Habitations for their numerous Offspring, as well as themselves.

{g) It is well known to all Perlons any Way converlant ia nucrofcopical observations. that these elegant Colours of Moths, and Butterfiies, are owing to neat and well-made Feathers, set with great Curiofuy and Exadnefs in Rows, and good Order.

{h) All that have Elytra, Scarabs (who have whole Hlytra, or rcachuig to the Pcde.x,) or the 'H^ottfAtoT/fc^i, hid\ as harzvi^s, and Utaphylini of all Sorts, do, by a very curious Mecnanilm, extend and withdraw their membranaceous Wings, (wherewith they chiefly fly;) and it is very pretty to see them prepare themselves for Flight, by thrufting out, ai d unfolding their Wings ; and again withdraw those Joynts, ^ar.d iieailv fold in the Membranes, to be laid up lately m ' tbcir

i

^66 Tarts and Motion of Infers. Book Vllf .

And then for the Poifing of the Body, and keeping it upright, and rteady in Fh"ght, it is an admirable Artifice and Provifion for this purpose> in some, by four Wings (/') j and in such as have but two, by Pointels, and Poifes plac'd under the Wings, on each Side the Body.

And lastly. It is an amazing Thing to refle£l upon the furprizing Minutenefs, Art, and Curiofity of the {k) Joynts, the muscles, the Tendons, the Nerves, neced'ary to perform all the Motions of the Legs, the Wings, and every other Part. I have already mention'd this in the larger Animals 5 but to consider, that all these Things concur in minute Animals, even in the fmallefl Mitej yea,

their Elytra, or Cafes. For which Service the Bones are ■well plac'd, and the Joynts miniflring thereunto are accurately contriv'd, for the most compendious, and commodious folding up the Wings.

(i) For the keeping the Body fteady and upright in Flight, it generally holds true, (if 1 miftake not,) that all bipennated .Infeefts have Poi/e^ joyn'd to the Body, under the hinder Part of their Wings ; but such as have four Wings, or Wings with Elytra, none. If one of the Poifes, or one of the lelTer auxiliary Wings be cut off, the Infedl will fly as if one Side overbalanc'd the other, until it falleth on the Ground; so if both be cut of, they will fly aukwardly, and unfteadily, manifefting the Defeft of some very necefl'ary Part. these Poifes, or Pointells are, for the most Part, little Balls, set at the Top of a flender Stalk, v/hich they can move every Way at Fleafure. In some they stand alone, in others, (as in the whole Flejh-Fly Tribe,) they have little Covers or Shields, under which they lie and move. The Ufe, no doubt, oi ihefs Poifes, znd fecondary kf^tr Wings, is to poife the Body, and to obviate all the Vacillations thereof in Flight; ferving to the Infeft, as the long Pole, laden at the Ends with Lead, doth the Ropedancer.

(k) As all the Parts of Animals are mov'd by the Help of these; so there is, no doubt, but the minuteft Animals have such like Parts: But the muscles and Tendons of some of the larger Infedts, and some of the lesser too, may be seen with a Microfcope.

the

Chap. IV. Tarts and Motion of Infers. 3 ^7 the Animalcules, that, (without good Microfcopes,) efcapc our Sight; to consider, I lay, that those minuteft Animals have all the Joynts, Bones, muscles, Tendons and Nerves, neccHary to that brisk and fwitt Motion that many of them have, is so itupendous a Piece of curious Art (/), as plainly manifcfteth the Power and wisdom of the infinite Contriver of those inimitable Fineries. But having nam'd those minute Animals, Why should I mention only any one Part of their Bodies, when wc have, in that little Compafs, a whole and compleat Body, as exquifitely form'd, and, (as far as our Scrutiny can poflibly reach,) as neatly adorn'd as the largell Animal? Let us consider, that there we have Eyes, a Brain, a Mouth, a Stomach, En-

(/) The minute Curiofities, and inimitable Fineries, obfervable in those leffer Animals, in which our bell Micro»- fcopes discover no Botch, no rude ill-made Work, (contrary to what IS in all artificial Works of iMan,) Do they not far more deferve our Admiration, than those celebrated Pieces of humane Art.-' Such as the Cup made of a Pcpper- Corn, by Ofwald Nerlinger, that held iico ivory Cups, all gilt on the Ldges, and having each of ihem a Foot, and yet affording Room for 400 more, in the Hphem. (3eim. T. I. Addend, ad Obf. 13. Such alfo was Phaeton in a Ring, which Galen thus reljcifts upon, when he speaks of the Art and wisdom of the Maker of Animals, particularly luch as are small, S)uanto, faiih he, ipfum minus fuer it, tanto majorem adtnirationem tibi excitaOit ; quod declarant Opijices cum in corporibus parvis alujuid mfculpant : cujus generis est quod nuper quidatn in Annulo Phaetonta quatucr equis in- -vettum fculfifit. Omnes enim equi frs.num, os, CT* denies antertores habebant, &c. And then having taken Notice, that the Legs were no bigger than those of a Gnat, he fliews that their Make did not come up to those ot the Gnat; as alfo, faith he. Major adhuc alia quidam ejje xidetur artis etu, qui PuUcem condidit. Vis atque Sapientia, quod, &c. Cum tgitur Ars tanta in tarn abjeciis ammalibus appareat, quantam ejus Vim ac Sapientiam in praflansionbus inejje putabimus? Galen, dc Uf. Fart. L. 17. c. i. tin.

2 trails

3^8 Tarts and Motion of InfeBs. Book VIII.

trails, and every other Part of an animal Body, as well as Legs and Feet; and that all those Parts have each of them their necessary ylpparatus of Nerves, of various muscles, and every other Part that other Infe£ls have j and that all is cover'd ^nd guarded with a well-made Tegument, befet with Briftles, adorn'd with neat Imbrications, and many other Fineries. And lastly, Let us consider in how little Compafs all Art and Curiofity may lie, even in a Body many Times less than a small Grain of Sand [m) j so that the least Drop of Water can contain many of them, and afford them alfo sufficient Room to dance and frisk about in («).

Having furvey'd as many of the Parts of Infers as I care to take Notice of; I shall in the next Place say fomewhat of their State, and Circumftances of Life. And here I shall take Notice only of two Things, which have been only hinted at before; but will deferve more particular consideration here, as being Ads of a wonderful Infi;in6t ; namely, Their Security of themselves against Winter; and their fpecial Care of preferving their Species.

(w) It will in some measure appear, how wonderfully minute some microfcopica! Animalcules are, by what fol- Jows in the next Note. But because more particular Examples would be endlcfs. I shall refer to the observations of Mr. Leuwenboeck, and others, in the Ph'tlof. Tranf. and elfewhere.

(») It is almost impoffible, by reason of their perpetual Motion, and changing Places, to count the Number of the Animalcules, in only a Drop of the green Scum upon Water ; but I gueis I have fometimes seen not fewer than loo frisking about in a Drop no bigger than a Pin's Head. But in such a Drop of Pepper- water, a far greater Number; thefc being much less than thole.

CHAP.

Chap. V. Infers Security agatnjl Winter . 3 6^

CHAP. V.

The Sagacity of Insects to see tire themselves aga'tnft JVinter.

IT is an extraordinary A6t of InftiniSl arid Sagacity, obfervable in the generality of the Infed- Tribe, that they all take Care to fccure themfclves, and provide againll the Necefllties of Winter. That when the Diltrefles of Cold and Wet force them, they should retire to warm and dry Places of Safety, is not ftrangei but it is a prodigious A6t of the infinite Confervator's Care to enable some to live in a different Kind of Inlcft-State j otherstolivc, as without A6tion, so without Food; and others that a6t and eat, to lay up in Summer sufficient Providons against the approaching Winter. Some, I say, live in a different State. For having fufficlently fed , nourifhed , and bred up themlelvcs to the Perfeftion of their Vermicular^ Nympha'State, in the Summer-Months, they then retire to Places of Safety, and there throw off their Nympha^ and put on their y^urelia or Cbryfalls-State for all the Winter, in which there arc no Occaflons for Food. This is the conllant Method of many Families of the Infedt-Tribe {a).

But

(<i) It would beendlefs to enter into Particulars here, be- cause all the Papilionaceous, Flejh, and Ichneumon- Fly Tribes, and all others that undergo the Nymf>ha and Aurelia-S\zic, between that of the Egg and Mature-Sute, (which are very numerous) appertain to this Note. For a Sample therefore only, I shall take what some may think a mean one, but if considered, dcferves our Admiration^ and that is the Saga- .V ' 1^ b i\if

370 InfeEfs Security againfl fVititer BookVllL

But there are are others, and some of them in their most perfe6t State too, that arc able to Tubfid in a kind of Torpitude or Sleeping State, without any Food at all j by reason as there is no A6tion ' so no Wafte of Body, no Ex pence of Spirits, andV; therefore no need of Food {b).

But for others that move and a£l:, and need Food, it is a prodigious In{lin6t: and Forefight the Creator hath imprinted on them, to say up sufficient Food in Summer for the Winter's {c) Necefliticj

-4'-

city of the White Btttter-fiy Caterpiller, which having fed it self its due Time, then retires to Places of Security. I have seen great Trains of them creeping up the Walls and Pofts of the next houses, where, with the kelp of some Cobweb-like Filaments, they hang thcmfelves to the Cielings, and other commodious Places, and then become AurelU; in which State and Places tltey hang fecure from Wet and Cold, till the Spring and warmer Months, when they are tsanfmuted into Butter- Fheg,

, {h) 1 shall not name any of the particular Species of lafet^s which Hve in this State, because they are very numerous, but only remark two Things obfervable in their Sagacity in this Matter : i. That they are not driven by Strefs of Weather to their Retirement, but seem as naturally to betake themlelves thereto, as other Animals do to rest and- Sleep. For before the Approach of cold Weather, towards the End of Summer, we ma.y see some Kinds of them flocking together in great Numbers within Doors {-ni Swallows do a little before tl\ey lea-ve us), as if they were raaikingready for their Winter's rest. z. That every Species betakes it self to a proper convenient Receptacle ; some under the Waters to the Bottoms of Ponds ; some under the Earth, below the Frofts ;. some under Timber, Stone, vc lying^on the Ground; some into hollow Trees, or under the Bark, or in the Wood ; some into warm and dry Places ; and some into dry alone.

(c) There are not many Kinds thst thus provide their Food before-hand. The most remarkable, are the Ant and the Bee; concerning the first of which, Ortgen\\n\\ this Remark, v'lx^ De /olertia. Farmicarum, venture hyemi maturf! frpfpicientiitm, Jtbique invUem fuh oinrt fejfts fHuurrentium ;

quod^Ht

Chap. V. Jnfeifs Security again ft tVinUr. 371

ties ;ind Occalions. And ic is very pretty to see 'With what unwearied Diligence all Hantls arc at work for that Purpofc, all the warmer Months. Of this xX^t Holy Scripture it self gives us an Inftancc in the Ant^ calling that little Animal exceeding mfe^ Prov.xxx. 14. And the reason is, f.z^. The Ms are a People not jltorig^ yet they prepare their Meat in the Summer. And therefore Solomon fends the Sluggard to this little contemptible Creature, to learn wisdom, Forefight, Care and Dili* gence, Prov. vi. 6,7, 8. Go to the Ant^ thou Sluggard^ consider her JVays.^ and be 'wife : which having no Guide , Overfcer , or Rukr , prevideth her Meat in the Summer^ and gathereth her Food in the Harvejl.

To this Scriptural Example, give me leave to anticipate, arxf fubjoin an Obfcrvation of the farther great wisdom of this little Creature j and that is their unparallelled Zra^yij, their Tendernefs, Sagacity, and Diligence about their Young (d),

'Tl3

tjHSdqae fritgei arrofas condunt, ne rurfut enafcatttur, fed fif JtHHum alimtnto finty noa ratiocination em Formicarum in causa debemus credere, fed almant matrem Naturam bruta qnoqui fie ornantem, ut etiam yniHtmis addat ftia qu*dam inient*. Orig. cont. Celf. L. 4.

But as for Wafps, Hornets, Humble Bees, and Other Wild- Bees, Vefpi Ichneumons, and divers Others that carry in Materials for Nefts and Food ; this is only for the Service of their Generation, for hatching their Kggs, and nourifttin^ their Young, not for Supplies in Winter; for they all forfake their Nefts towards Winter, and retire to other Quarters, living (I conceive) without Food ail that Time.

(i) Has vermiculos [Formicarum Ova vulgo vocatos] in^ credibili i-o^yfi ^ cura Vormics edticant, fummamque dant op$- ram, ne vel tantillHm, quod fpeHet eorum vermiculorum edu- (ationem atqse nntrttiontm, omittant : quem in finem fert femper eofdem ore circHmportaHt ' jecitm, rn ulla eos Udtt ifPj'*ria. In mitfco wio nonnnlUs tjitm gener'n firmUAi, vitrt ' ' " ' ' ' ' ■ B b 1 t$rr4

372. InfeBs Security agatnft fFhiter. ^ookVlU.

'Tis very diverting, as well as admirable to see, with what Affeftion and Care they carry about tbeir Young in their Mouths, how they expofe themselves to the greatest: Dangers, rather than leave their Young expofcd or forfaken j how they remove them from Place to Place in their little Hills, fometimes to this Part, fometimes to that, for the Benefit of convenient Warmth, and proper Moifturej and then again withdraw, and guard them against Rain and Cold. Now that this great wisdom which the Scriptures attribute unto, and is difcernible in this little Animal, is owing only to the Inftind, or Infulions of the great Confervaterra repleto, conclufas cum Vermiculis ift'is adfervabam : ibi non fine jucunditate fpe6labam , quo terra fieret in fuperficie ficcior, eo profundms Formicas cum fcctibus fuis prorepere : cum 'Verb aquam adfunderem, vifu mirificum erat, quanta ajfe6lUj quanta folicitudine, quanta XTt^yri omnemineo coUacartnt operam, ut foetus fuqs Jiccjore c tuto loco rtponertnt. Sdpitts vidi, cum aliquot diebus aqua caruijjent, atque eum dffufo tantillo aquA terram illam humii'arem, evefttgio a Formicis foetus fuos eo loci fuijfe allatos, quos lit dijiin^e confpiciebam moveri atque fttgere humorem. Multoties fui conatus, ut eos Verm'tculos tpje educarem, at femper conatum fefelitt eventus : neque ipfas Formicarum Nymphas altmenti jam non indigas unquam fine ipfis Formicis potui fotu artificiali excludere. J. Swammerd. Epilog, ad hist. Infed. p. 153.

Sir Edward King^ who Was very curious in examining the Generation of Ants, observes their great Care and Diligence, I. About their Sperm, or true Eggs, which is a fine white Subftance, like Sugar, which they diligently gather together into a Heap, when Icattered; and on which they lie in Multitudes. (I suppose, by way of Incubation.) 2,. 1 have observed, faith he, in Summer, that in the Morning they bring up those of their Young (call'd Ant-Eggs) towards the Top of the Bank: So that you may from 10 in the Morning, until 5 or 6 Afternoon, find, them near the Top

for the molt Part on the South-side the Bank. But towards 7 or 8 at Night, if it be cool, or likely to rain, you may dig a Foot deep before you can find them, Phtlof. Jranf. N®. 13. or Lowthorp% Ahridg, V. i. p. 7. and 9.

Chap. VI. Infers Care of their Toung. 373

tor of the World, is evident, because cither this wisdom, Thought, and Forecall, is an Ad of the Animal it fclf, or of fomc other Being that hath wisdom. But the Animal being irrational, 'tis impodible it can be its own Act, but mull be derived, or received from some wife Being. And who ? What can that be, but the infinite Lord, Confervator and Governour of all the World ?

CHAP. VI.

Of the Care of Insects about their Young.

TH E other notable instinct I am to treat of, is the peculiar Art and Care of the Infc6t- Tribe, about the Prefervation of their Specips. Here I might speak of many Things, but I have occafionally mentioned divers of them before, under some or other of the general Heads, and therefore shall fix only upon two Things relating to their fpccial Art and Care about the Production {ii) of their Young, which have not been so particularly spoken to as they deferve.

One Thing is their fingular Providence for their Young, in making or finding out fucb proper Receptacles and Places for their Eggs and Seed , as that they may receive the Advantage of a futfici-

(4) The Doftrine of /[equivocal Generation, is at this Day so fufficiently exploded by all learned I'hilofophers, that I (hill not enter the i-)ifpure, but take it for gt anted, that 9II Animils spring from other Parent-Aniinals. If the Rcider hath any doubt about it, I refer hi en to Seigneur Reiii d» Gen. Infen. and M Ray's iVifJ. of God, &:c. p. 344. Sec al- I9 before, Book IV. Qi. 15. Note (a).

B b ; cnc

3 74 InfeEis Care of their Toung. Book VIII,

cnt Incubation, and that the Young, when pro* dueed, may have the Benefit of praper and fuffieient Food for their Nurture and Education, till they are able to ihift for themselves. It is admirable to see with what Diligence and Care the several Species of insects lay up their Eggs or Sperm in their several proper Places 5 riot all in the Waters, in Wood, or on Vegetables j but those whose Subfiftence is in the Waters (^), in the Waters those to whom Flefh is a proper Food \ in Flefh {c) ;

those

(fr) It would be endkrs to fpecify the various Species of Infeds, that have their Geiieration in the Waters. And therefore I ftiall only observe of them, i. That their Egg« are always laid up wifh great Care, and in good Order. And alfo, 1. Where pifoper and sufficient Food is. 3. That in their Nympha-Stzie m the Waters, they have Parts proper for Food and Motion; and in many, or most of them, very different from what they have in their MatHre-SiQte, ^ manifest Argument of the Creator's Wirdom and Providence. For an instance, see Note (r).

(c) As Seigneur Redi was one of the first that made it his Bufincfs to difcard Anomalous Generation, so he tried more Experiments relating to the Vermination of SerpentSj Flefh, Fifh, putrified Vegetables; and in (hort, whatever was commonly known to be the Nurfery of Maggots, more I say probably, than any one hath done since. And in all his observations, he constantly found the Maggots to turr» to Aureiu, and these into Ilies. But then, faith. he, Dt^bii tare coept, utrutn omm hoc vermium in came ^enus, ex fola Mufcarum femine, an ex ipfis futrefa5liicarn'tbus oriretur, tan' toque magi! confirmabar in hoc meo dubio, quanto in omnibus

generationibus fepiti's videram, in carnibus, antequam

verminare inciperent, refedijfe ejufdem Jpeciei Mufcas, cujus fropago pofiea nafcebatur. Upon this he tells us, he put Fifh, Fiefh, tyc. into Pots, which he covered close from the Flies with Paper , and afterwards (for the free Air fake ) with Lawn, whilfl: other Pots were left open, with such like l^lefli, t^c. -in them ; that the Flies were very eager to get into the covered Pots; and that they produced not one Maggot, when the open ones had many. Fr. Redi de Gener. JnfeSi.

Among

Chap. VI. lufiSfs Care of their Toung. 375thofc to whom the Fruits {d) or Leaves of Vegetables

Among the Infcdsthat come from the Maggots he mentions, he names Culices. Now from the mod critical Obfcrvations I have made, I never observed any sort of Gnat to <:ome from putrified Flefli, Vegetables, or any other Thing he taxeth with them. So that either he means by Ctilcx^ some Fly that we call not by the Name of Gnat; or elfc their Gnats in Italy, vary in their Generation from ours in FngUnd, For among above 30, near 40 diftincfl Species of Cnats that I have observed about the Place where I live, I never found any to lay their Eggs in I'lcfti, Filli, c/f. but the largeft Sort, called by Aldrovand, Cuiices maximi, by Swammerdam, TipnU terreftres, lay their Eggs in Meadows, crc. under the Grafs ; one of the larger middle Sort, in dead Beer, Yeaft, tsrc. lying on the Tops, or in the Leaks of Beer- Barrels, isrc. and all the rest (as far as ever I have observed) lay -and hatch in the Waters, as in Note (r).

The Generation of the Second of the.fe beingakintofome of the foregoing instances, and a little out of the way, may deferve a Place here. This Guat lays its Eggs commonly in d^ad Beer, a-c. as I said, and probably in Vinegar, and other such Litjuors. Some Time after which, the Maggots are so numerous, that the whole Liquor ftirreth as if it was alive; being full of Maggots, fomc larger, some fmallcr; the larger are the ofF-lpring of our Gnat, the fmallcr, of a small dark coloured Fly, tending to reddifti ; frequent iti Cellars, and such obfcure Places. All these Maggots turn to jiurelia, the larger of which, of a Tan-Colour, turn to our Gnat. This Gnat is of the unarmed Kind, having no Spear in its Mouth. Its Head is larger than of the commoii Gnats, a longer Neck, fliort jointed Ant^nm, fpotted Wings, reach-.- ing beyond its- fkndcr Al-vus ; it is throughout of a brown Colour, tending to red, efpccially in the Female: The chief Difference between the Male and Female, is (as in other Gnats, yea, most Infeds) the Male is less than the Female, and hath a flcnderer Belly, and its Podex not so iLarp as the Female's is.

{d) The Infeds that infcft Fruits, are cither of the IchneU' man-Fly Kind, or PhaUn£. Plums, Peafc, Nuts, vc. produce some or other ichneumon-Fly. That generated in the Plum is black, of a middle Size, its Body near -I Inch long. Its Tail not much less, confillmg of three Briltles, whejcwith it conveys its Eggs into I'ruits : Its Antenm, or Horns, long, flcivder, recurved; its Belly longifh, tapering, small

Bb 4 towards

37^ Infers C^re of their Toting. BookVII!,

tables are Food, are accordingly repofited, some in this Fruit, feme on this Tree (^), some on that Plant (/), Tome on another, and another i butconftantly

towards the Thorax; Legs rcddidi; Wmgs membranaceous, thin and transparent, in Number 4, which i% one Charadte- ^ifticjv of the Ichneumon Fly.

The Peafe lchneii>non-Fly , is very fraall , Wings large, reaching beyond the Podex ; Antenna, long; Alvus ftiort, fiiaped Jike aq Heart, with the Point towards the Antis., it waiketh ^nd flieth flowly. No Tail appears as^ in the former; but they have one Ueth hidden under the Belly, which they can at pleasure bend back to pierce Peafe when they are young and tender, and other Things alfo, as I haveRe^- son to fufpeft, having met with this (as indeed the former two) in divers Vegetables.

Pears and Apples I could never discover any Thing to breed in, but only the lesser PhaUna, about -4 Inch long, whitifh underneath; greyifh brown above (dappled witix brown Spots, inclining to a dirty Red) all but about a third Part at the End of the VVings , which is not grey, but brown, elegantly ftripcd with wavey Lines, of a Gold Coloijr, as if gilt; its Head is small, with a Tuft of whitifh brown in the Forehead; 4«/e«»4 fmooth, moderately long. The Aurelia of this Moth is small, of a yellowifli brown. I know not what Time they require for their Generation out of Boxes ; but those I laid up in .^«^«y2, did nQt become Moths before ^une following.

(e) There are many of the PhaUna and Ichneumon-Fly Tribes, that have their Generation on the Leaves or other Parts of Trees r-nd Shrubs, too many to he here reckoned up. The Oak haih many very beautiful phaUns, bred in Ks convolved Leaves, white, green, yellow, brown fpotted prettily, and neatly dappled, and many more befides ; and Its Buds aiford a Place for Cafes, and Balls of various Sorts, as fiiall be Ihewn hereafter; its Leaves expanded, minifter to the Germination of globular, and other fphseroidal Balls, and fat Thec^, some like H^s, some like Butrons excavated in the Middle, and divers others such like Repofitories, all belonging to the Ichneumeon Fly Kind. And not only the Oak, but the Maple alfo, the White-Thorn, the ^riar. Privet, and indeed almost every Tree and Shrub.

(/) And as Trees and Shrubs, so Plants have their pecu- 'h^li Iqfeds. The IVhite^Butterfiy lays its voracious OfF-

.■'.v, ^P^*"S

Chap. VI. InfeBsCareof thcirToung. 377

ftantly the same Family on the same Tree or Plane, the most agreeable to that Family. And as for othcrs that require a conllant and greater Degree of Warmth, they are accordingly provided by the Parent-Animal with some Place in or about the Body of other Animals j some in the Feathers of Birds ig) 5 some in the Hair ot" Bearts {h) j some

spring on Cabbage- Leaves ; a very beautiful reddifti occllatcd one, Its no less voracious black Off-spring of an horrid Afpedt, on the Leaves of Nettles ; as alio doth a very beautiful, small, grecni(h Ichneumon- Fly, in Cafes on the Leavcf of the same Plant : And to name no more (becaufc it would be endlcfs) the beautiful Ragwort-Moth, whose upper Wings arc brown, elegantly fpctted with red and underwings edged with brown; these, I say, provide for theirgoldenring*di:r«- ■Ci. upon the Ragwort- Plant.

{g) Many, if not most Sort of Birds, arc infefted with a diiltinci Kind of Lice, very different from one another in Shape, Size, (^-c. For Figures and Defcriptions of them, I shall refer to Signieur Redi of InfcSls. See i[{o Moufet, L. r. c. 13. these Lice lay their Nits among the Feathers of the refpedive Birds, where they are hatched and nourifhed ; and as Anfiotle faith, would dcltroy the Birds, particularly Phea- Jants, if they did not duft their Feathers. Loco infr. e'ttat.

(h) And as Birds, so the fcveral Sorts of Beifts have their pecuiur Sorts of Lice; all diftind from the two Sorts infeltjng Man: Only the Afs, they say, is free, becaufeour Saviour rode upon one, as some think; but I prefume it is ra- .ther from the passage in Pliny, L ii. c. 33. or rather ^r//7. Hijir Animal. L. 3. c. 3 1, who faith, Gluibus pilus est, non carent eodem [Pediculo] excepto Ajino, qui Hon Pediculo tantiim, verum etiam Redivio irnmnnis est. And a little before, fpeaking of those in Men, he (Lews what Conftitutions arc most fubjed to them, and inftanceth in Alcman the Poet, and Pherecydes ityrius that died of the Pthiriafis, or Lowly Difeafe. For which soul Diftcmper, if Medicines are defirtd, Moufet de insect, p. x6i. may be confulted. Who in the same Page hath this Obfcrvation, Animadvcrterunt ncftrafts ubi A fores infutat a tergo reliquerint , Pediculo!

confcftim omnes tabefcere : atque ubi eas revijermt, itcrutn irtnumeros aliot fubito oriri. Which observation is confirmed by Dr Stubs. Vid. Lowth. Abridg. V. 3 p 558, And many Seamen have told me the same.

in

378 InfeBsCare of their TouHg. BookVHI,

in the very. Scales of Fifhes {i) j some in the nose {k) i some in the Flefh (/) j yea, some in

5 , the

will lll.i ' I " H'l'l I II I ''I'M itl

(t) Fifties, one would think, should be free from Lice, by Rcafon they hvc in theWatersi and are perpetually moving In, and bruftiinj through, them; but yet tliey have their Sorts too.

- -Belides whkhr^-I bav« ix^^o:tr\x\j fooiid 'great NumljeTSrnf long ilender Worms in the Stomachs, and other Parts of Fifti, particularly Codfijh, especially such as are poor ; which Worms have work'd themselves deeply into the Coats and Fle(K so that they could not eafiiy be gotten out : So Arifietle, faith of some Fiflies, Ballero cr Tilloni Lumbricus innafcitur, qui debditat, &c. Chalets v'tUo infejlattir d'tro, ut Pediculi fub Branchiis innati quam multi interimant. hist. An. L. 8. c. io.

(k) Of Infcds bred in the nose of Animals, those in the Nofl:rils of Sheep are remarkable. I have my ielf taken out not fewer at a Time than tvsrenty or thirty rough Maggots, lying among the Lamina, of the Noftrils. But I could nevet ha.tch any of them, and so know not what Animal they proceed from : But I have no great doubt, they are of the Ichneumgn-Fh Kindj and not improbably of that with a long Tail, call'd Trifeta, whose three Briftles seem very commo- <iious for conveying its Eggs into deep Places.

I have alfo seen a rough whitifli Maggot, above two Inches within the Intefiinum re£lum of horses, firmly adhering thereto, that the hard Dung did not rub off. I never could bring them to Perfedion, but rufpe<ft the Side-Fly proceeds from it.

{[) In the Backs of Cozvs, in the Summer-Months, there are Maggots generated, which in EJfex we call Womils; which are first only a imall Knot in the Skin ; and I fuppole no other than an Egg laid there by some Infec^l. By Degrees these Knots grow bigger, and contain in them a Maggot lying in a purulent Matter : They grow to be as large as the End of one's Finger, and may be fqueez'd out at a Hole they have always open: They are round and rough, and of a dirty White. With my utmoft Endeavour and Vigilance, 1 could never discover the Animal they turn into; but as they are iomewhat like, so, may be the same as those in the Note before.

< In Perfia there are very long {lender Worms, bred in the Legs, and other Parts of Men's Bodi«s, 6 or 7 Yards long.

in

Cbap.VI. Infeifs Care of their Tomi^. 379

the very Bo\¥cls {m) > and inmoll Rcccflcs of

the

In Philof. 'Iranf. Mr. Dtnt, and Mr. Ltwis, relate divers Examples ot WoTirti taken out of the Tongue, Gums, nose, and other Parts, by a Woman at Leice/ltr, which they were Eye-witnefl'fS of. Thcfe, and divers others mention'd iti the Tranfattions, may be seen together in Mr. Lowthorfs Abridg. Vol. 3. p. 131.

Narrat mihi vir side dignus ^"fp- Wendlar.dt ■■■ fe

in Polonia, puero cuidam rufitce duorum annorum, Vcrmkulum

album > pallebra extraxijfe, ma^nitudinis Erua

Similem jere huic cafum mthi [Schulzio] cr D. Segfro narravit hoc. Anno 1676. chirurgus nejler Ant. Statlender, qui euidam puero, ex Aure, extraxit Vermiculum talem, qualis in nucibtis avellanis perforata latitare folet, fed paiiio majoretn, coloris alhilftmi ; alteri minores 5 ejufdem generis fttniliter ex Aure :

Omnei aliquot horas fiipervtxernnt Vermiculos adhtfc

liventes oculis noflris vidimus. Ephem. Germ. T. 2. Obf. 24. ubi Vermiculi Icon. Many other instances may be met with in the same Tome. Obf. 147, 148, 154.

The Worms in Deer are mention'd often among ancient Writers. Anflotle faith, '2KU?\t)x»i [f^roi w<x»7e« txno-n, c* T»| xi<pxXy\ ^avTXi, 8cc. They [Deer] all have Itve Worms in their Heads ; bred under the Tongue., in a Cavity near the Vertebra, on which the Head is plac'd; their Size not left than of thp largefi Maggots; they are bred all together, in number about twenty. Ariftot. Hilt. Animal. 1. 2. c. ij.

To these Examples may he added the Generation of the Ichneumon-Fly in the Bodies of Caterpillars, and other Nymphx oi lnfe£is. In many of which, that I have laid up to be hatch'd in Boxes, inflead of Papilios, &c. as I expc<fted, I have found a great Number of small Ichneumon-Flies^ whose Parent-Animal had wounded those Nymphi, and darted its Eggs into them, and so made them the Fofter-Mother of its Young. More Particulars of this Way of Generation may be seen in the great Mr. IVillughby's Obfcrvations in Philof. Tranf. No. 76. But concerning the farther Generation of this \nkf\, I have taken Notice of other Particulars in other Places of these Notes.

{m) The Animals ordinarily bred in the Stomach and Guts, are the three Sorts of Worms call'd Lati, Teretes, and Afcaridfs ; concerning which, it would be irklbme to fpfaW in Particular, and therefore I shall refer to Moufet, L."2. c. 3r, 3z, 33. Dr. Tyfon% Anatomy of them in Mr. Lowthorp's Abridg. V. 3. p. Til. Seignior F^eJis Obf. and others that have written of them.

And

<3^o Infedis Care of their Toting. Book VIH.

the Bodies of Man and other Creatures {n) : "And as for others to whom none of these Methods

arc

And not only Worms, but other Creatures alfo are said to be found in the Stomach ; instances of which are so innumerable, that I (hall only fele(5t a few related by Ferfons of the bed Credit. And firfl: of all, by some of our own Country- ^men. Dr. Lifter, (whose Credit and Judgment will hardly be queition'd,) gives an Account of true Caterpillars, vomited up by a Boy of nine Years old ; and another odd Animal by a poor Man. Mr. Jejfop, (another very judicious, curious and ingenious Gentleman, faw Hexapods vomited up by a Girl ; which Hexapods Hv'd and fed for five Weeks. See Lowth. ib. p. 135.

And to Foreigners, it is a very ftrangc Story (but attefted by Perfons of great Repute,) of Cathariaa Gtilerla, that dy'd in teb. i66i, in the Hofpital of Altenburg, in Germany, who for twenty Years voided by Vomit and Stool, Tcads and Lizzards, &C. Ephemer. Germ. T. I. Obf. 103. See alfo the 109. observation of a Kitten bred in the Stomach, and vomited up; of Whelps alfo, and other Animals, bred in like Manner. But I fear a Stretch of Fancy might help in some of those last instances, in those Days when spontaneous Generation was held, when the Philofophers seem to have more flightly examined such Appearances than now they do. But for the breeding of Frois or Toads, or Lacerti, Aquatics, in the Stomach, when their Spawn happeneth to be drank, there is a Story in the fecond Tcme of the Ephem. Gtrm. Obf. 56. that favours it, viz. In the Year i66-j, a Butcher's Man going to buy some Lambs in the Spring, being thirfly, drank greedily of some standing Water, zvhich a whil^ after, caus'd great Pains in his Stomach, which grew ivorfe and worfe, and ended in dangerous Symptoms. At last he thought fomeivhat was alive tn his Stomach, and after that, vomited up three live Toads ; and so recover' d his former Health.

Such another Story Dr. Sorbait tells, and avoucheth it seen with his own Eyes, of one that had a Toad came out of an Abicel's, which came upon drinking soul Water, Obf. 103.

(») Not only in the Guts, and in the Flefti ; but in many other Parts of the Body, Worms have been discover'd. One. was voided by Urine, by Mr. Mat. Milfcrd, fuppos'd to have come from the Kidneys. Lowth. ib. p. 135. More f^cli Examples Moufet tells of. ibid. So the Vermes Cucurbitmi

Chap. VI. Infers Care of their Toung. 381

^xc proper, but make chemfclvcs Neds by Perforations in the Earth, in Wood, or Combs they build, or such like Ways } 'tis admirable to see with what Labour and Care they carry in, and

hit'tni are very common in the VclTels in Shceps Livers: And Dr. Lijier tells of them, found in the Kidney or a D( g, and thinks that the Snakes and Toads, crc. laid to be found in Animals Bodies, may be nothing elfe. Lowth. ib. p. izo. Nay, mere tlian all this: In Dr. Bern. Verza/cha's lixth Obkrwation, there are divers Inllances of Worms bred in the Brain of Man. One, a Patient of his, troubled with a violent Hcadach, and an itching about the Noftrils, and frequent Snee/ing ; who, with the Ufe of a Sneezing- Powder, voided a Worm, with a great deal of Snot from his nose. A like instance he gives from Barthotine, of a Worm voided from the nose of O. IV. which he gueifeth was the famous Olaus Wormius : Another, from a Country Woman of Dietmarfu ; and others in Tulpius, F. Hildanus, Schenckiut, Sec. Thcfe Worms he thinks are undoubtedly bred in the Brain : But what way they can come from thence, 1 can't tell. Wherefore I rather think, they are such VVorms as are mentioned in Note (k), and even that Worm that was adiually found in the Brain of the Paris Girl (when opened). 1 guefs might be laid in the Lamim of the Noftrils, by Tome of the Ichneumon, or other Infeft Kind, and might gnaw its way into the Brain, through the Os cribiforme. Of this he tells us from Bartholinc, Tandem cum tabida obiijfet, Jlatim aperto cranio pnfcntes Mcdict totam cerebelli fubftantiam, quA ad dexternm "nfrgtt, a reliquo corpore fejunilam, nigraque tunica in- ■votutam deprehenderunt : hic tunica rupta, latentem I'ermem vivum, c^ pilofum, duobus punClis fplendidis loco orulor urn prodidit, ejufdem fere molts cum reliqua Cerebri portione, quiduarum horaram fpacio Jupervixit. B, Verzal. Obf. Mcdicae, p. i6. «.

Hildanus tells us such another Story, viz Tilius Theod. auft der Roulen , Avuncuit mei , diuturno vexabatur dolore capitis. Deinde febricula O" fiernutatione exortd, ruptus e(i

Abfceffus circa os crihrofum cr Vermis prorepjit. By his

Figure of it, the Maggot was an Inch long, and full of Briftles. Fabri Htldan. Cent. i. Obf.

Galenus Wierus (Phyfician to the Princ. Jul. S< Cleve) he faith, told him, that he had, at divers Times, found Worms in the Gall-bladder in Perlons he had opened at DuJIi-lderp. Id. ib, Obf. 6c.

fcal

iii InfeBs Care of their Toung. BcwDkVIJL

feal up Provifions, that fcrve both for the Produ" ftion of their Yoang, as alfo for their Food and Karture when ptodoc'd {o).

The other Piece of remarkable Art and Care a:-* bout the Produ6i:ion of their Young, is their Curiofity and Neatnefs in repofiting their Eggs, and in their Nidification.

As to the firfl: of which, \s/e may observe that great Curiofity, and nice Order is generally obferv'd by them in this Matter. You shall always see their Eggs laid carefully and commodioufly up {p). When upon the Leaves of Vegetahles, pr other Material on Land, always glu'd thereon with Care, with one certain End lowermoft, and with handfom juxta-Pofitions {q\ Or if in the Waters, in neat and beautiful Rows oftentimes, in that fpermatick, gelatine Matter, in which they arc repofited, and that Matter carefully ty'd and faftned in the Waters, to prevent its Diflipation {r)^

or

(o) See before ^ook IV. Chap. 13. Note (c).

if) Some Infedls lay up their Eggs in Clufters, as in Holes of Flefli, and such Places, where it is nccelTary they (hould be Crowded together; which, no queftion, prevents their being too much dried up m dry Places, and promotes their hatching. But,

(5) As for such as are not to be cluftered up, great Order is uled. I have iztxi upon the Poils and Sides of Windows, little round Eggs, refembhng small Pearl, which produced i'maliilv.iiry Caterpillars, that were very neatly and orderly kid: And to name no more, the White Btttterjij lays its neat Eggs on the Cabbage Leaves in good Order, always gluing one certain End of the Egg to the Leaf. I call them neat Eggs, because if we view them in a Microfcope, we ihall find them very curiously furrowed, and handfomely made and adorned.

(r) By Realbn it ^would be endlefs to fpecify the various Generation of Inlecls in the Water, I (hall therefore (because it is little observed) take Pliny's instance of rhc Gnat, a mean and contemned Animal, but a notable instance of

Natujfe's Work, as he faith.

The

Qh^^y\. Nidification af Infe5fs, 383

or it' made to float, so carefully fpread and poifed, as to swim about with all poflible Artifice. ^

And as to their other Faculty, that of Nicfification, whether it be exerted by boring the Earth

or

^(

The first Thing conrtderable in the Generation of this la-^ fcift is (tor the Size of the Animal) it* vast s/^atun, being* fj^nie of thern above an Inch long, znd half a quarter Diameter ; made to float in the Waters, and tied to fume Sticky Stone, or other fix'd Thing in the Waters, by a small Stem, or St»lk. In this gelatine, transparent Spawn, the Eggs are ntatly laid; in some Spawns in a fingle, in forae in a double Ipiral Line, running round from end to end, as in Fig. 9, and 10; and in some tranfverlly, a6 Fig. 8.

When the Eggs are by the 'Heat of the Sun, and Warmth. of the Seafon hatched into small Maggots, these Maggots defcend to the bottom, and- by mcairs of some of thegclatioe Matter of the Spawn (which they take along with them) they ftick to Stones, and other Bodies at the bottom, and there make themselves little Cafes or Cells, which they creep into, and out of at Pleafurc, until they are arrived to a more mature Nympha-State, and can swim about here, and there, to feek for what Food they have occafion; at which Time, they are a kind of Red-worms, above hal£ an Inch long, as in Fig. rr.

Thus far this mean Infe(5l is a good instance of the divine Provideiice towards it. But if we farther consider^ and compare the three States it undergoes after it is hatched, we (hall find yet greater Signals of the Creator's Management, even in these meaneft of Creatures. The three States 1 mean, are its Nympha-Verm'tcular State, its Aurelia, and Mature-S>u\.Q, alias different as to Shape and Accoutrements, as if the Infecl: was three different Animals. In its Vjrmif cv/^r- State, ir is a Red-Maggot, as I said, and hath a Mluih' and other Parts accommodated to Food: In its Aurelia- State it hath no such Parts, because it then fubfills without Food; butin '\\:% Mature, G«4^ State, it hath a curious wellmade Spear, to wound and fuck the Blood of other Animals. In its Vermicular 'S\.nt, it hatha long Worm-like Body, and fomething analogous to Fins or Feathers, (landing creft near its Tail, and running parallel with the Body, by means of which refilling the Waters, it is enabled to swim about by Curvations, or flapping its Body, side-ways, this way and that, as in Fig. iz.

But

3?4- Nid'tfication of Infers. BookVIIL.

or Wood, or building themselves Cells (i), orfpinning and weaving themselves Cafes and Webs, it is all a wonderful Faculty of those poor little Animals, whether we consider their Parts where-; with they work, or their Work it self. Thus those who perforate the Earth, Wood, or such like, they have their Legs, Feet, Mouth, yea, and whole Body accommodated to that Service j their Mputh exactly formed to gnaw those hand- Tome round Holes, their Feet as well made ta fcratch and bore (^), and their Body handfome*! ly turned and fitted to follow. But for such as, build or fpin themselves Nefts, their Art juftly bids Defiance to the moll ingenious Artift among Men, so much as tolerably to copy the nice Geometrical Combs of some («), the Earthen Cells of others, or the Webs, Nets and Cafes (w) woven

^' But in Us ^«re//^- State, it hath a quite different Body ^ V/ith a CM-Head (in -which the Head, Thorax, and Wings of the Gnat are inclofed) a (lender Alvtts, and a neat finny Tail, (landing at right Angles with the Body, quite contrary to what it was before; by which means, instead of eafy flapping side-ways, it fwims by rapid, brifk Jirks, the quite, contrary way ; as is in some measure reprefented in Fig. 13.. But when it becomes a Gwat, no finny Tail, no Club-Head, but all is made in the most accurate manner for Flight and Motion in the Air, as before it was for the Waters.

(i) See BooklY, Chap. 13. Nates (»), (0).

(t) Thus the Mouths and other Parts of the Ichneumon' Waff^ in BoekW. Chap. 13. Note (c). So the Feet of the Gryllotalpa, ibid. Note {s).

[u) See the last cited Places, Note {0).

(w) Of the textrine Art of the Spider, and its Parts ferving tothat purpose, see the last cited Place, Note (x).

Befides these. Caterpillars, and divers other InlciSs, can emit Threds, or Webs for their Ufe. In this their Nympha- State, they fecure themselves from falling, and let themselves down from the Boughs of Trees, and other high Places, with one of these Threads. And in the Cafes they weave, they f«cure tUemfelves in their AurtUa-State.

And

Chap. VI. Nidification of InfeBs. 385vcn by others. And here that natural Glue {x) ■which tlieir Bodies afford feme of them to conlblidare their Work, and combine its Materials together, and which in others can be darted out at PJeafure, and fpun and woven by thcrn into filken Balls 0') or Webs. I say, this so peculiar, so

I'erviccable

And not only the OfFfpring of the PhaUna-Tribe , but there are some ot the Ichneumon-Fly Kind alfo, endowed with this texcrine Art. Of these'l have met with two Sorts; one th.it fpun a Milk-white, long, round, filken Web, as big as the top of ones Fingers, not hollow within, as many are, but filled throughout with Silk. these are woven round Bents, Stalks of Ribwort, crc. in Meadows. The other is a lump of many yellow, filken Cafes, Iticking conful'cdly together on Ports, under Cole- worts, crc Theie Webs contain in them, small , whitiQi Maggots; which turn to a small, black, Ichnatman-Fly, with long, capillary jintennA ; Tan-couioured Legs; long Wings reaching beyond their Body, with a black Spot near the middle ; the Alvus, like an Heart; and in some, a small feraceous Tail. Some of these Flies were of a (liining, beautiful green Colour. 1 could not perceive any Difference, at least, not fpecifical, between tlie Flies coming from those two Produ<flions.

(x) I have often admired how Waf{>s, Hornets, Ichneumon-Wafps, and other Infedts that gather dry Materials for building their Nefts, have found a proper matter to cement and glue their Combs, and line their Cells; which we find always fufficienily context and firm. But in all Probability, this ufeful iMaterial is in their own Bodies ; as 'tis in the Tinea ve/iivora, the Cadew Wrrm, and divers others. Gcedart observes of liis Eruca, Num. xx. 6. lh;t fed upon Sallow- Leaves, that it made its Cell of the comminuted Leaves, glued together with its cvn Spittle, hic pulverls ant artn& injlar comminuit, ac pituitofo quodam fui corporis fucco ita maceravit, ut inde a^ommodatum fubeundA mntationi inftanti locum fibi exflruxerit. Domuncula hic a communi Salicum ligno nihil dtffcrre videbatur, nifi quod longe ijfct durior, adto ut cultro vix difrumpi pfjfet.

(y) An ingenious Gentlezvamaii of my^ Acquaint anct , Wi^t to a learned Phypcian, taking much pleasure to keep Silk- IVormtt had once the ^urioft'iy to drazv out one of the oval

C C C4/(f;,

385 Nidificationof Infetis. BookVlII.

ferviceable a Material, together with the curlou* Structure of all Parts miniftring to this textrine Power, as mean a business as it may seem, is such as may jullly be accounted among the noble De* figns and Work?of the infinite Creator and Confervator of the World.

In the last Place, there is another prodigious Faculty, Art, Cunning, or what shall I call it? that others of those tittle Animsls have, to make even Nature it self ferviceable to th^ir Purpofej and that is the making the Vegetation and Growth of Trees and Plants," the very Means of the building of their little Neils and Cells {z) j such as are

the

Ca^es^ which the Silk-Worm [pins — —into all the Silken Wife it was made up of, which, to the great Wonder as well of her Hiifhand, as her self, • appeared to be , by measure , a

great deal above joo Yards, and yet weighed but two Grains and an half. Boyl Subtil, of Effluv, ch. ^.

{z) Since my penning this, 1 have met with the mod fagacious Malpighi's Account of Galls, &c. and find his Dekriptions to be exceedingly accurate and true, having traced my self many of the Produdlions he hath mentioned. But I find Italy and Sicily (his Book de Gallis being publifhed long after he was made Profeflbr of Meffina) more luxuriant m such Produdtions than England, at lead, than the Farts about Upminfler (where I live) are. For many, if not most of those about us, are taken Notice of by him, and several others befides that I never met with ; although I have for many Years as critically observed all the Excrefcences, and other morbid Tumors of Vegetables, as is almort poflible, and do believe that few of them have efcaped mc.

As to the Method how those Galls and Balls are produced, the moll fimple, and consequently the most eafy to be accounted for, is that in the Gems of Oak, which may be CzWed Se]uamouS'Oak-Cones, Capitula fquamata, inMalpighi: whose description not exadly anfwering our Engltfh-Cones , jn divers Refpeds, I' shall therefore pass his by, and (hew ©nly what 1 have observed my self concerning them.

% Tbefs

Chap. VI. Ntdtficdtton of InfeEfs. ^87

the Galls and Balls found on the Leaves and Branches of divers Vegetables, such as the Oak, the Willow {aa)^ the Briar, and fomc others.

Now

these Cones are, in outward Appearance, perfciftly like the Gems, only valUy bigger; and indeed they are no oiher than the Gems, encrealed in Bignefs, which naturally ought to be puihed out in Length : The cause of which Obrtruction of the Vegetation is this : Into the very Heart of the young tender Gem or Bud (which begins to be turgid in '^unt, and to Ihoot towards the latter end of that Month, or beginning of the next; into this, I say) the Parent-Infed thrufts one or more Eggs, and not perhaps without some venemous Ichor tlierewith. This Egg foon becomes a Maggot, which eats it self a little Cell in the very Heart or Pith of the Gem, which is the Rudiment of the Branch, together with its Leaves and I'ruit, as ftiail be hereafter (hewn. The Branch being thus wholly deflroyed, or at lead its Vegetation being oblbufled, the Sap that was to nourifli it, is diverted to the remaining Parts of the Bud, which are only the fcaly Teguments ; which by these Means grow large and flounfhing, and become a Covering to the Infcd- Cafe, as before they were to the tender Branch and its Appendage.

The Cafe lying withm this Cone, is at first but small, as the Maggot included in it is, but by degrees, as the Maggot increafeth, so it grows bigger, to about the Si7.e of a large white Peaie, long and round, resembling the Shape of a small Acorn.

The inftil it felt, is (according to the modern InfecSologers) of the ichneumon-Fly Kind; with four Membranaceous WingSt reaching a little beyond the Body, articulated Horns, a large ihorax, bigger than the Belly ; the Belly lliort and conical ; much like the Heart of Animals : The Leg: partly whitilh, partly black. The Length of the Body from Head to Tail, about TTof an Inch; its Colour, a very beautiful ftiining Green, ig lome tending to a dark Copper-Colour. Figures both of the Cones, Calcs, and Infedts, may be seen among Malpighi's Cuts of Galls, Tab. 13. and Tab. xo. Fig. 71. which Fig. 71, exhibits well enough fomeothers of the Gall-lnfetls, but its Thorax is fomewhat too fliort for curs.

(aa) Not only the Willow, and some other Trees, but Piants alfo, as Ktttles, Ground-Ivy, &c. have Calcs produ-

C c 1 ced

588 Nidification of Infers, Book VIIT.

Now this is so peculiar an Artifice, and so far out of the Reach of any mortal Undertfanding, Wit, or Power, that if we consider the Matter, with some of its Circumllances, we must needs perceive manifest design, and that there is the Concurrence of some great and wife Being, that hath, from the Beginning, taken Care of, and provided for the Animal's Good; For which Rcafon, as mean as the instance may seem, I might be cxcufed, if 1 should enlarge upon its Particulars. But two or three Hints shall fuffice.

In the firfl Place, 'tis certain that the Formation of those Cafes and Balls quite exceeds the Cunning of the Animal it self j but it is the Ad partly of the Vegetable , and partly of some Virulency (or what shall I call it?) in the Juyce, or Egg, or both, repofited on the Vegetable by the Parent Animal {hh). And as this Virulency is various , according to the Difference

ced on their Leaves, by the Injedlion of the Eggs of an Jchneumon-Fly. I have observed those Cafes always to grow in, or adjoining to some Rib of the Leaf, and their Produdion I conceive to be thus, viz.. The Parent-Infed, with its ftiff fetaceous Tail, terebrates the Rib of the Leaf, when tender, and makes Way for its Egg into the very Pith or Heart thereof, and probably lays in therewith, some proper Juice of its Body, to pervert the regular Vegetation of it. From this Wound arifes a small Excrefcence, which (when the Egg is hatched into a Maggot) grows bigger and bigger, as the Maggot increafes, fvvellmg on each Side the Leaf between the two Membranes, and extending it self into the parenchymous Part thereof, until it is grown as big as two Grains of Wheat. In this Cafe lies a small, ^hite, rough Maggot, which turns to an Aurelia, and afterwards to a very beautiful green, small Ichneumon-Fly.

{bb) What 1 fufpecfted my self, I find confirmed by 'Matfighi, who in his exad and true description of the Fly bred ]n the Oaken Galls, faith, Non fat fuit nature tam miro artificio Terehram fen Litnam condidijje; fed inflttto vulnere, -oel exdtato forarnine mfundendum exmde Uquorem intra Jerebram

(ondidit ;

Chap. VI. Nidijicatlon of Infe6fs, 389

of its Animal, so is the Form and Texture of the Cafes and Balls excited thereby ; some being hard Shells {cc)^ some tender Bails {eld) ^

some

comiiAlt : quare fraHa per tranfverfam mitfcarum terebra frequentijfime, vivente animal/^ gutU aliqttot diaphant humoris effluunt. And x little after, he confirms, by ocular Obl'ervation, what he imagin'd before, viz. Semel prope Junit finem vidi Mufcam, qualem fnperiits delineavi, inftdentem qutrcinti ^emt/j.i, adhuc germinanti ; hdrebat etenim follolo jiabili ab apice hiantis gemm& erumtenti; v convulfo in arcum corpore, terebram evaginabat, ipfamque tenfam immittebat ; cr tumejaClo ventre circa terebn radicem tumorcm excitabut, qutm interpolatis vicibus remittebat. In folio igitur, avut/d Alufcd, minima c/ diaphana reperii ejecla ova, Jimillima iis, qu& adh-'.c tn tubis Jupererant. Non licuit iterum idem admirarifpectac Ilium, Sec.

Somewhat hke this, which MaUnghi faw, I had the good Fortune to see my self once some Years ago: And that was, the beautiful, fliining Oak-Ball ichneumon ftrike us Terebrainto an Oak-Apple divers Times, no doubt to lay its Eggs therein. And hence I apprehend we see many Vermicules towards the Outfide of many of the Oak-Apples, which I guefs were not what the Primitive Infedts laid up in the Gem, from which the Oak- Apple had its Rife, but some other fupervenient, additional Inl'eds, laid in after the Apple was grown, and whilll it was tender and soft.

{cc) The Aleppo-Galls, wherewith we make Ink, may be reckoned of this Number, being hard, and no other than Cafes of insects which are bred in them ; who when come to Maturity, gnaw their Way out of them ; which is the cause of those little Holes obfervablc in them. Of the Infe(5ts bred in them, see Philof. Tranfatl. No. 145. Of this Number alfo are those little fmooth Gales, as big as lari;e Peppcr- Corns, growing close to the Ribs under Oaken-Lcavcs, globous, but flattilb; at tirlt touched with a blulliing red, afterwards growing brown ; hollow withm, and an hard thiji Shell without. In this licth commonly a rough, white Maggot, which becomes a little long winged, black Ichneumon- Fly, that eats a little Hole m the Side of the Gall, and so gets out.

{d4) For a Sample of the tender Balls, I shall choofe the globous Ball, as round, and some as big as small Muskef- BuUcts, growing close to the Ribs, under Oaken- Leaves,

C c 3 of

390 Nidlficatton of InfeBs. Book VIII.

some fcaly (^^), some fmooth (//), some Hairy (^s)j some Long, some Round, some Conical,

of a greenifli yellowifti Colour, with a blufh of red; their Skin fmooth, with frequent Rilings therein. Inwardly they are very soft and fpongy ; and in the very Center is a Cafe with a white Maggot therein, which becomes an Ichneumon- Fh> not much unlike the lalt. As to this Gall, there is one Thing 1 have observed fomewhat peculiar, and I may say providential, and that is, that the Fly lies all the Winter in these Balls in its Infantile-State, and comes not to its Maturity till the following Spring. In the Autumn, and Winter, these Balls fall down with their Leaves to the Ground, and the Infedl indofed in them is there fenced against the Winter Frofts, partly by other Leaves falling pretty thick upon them, and efpeciaily by the thick, parenchymous, fpongy Walls, afforded by the Galls themselves.

Another Sample shall be the large Oak-Balls, called Oak- '^pples, growing in the Place of the Buds, whose Generation, Vegetation and Figure, may be seen in Malpig. de Gal- Us, p. 2,4. and Tab. lo. Fig. 33,cyc. Out of these Galls, he faith various Species of Flies come, but he names only two, and they are the only two I ever faw come out of them : Frequenter (faith he) fubnigr& funt mti[c& hrev't miinits. terebra. Inter has aliquA obfervantur aure&y levi viridis tinHur^ fup{f£y oblonga pollentes terebra. these two differently coloured FHes, I take to be no other than Male and Female of the same Species. I have not observed Tails (which are their Terebrd) in all, as Malpighi seems to intimate : Perhaps they were hid in their ThecA, and I could not discover them : But I rather think there were none, and that those were the Males : But in others, I have observed long, recurvous Tails, longer than their whole Bodies. And these I take to be the Females. And in the Oak- Apples themftlves, I have seen the Aurelu, some with, some without Tails. And I muftconfefs, 'twas not without Admiration as well as pleasure, that I have seen with what exad Neatnefs and Artifice, the Tail hath been wrapt about the Aurellut whereby it is fecured from either annoying the Infc«ft, or being hurt it self.

(ee) See before Note {z^.

( ff) As in the preceding Note.

Igg) Of the rough or hairy Excrefcences, those on the 'Briar, or Dog-Rofe, are a good Inllance. these Spongioid %:illofi, z$Mx,Ray, GalU rtmof'i, as Dr. Af<f//'/^^< calls them,

arc

Chap. VI. Nidi ficat ion ofInfe6is. 391

nical, ^c. {hh). And in the last Place, let us add, That those Species of insects are all endowed with peculiar and cxaftly made Parts for this

are thus accounted for by the latter; Ex copiofis relidlis ovis ita turbatur ajjliiens [Rubl] fuccus, ut ftrumofa fiant complura tubercul* pmul confuse conge/la^ qut utrtcitlorum feriebus, C?" fibrarum impiieatione contexta, ramofas propagines germinant, ita ut minima quaft fylva apparent. Glu^Ubet propago ramos, hinc inde villofos edit. Jiinc inde piit pariter erumpunt, &c.

these Balls are a fafe Repofitory to the Infecfl all the Winter in its Vermicular-State. For the Eggs laid up, and hatched the Sumtiicr before, do not come to mature Infeffts until the Spring following, as Mr. Ray rightly observes in Cat. Cantab.

As to the In/cc'ls themselves, they are manifeilly Ichtjeumon-Flits, having four Wings, their ^/i/wj thick and large towards the Tail; and tapering up till it is small and flender at its fetting on to the Thorax. But the Alvi or Bellies are not alike in all, though coloured alike. In some they are as is now described , and longer, without Terebrji, or Tails; in some ftiorter with Tails : And in some yet shorter, and thick, like the Belly of the jint, or the Heart of Animals, as in those before, Note {z). But for a farther description of them, I shall refer to Mr. Ray, Cat. Plant, circa Cantab, under Rofafylveft.

{hh) It being an instance fomewhat out of the Way, I ftjall pitch upon it for an Example here, viz.. The gouty Swellings in the Body, and the Branches of the Blackberry- Bufl] ; of which Malpighi hath given us two good Cuts in Tab. 17. Mg. 6i. The cause of these is manifeflly from the Eggs of lnfe<fls laid in (vvhilft the Shoot is young and tender) as far as the Pith, and in some Places not so deep: Which for the Realbns before- mentioned, makes the young Shoots tumify, and grow knotty and gouty.

The Infeift that comes from hence is of the former Tribe, a small, Ihining black ichneumon-fly, about a tenth of an Inch long ; with jointed, red, capillary Horns, four long Wings, reaching beyood the Body, alargeT^or4x, red Legs, and a fliort, heart-like Belly. They hop like Fleas. The Males are less than the Females; are very venereous, endeavouring a Coit in the very Box in which they are hatch'd ; getting up on the Females, and tickling and thumping them with their Breeches and Horns, to excite them to Venery. Cc 4 Service,

392' The Conclujion. Book VIII.

Service, to bore and pierce the Vegetable, and to reach and injedt their Eggs and Juice into the tender Parts thereof.

The Conclusion.

AN D now these Things being ferioufly confideredj what less can be concluded, than that there is manifefl: design and Forecaft in this Cafe, and that there mufl: needs be some wife Artift, some careful, prudent Confervator, that from the very Beginning of the Exidence of this Species of Animals, hath with great Dexterity and Forecaft, provided for its Prefervation and Good? For what elfe could contrive and make such a Set of curious Parts, exadly fitted up for that fpecial purpose : And withal implant in the Body such peculiar Impregnations, as should have such a ftrange uncouth Power on a quite different Rank of Creatures? And lastly, what should make the Infed aware of this its ftrange Faculty and Pov/er, and teach it so cunningly and dextroufly to employ it for its own Service and Good ?

0/ R E p T I L F. s, and the Inhabitants of • the Waters.

CHAP. I.

Of Reptiles.

I^PP^UVING difpatch'd the inl^a Tribe, ■^^^B there is but one Genus of the Land- ^ m. Animals remaining to be furvey'd j and ,,^^,,^ that is, that cf Reptiles {a). Which I ihall difpatch in a httle Compafs, by Ileafon I have fomewhat amply treated of others, and many ot

the

(a) Notwithftanding I have before, in Book IV. Chap. ^^. Note(p), tzkcnSoUctoi iht Earth-worm ; yet it being a good Example of the Creator's wile and curious Workmanlhip. m even this meanert Branch of rhe Creation. I ^^^ ^l^ u, /r few farther Remarks from Drs. WilUs and Tyfon Saith iVtlUt, Lumlricm urreflrts, licit vile V contcmptMe hubctur, Orga^

(J «4

3p^ Of Reptiles. Book IX.

the Things may be apply'd hereu But there are some Things in which this Tribe is fomevvhat Angular, which I {hall therefore take Notice of briefly in this Place. One is their Motion, which I have in another Place {b) taken Notice of to be not less curious, than it is different froni that of other Animals, whether we consider the Manner of it, ias vermicular, or finuous (t), or like that of

the

no, vitaliaf necnon cr alia vifcera, O" membra divino artific'to admirabiUter fahrefacla sort'itur : totius corporis compages mufculorum anntilarium catena eji, quorum fibra orbiculares coniradli qusmque annulum, prius amplum, cr dilatum, aTfgufiiorem d" longiorem reddunt. [This Mufde in Earth-Worms, I find is fpiral, as in a good measure is their Motion likewife ; so that by this Means they can, (like the Worm of an Augre,) the better bore their PaJJage into the Earth. Their reptile Motion alfo, may be explain d by a Wire wound on a Cyliifder, which zvhenjlipp'd off, and one End extended and heldjafif ■will bring the other nearer it. So the Earth-Worm, having JJjot out, or extended its Body, (which is with a Wreathing,) it takes hold by those small Feet it hath, and so contra£ls the hinder Part of its Body. Thus the curious and learned Dr. Tyfon, Phil. Tranf. N". 147.] Nam proinde chm portio corporis fuperior elongata, <y exporrecla, ad fpatium altering ex~ tenditur, ibidemque piano affigitur, ad ipfum quafi ad centrum portio corporis inferior relaxata, er abbreviata facile pertrahitur. PeduncuU ferie quadruplici, per totam longitudinem Lumbrici difponuntur ; his quafi totidem uncis, partem modo hanc, modo ifiam, piano affigit, dum alteram exporrigit, aut poft fe du~ cit. Supra oris hiatum, Probofcide, qua, terram perforat & elevat, donatur. And then he goes on with the other Parts that fall under View, the Bram, the Gullet, the Heart, the fpermatick Vejfels, the Stomachs and Intefiines, the Foramina on the Top of the Back, adjoyning to each Ring, fupplying the Place of Lungs, and other Parts. Wdlis de Anim, Brut. P. I. c. 3.

ib) In Book IV. Chap. 8.

(c) There is a great Deal of geometrical Neatnefs and Nicety, in the finuous Motion of Snakes, and other Serpents. For the aflTifting in which Adion, the annular Scales under their Body are very remarkable, lying crofs the Belly, contrary to what those in the Back, and rest of the Body do ;

alfo

Chap. I. Of Reptiles 39^

the Snail {d), or the Caterpillar (0? or tht Multipedous

alfo as the Edges of the foremoft Scales lye over ihe Edges ol:" their tollowmg Scales, from Head to Tail; so those Edges run out a little beyond, or over their following Scales ; so as that when each Scale is drawn back, or fct a little upright by its Miilcle, the outer Edge thereof, (or I'oot it maybe call'd,) is rais'd alio a little from the Body, to lay hold on the Earth, and so promote and facilitate the Serpent's Motion. This is what may be ealiiy seen in the Slough, or JBelly of the Serpent-kind. But there is another admirable Piece of Mcchanifm, that my Antipathy to those Animals hath prevented my prying into ; and that i-s that every Scale hath a diHindt muscle, one End of which is tack'd to the Middle of its Scale; the other, to the upper Edge of its following Scale. This Dr. Tyfon found in the Rattle- Snake, and I doubt not is in the whole Tribe.

{d) The wife Author of Nature, having deny'd Feet and Claws to enable Snails to creep and climb, hath made them amends in a Way more commodious for their State of Life, by the broad Skin along each Side of the Belly, and the undulating Motion oblervable there. By this latter 'tis they creep ; by the former, aflifted with the glutinous Slime emitted from the Snail's Body, they adhere firmly and fecurely to all Kinds of Superficies, partly by the Tenacity of their Slime, and partly by the Prcirure of the atmosphere. Concerning this Part, (which he calls the Snail's Feet,) and their Undulation, Sec Dr. Lijler's Exercit. Anat. i. §. i. and 37.

(e) The motive Parts, and Motion of Caterpillars, are ufeful, not only to their ProgrefTion and Conveyance from place to Place; but alfo to their more certain, eafy and commodious gathering of Food. For having Feet before and behind, they are not only enabled to go by a kind of Steps made by their fore and hind Parts; but alfo to climb up Vegetables, and to reach from their Boughs and Stalks for Food at a distance ; for which Services, their Feet are very nicely made both before and behind. Behind, they have broad Palms for flicking too, and these befet almost round with small fliavp Nails, to hold and grafp what they are upon : Before, their Feet are fliarp and hook'd, to draw Leaves, vc to them, and to hold the fore- part of the Body, whilft the hinder- parts are brought up thereto. But nothing is more remarkable in thcfe Reptiles, than that these Pans and Motion are only temporary, and incomparably adaptcd only to their present l^ym^ha-Stntf, whereas in ihcir

Aurtln\-

39<^ Of Reptiles. Book IX.

pedous (/) or any other Way, or the Parts miniftring to it, particularly the Spine (^), and the muscles co-operating with the Spine, in such as have Bone, and the annular and other muscles, in such as have none, all incomparably made for those curious, and I may say, geometrical Windings and Turnings, Undulations, and all the va-

'Atirelia-State, they have neither Feet nor Motion, only a little in their hinder-parts: And in their Mature-State, they have the Parts and Motion of a flying Infedl, made for Fhght.

(/) It is a wonderful pretty mechanism, obfervable in the going of Multipedes, as the 'JhU, Scolopendr&, &c. that on each Side the Body, every Leg hath its Motion, one very regularly following the other from one End of the Body to the other in a Way not eafy to be defcrib'd in Words; so that their Legs in going, make a kind of Undulation, and give the Body a fwifter Progreffion than one would imagine it should have, where so many Feet are to take so many lliort Steps.

(g) Vert ebr arum Apophyfes breviores funt, prAcipue juxta caput, cujus propterea fiexus in averfum, ct" latera, facilis Viperis est : [ecus Leonibus, &:c. Incumbit his Ojfibtts ingens Mufculorum minutorum pr^Jidium, turn fpinivs tendinum exilium tnagno apparatu diducentium^ turn vertebras potiljtmum in diver/a fietientium, atque erigentium. Adeoque illam corporis tniram agilitatem, non tanthm (ut Ariftot.) on tJCi>c«.M.7r«« xj XovS^uS'eti 01 a-TfovSvXoi quoniam faciUs ad flexum, c?" cartilagi- Tieas prodtixit -vertebras, fed quia etiam multiplicia tnotu^ localis iaftrumenta mufculos fabrefecit provida rerum Parens Natura, confecuta fuit. Blaf. Anat. Anim. P. i. c. 39. de Vipera e Veflmgio.

That which is most remarkable in the Vertebrae [of the Ratile-Snake, befides the other curious Articulations,] is, that the round Ball in the lower Part of the upper Vertebra, enters a Socket of the upper Part of the lower Vertebra, like as the Head of the Os Femoris doth the Acetabulum of the Os Ifchii ; by which Contrivance, as alfo the Articulation with one another, they have that free Motion of zvinding their Bodies any Way. Dr. Ty fan's Anat. of the Rattle- Snake in Phil. Tranf. No. 144. What is here obferv'd of the Vertebrs, of this Snake^ is common to this whole Genus of Reptiles.

rious

Chap.l. Of rest ties. 397

rioiis Motions to be met with in the reptile

Kind.

Another Thing that will dtfcrve our Notice, is, the Poyfon (/;) that many of this Tribe arc flock'd with. Which 1 the rather mention, bccaufe ibme make it an Objeftion againll the divme Superintendence and Providence, as being a Thing so far from ufeful, (they thmk,) that 'tis rather mifchievous and deflru6tive of God's Creatures. But the answer is eafy, 'viz. That as to Man, ihofc Creatui^s are not without their great Ufes, particularly in the Cure of (;) some of the moit ftubborn

{h) My ingenious and learned Friend, Dr. Mead^ examined with his Microfcope, the Texture of a Fiper's Poyfon, and found therein at first only a Parcel of small Salts nimbly floating in the Ltquor ; hut in a fliort Time the Appearance 1VM Chang d, and these faline Particles were /hot out tnto Cryfidls, of an incredible Tenuity and Sharpnefs, with fomething like Knots here and there, from which they seem'd to proceed; so that the whole Texture did in a Manner reprefent a Spider sWeb, though injinttely finer. Mead of Poyfons, p. 9.

As to the Nature and Operation of this Poyfon, see the same ingenious Author's Hypothefis, in his following Pages.

Th\s Poyfon of the Ftper, lieth in a Bag in the Gums, at the Upper-end of the Teeth, It is feparated from the Blood by a conglomerated Gland, lying in the anterior lateral Part of the Os Sincipitis; juft behind the Orbit of the Eye: From which Gland lieth a Duft, that c&nveys the Poyfon to the Bags at the Teeth.

The Teeth are tubulated, for the Conveyance, or Emiffion of the Poyfon into the Wound, the Teetli make ; but their Holiownefs doth not reach to the Ape.x, or Top of the Tooth, (that beiilg lolid and flurp, the better to pierce ;) but it ends in a long flit below the Point, out of wliich the Poyfon is emitted. Thcic i''erforations of the Teeth, Galen faith, the Mountebanks us"d to itop with some kind of Pafle, before they suffer'd the Vipers to bite them before their Spcdaiors. Cuts of thei'e Parts, crc may be seen in the lalt ciccd Book of Dr. Mead. Alfo Dr. Tyjcn's Anat. of the Kaitle-Sna'xe, in Philof. Tranfatl. N«. 144.

(i) That Vipers have tlieir great Lies in Pliyfick, is manifcft from their bearing a great Share in lun.c of our bc!t

Antidotes,

39? Of Reptiles. BooklX.

born Difeafes} however, if they were not, there would be no Injuftice for God to make a Set of such noxious Creatures, as Rods and Scourges, to execute the divine Chaftifements upon ungrateful

Antidotes, such as Theriaca Andromachi, and others ; alfo in the Cure of the Elephantiafis, and other the Uke ftubborn Maladies, for which i shall refer to the medical Writers. But there is so lingular a Cafe in the curious CoUecflion of i)r. Ol. Worm, related from Kircher, that I ftiall entertain the Reader with it. Near the Village of Sajfa, about eight Miles from the City Bracciano in Italy, faith he, Specus feu caverns (vulgb La Grotta delli Serpi) duorum hominum capax, fiftulofis qu'tbufdam foram'tnibus in formam crilri perforata cernitury ex quihus ingens qu&darn, principio verts, diverficolorum Serpent um, nulla tamen, ut dicitur, Jinoulari veneni qualitate imbutorum progenies quotannis puUulare folet. In hac fpeluncA Elephantiacos, Leprofos, Paralyticos, Arthriticos, Podagricos, &c. nudos exponere folent, qui mox haiituum fuhterrane^ erum colore in fudorem refoluti, Serpentum propullulantium, totum corpus infirmi implicantium, fu5lu linSluque ita otnni vitiofo virulentoque humore privare dicuntur, ut repetito hdc per aliquod tempus medicamento, tandem perfe5l& fanitati refli~ tuantur. This Cave Kircher vifited himself, found it warm, and every Way agreeable to the description he had of it; he faw their Holes, heard a murmuring hiding Noife in them ; but although he miffed feeing the Serpents (it being not the Seafon of their creeping out) yet he faw great Numbers of their ExuviA, or Sloughs, and an Elm growing hard by laden with them.

The discovery of thisT^ave, was by the Cure of a Lep£r going from Rowe to feme Baths near this Place ; who lafing his Way, and being benighted, happened upon this Cave ; and finding it very warm, puU'd off his Cloaths, and being weary and fleepy, had the good Fortune not to feel the Serpents about him, till they had wrought his Cure. Vid. Mufeum Worm. L. 3. c. 9.

The before-commended Dr. Mead, thinks our Phyficians deal too caudoufly and fparingly, in their prefcribing only small Quantities of the Viper's Flelh, ct-c in the Elephantiafts, and ftubborn Leprofes : But he recommendeth rather the Gelly or Broth of Vipers; or, as the ancient Manner was, to boil Vipers, and eat them like Filh; or at least to drink Wine, in which they have been long infufed. Vid. Mead, ubi, ftipr. p. 34.

and

Chap. I. Of Reptiles. 399

and finful Men. And I am apt to think that the Nations which know not God, arc the moll annoy'd with those noxious Reptiles, and other pernicious Creatures. As to the Animals themftlvcs, their Poyfon is no doubt of iome great and c(pecial Ufe to themselves, ferving to the more cafy Conqueil, and fure Capture ot" their Prey, which might otherwile be too rcfly and (Irong, and if once efcap'd, would hardly be again recover'd, by reason of their fwifter Motion, and the Help of their Legs ; befidcs all which, this their Poyfon may be probably of very great Ufe to the Digcftion of their Food.

And as to the innocuous Part of the Reptile Kind, they as well deferve our Notice for their Harmlefnefs, as the others did for their Poyfon. For as those are cndow'd with Poyfon, becaufc they are predaceous •, so these need it not, becaufc their Food is near at hand, and may be obtain'd without Strife and Contell, the next Earth {k) affording Food to such as can tcrebrate, and make Way into it by their Vermicular Faculty j and the next Vegetable being Food to others that can climb and reach (/), or but crawl to it.

{k) ThTLlEarth-zvortnsYwt upon Earth, is manifest from the httle curled Heaps of their Dung ejeifted out ot their Holes. But in Phtlof. Tranfatl. N°. 191. 1 have laid, it is in all Probability tarth made of rotted Roots and Plant?, and such like nutritive Things, not pure Harth. And there i<; tariher reason tor it, because Worms will drag the Leaves of Trees into their Holes.

(/) SnaiLs might be in Danger of vi'anting Food, if they were to live only upon such tender Plants as arc near the Ground, within their Reach only ; to impoNverthem therefore to extend their Purluits farther, they are enabled by the Means mentioned in Note {d), to ftick unto, and creep up Walls and Vegetables at their pleasure.

CHAP.

400 ^ Book IX.

CHAP. II.

Of the Inhabitants of the Waters.

I Have now gone through that Part of the Animal World, which I propofed to furvey, the Animals inhabiting the Land.

As to the other Part of the Terraqueous Globe, the Waters, and the Inhabitants thereof, not having Time to finifh what I have begun on that large Subjedl, I shall be forced to quit it. for the present, altho' we have there as ample and glorious a Scene of the Infinite Creator's Power and Art, as hath been already set forth on the dry Land. For the Waters themselves are an admirable Work of God («), and of infinite Ufe {b) to

(<i) Befides their abfolute necessity, and great Ufe to the World, there are several Topics, from whence the Waters may be demonftrated to be God's Work; as, the creating so vafta Part of our Globe; the placing it conmodioufly therein, and giving it Bounds; the Methods of keeping it sweet and clean, by its Saltnefs, by the Tides, and Agitations by the Winds ; the making the Waters ufeful to the Vegetation Qf Plants, and for Food to Animals, by the noble Methods of fweetning them; and many other Things bcfides, "Which are infilled on in that Part of my Survey.

{b) Plin'j having named divers Mirabilia Aquarum , to (hew their Power; then proceeds to their Ufes, viz. E&dem cadentes omnium terra nafcentium eaufa fiunt, prorfus mirabili naturd, ftquis velit reputare, utfruges gignantur, arbores frU' ticefque vivant, in caelum migrare aquas, aKimamque ettam herbis I'italem inde deferre : jujiA ccnfejfione, cmnes terr& quoque 'vires aquarum ejfc heyjeficii. ^aprcpter ante omnia ipfarum potentiA exempla ponemus : Cunticts enim quis mortalium enitmerare qtwnt ? And then he goes on with an Enumeration of some Waters famed for being medicinal, or some other unufual Quality. Pirn, L, 31. c. i,crz.

that

Chap. II. The JV at ery Inhabitants. 401

that Part of the Globe already furveyed j and the prodigious Variety (f), and Multitudes of curious and wonderful Things obfervable in its Inhabitants of all Sorts, are an incxhauftible Scene of the Creator's VVifdom and Power. The vail Bulk of some (i), and prodigious Minutenefs of others (^J, together with the incomparable Contrivance and Structure of the Bodies (/") of all > the Provifions and Supplies of Food afforded to such an innumerable Company of Eaters, and that in an Element, unlikely one would think, to afford any great Store of Supphes {£) } the business of respiration per-

(c) P/;«y reckons 176 Kinds in the Waters, whose Names may be met with in his L. 31. c. 11. but he is short in his Account.

id) Pliny, L. 9. c. 3. faith, that in the Indian Sea there are Balem quaternum jugerum (i. e. 960 Feet) Pnfles zoo cnbitorHtn (i. e. 300 Feet.) And L. 31. c. i. he mentions Whales 600 Foot long, and 360 broad, that came into a River of Arabia. If the Reader hath a mind, he may see his reason why the largelt Animals are bred in the Sea, L. 9. c. ^.

{«) As the largeft, so the most minute Animals are bred in the Waters, as those in Pepper- water; and such as make the green Scum on the Waters, or make them seem as if green, and many others. See Book W. Chap. ir. Note{n),{o).

(/) It might be here Ihewn, that the Bodies of all the several Inhabitants of the Waters are the beH contrived and fuited to that Place and business in the Waters, which is proper for them ; that particularly their Bodies are cloathed and guarded, in the best Manner, with Scales, or Shells, ct-c. fuittable to the Place they are to refide in, the Dangers they may there be expoTe.l unto, and the Motion and Bulineis they are thc:re to pertorm : That the Center of Gravity (of great Conlideration in that fluid F.lement,) is always plac'd in the fitted Part of the Body : Th.\t the Shape of their Bodies, (efpeciilly the more fwift,) is the moit commodious for making Way through the Waters, and most agreeable to geometrical Rules; and many other Matters bcfides would deferve a Place here, were they not too long for Notes, and that I shall anticipate what will be more proper for ^no* ther Place, and more accurately treated of ihcrs.

(^) See before Book IV. chaf>. 11.

D d form'd

40X The fFdtery Inhabitants. Book IX.

form'd in a Way so different from, but equivalent to what is in Land Animals {h); the Adjuftment of the Organs of Vifion {i) to that Element in which the Animal liveth ; the Poife (/^), the Support (/), the Motion of the Body {m)y forwards

with

ih) Galen was aware of the respiration of Fifhes by their "BranchU. For having said, that Fifties have no Occalion of a Voice, neither refpire through the Mouth as Land Animals do, he faith, Sed earum, quas Branchias nuncupamuSf conftruSlio, ipjis vice Pulmonis *Ji. Cum e«i;» crebris ac tenuibus foraminibus fint Branchi& hd. intercept a, a'eri quidem o" ^apori perviisy fubtilioribus tamen quam pro mole aqu&; hanc quidem extra repellunt, ilia autem prompte intromittunt. Galen de Uf. Part. L. 6. c. 9. So alfo Phn'y held, that Fifhes refpired by their Gills ; but he faith Anftotle was of a different Opinion. Plin. L. 9. c. 7. And so Arijlotle seems to be in liis hist. Animal. L. 8. c. 2. and in other Places, And I may add our famous Dr. Needham. See his De form. Jcetu, Chap. 6. and answer to Severinus.

(i) A protuberant Eye would have been inconvenient for Fidies, by hindring their Motion in so denfe a Medium as Water is; or elfe their brufliing through so thick a Medium would have been apt to wear, and prejudice their Eyes; therefore their Cornea is flat. To make amends for which, as alfo for the Refradtion of Water, different from that of the Air, the wife Contriver of the Eye, hath made the Cryfialline fpherical in Fifties, which in Animals, living in the Air, is lenticular, and more flat.

{k) As I have (hew'd before, that the Bodies of Birds are nicely pois'd to swim in the Air; so are thoie of Fifties for the Water, every Part of the Body being duly balanc'd, and the Center of Gravity, (as I said in Note (/), accurately fix'd. And to prevent Vacillation, some of the Fins serve, particularly those of the Belly; as BorelU prov'd by cutting off the Belly-fins, which caus'd the Fifti to reel to the right and left Hand, and render'd it unable to stand fteadily in an upright posture.

(/) To enable the Fifti to abide at the Top, or Bottom, or any other Part of the Waters, the Air-Bladder is given to most Fifties, which as 'tis more full or empty, makes the Body more or less buoyant.

{m) The Tail is the grand Inftrument of the Motion of the Body ; not the Fins, as some imagine. For which ReafOB;,

Chap. 11. The IVatery Inhabitants. 403

with great Swiftnefs, and upwards and downwards with great Readincfs and Agility, and all without Feet and Hands, and ten thoufand Things bcfides^ all thcie Things, 1 say, do lay before us so va» rious, so glorious, and withal so incxhaurtible a Scene of the divine Power, wisdom and goodness, that it would be in vain to engage my fclf in so large a Province, without allotting as much Time and Pains to it, as the preceding Survey hath cod me. passing by therefore that Part of our Globe, 1 shall only say fomewhat very briefly concerning the infenftthe Creatures, particularly those of the vegetable Kingdom^ and so conclude this Survey.

son, Firties arc more mufculous and flrong in that Part, than in all ihe rest of their Body, according as it is in the motive Parts of all Animals, in the pcdoral muscles of Birds, the Thighs of Man, csrc.

If the Reader hath a Mind to see the admirable Method, how Fiflies row themselves by their Tail, and other Curio* fities relating to their Swimming; I (hall refer him ro Borelli ie mot, Antm, Part. i. Chap. 13. particularly to Prop. 113.

D d 2 BOOK

4^4 Book X.

BOOK X.

0/ Vegetables.

"^'^'^'^^"'^^ H E Vegetable Kingdom, although an inferiour Branch of the Creation, exhibits to us fueh an ample Scene of the Creator's Contrivance, Curiofity, and Art, that I much rather chufe to shew what might be said, than engage too far in Particulars. I might infifl upon the great Variety there is, both of Trees and Plants provided for all Ages, and for every Ufe and Occafion of the World (a) 5 some for Building, for Tools and Utenfils of every Kind j some hard, some soft j some tough and flrong, some brittle ; some long and tall, some short and low> some thick and large, some small and flender 5 some for Phyfick (^j, some for

Food,

(a) The fifth Book of Theophraftus's Hifi. Plant, may be here confuked : Where he gives ample instances of the various Conftitutions and Ufes of Trees ^ in various Works, Gc. See alfo before Book IV. Chap. 13. Note (a).

(b) Invifis quoque herbis inferuit [Natura] remedia : quipfe cum meduinas dederii etiam acuieatis ■. in quibus tp-

Jis providentiam Nature fatis admirar't ample^lique non efi. « Inde excogitavit aliquas afpeSlu hifpidas, taSf.u truces ^

lit tantum non "uocem ipfius fingentis illas, rationemque reddentis exaudire videamury ne fe depafcat avida ffluadrupes, ne procaces manus rapiant, ne negUila veftigta obterant, ne infi' dens Ales infringat • his muniertdo Aculeis, teltfque armandjy rsmediis ut tuta ac falvafint. Ita hoc quoque quod in iis odi' mus, hommum causa, excogitaium eji, Plin. N. H. L. zz. c. 6. 6 Art

Book X. Anatomy of Vegetables. 405-

Food, fomc for Plcalure j yea, the most: abjc<5t {c) Shrubs, and the very Buihcs and Brambles themfelvcs, the Husbandman can tedify the Ufcof.

I might alio lurvey here the curious Anatomy and Scru6bure of their Bodies {d) , and fliew the

admirable

Are same of the Species of Nature noxious ? They are aU so ufeful —— Doth a Nettle fling ? It is to fecure so good x Medicine from the Rapes of Children and Cattle. Doth the Bramble cumber a Garden r It make\ the better Hedge ; where if It chanceth to prick the Owner, it will tear the ihief. Grew Cofmolog. L. 3. c. z. §.47.

(c) That the most abject Vegetables, err. have their V^c, and are beneficial to the World, may in some measure appear trom the Ulc the Northern People put rotten Wood, ctt. unto. Sat)s ingeniofutn modum habent populi feptentrionales in nemoribus no^lnrno tempore pertranfeuntes, tmo c? diurno, quando in remotioribus Aquilonis partibus ante, cr po/i Solfiitium hyemale continue nottcs habentur. <^tque his remediis indigent. Cortices quercinos inquirunt put res, eafque collocant certo interftitio itineris inflituti, ut eorum fplendore, quo voluerint^ ferjiciant iter. Nee foltim hoc prAJiat Cortex, fed O" Truncus putrefatlus, ac fungus ipfe Agaricus appellatHs, 8cc. Ol. Mag. hist. L. r. c. 16.

To this we may add Thiflles in making Glafs, whose Afhes Dr. Merret faith, are the best, viz. the Allies of the Comtnon-way ThijUe, though all Thiftles serve to this purpose. Next to Thifiles are Hop-firings, cut after the Flowers are gathered. Plants that are Thorny and Prickly, seem to afford tiie befl and most Salt. Merret's Obfer-v, on Anton. Ntr. p.z6s.

Giuid majora fequar ? Salicts, humilefque Genijiit Aut ilia, pecort frondem, aut pafloribus umbram Sujficiuntf Sepemque fatis, cr pabula melli.

Virg. Georg. L. i. )?, 434,

(d) Dr. Beat (who was very curious, and tried many Experiments upon Vegetables) gives some good reasons to imagine, that there is a dire<5t Communication between the Parts of the Tree and the Fruit, so that the same Fibres which conftitutethe Root, Trunk, and Boughs, arc extended into the very Fruit. And in old Hornbeams, I have ob-

D d 3 " leived

40^ Anatomy of Vegetables, BookX.

admirable Provifion made for the Conveyance of the lymphatick and eflential Juices, for communicating the Air, as necessary to Vegetable, as Ani^ mal Life {e) : I might alfo speak of, even the very Covering they are provided with, because it is a curious Work in Reality, although less so in Appearance : And much more therefore might I furvey

served fomething 'very like this; in many of which, there are fivers great and small Ribs (almost like Ivy, only united to the Body) running from the Root up along t'he outlide of the Body, and terminating in one fuigle, or a few Boughs : Which Bough or Boughs fpread again into Branches, Leaves and Fruit. See what Dr. Beal hath m Lowth. Abr. V. 2. p. 710.

But as to the particular Canals, and other Parts relating to the Anatomy of Vegetables, it is too long a Subje<ft for this Place, and therefore I (hall refer to Seigneur Malpighi'^ and Dr. Grew's Labours in this kind.

(e) ' Tanta est Refpirationis necejfttas, & ufus, ut Natura in Cmgulis viventium ordinibus varia, fed analoga, pafaverit infirumenta, t^ua Pulmones vocamus [and so he goes on with obferving the AppAratmmzAQ in the various Genera of Animals, and then faith] In Plantis vera, qu£ infimum anitnalium attingunt ordinem, tantam Trachearum copiam er prodttctionem extare par est, ut his minima Vegetantium partes prater corticetn irrigentur. — — Plants igitur ( ut conje^ari fas est) ckm fint viventia, i/ifceribus infixa terra, ab hac, feu potius ab aqua e/ a'ere, commixtis c? percolatis a terra, Refpirationis fu& materiam recipiunt, ipfarumque Trachea ab halitu ter- TA , extremas radices fubingrejfo , replentur. Malpig. Op. Anat. Plant, p. 15.

these Trachea or Air-Vejfcls, are visible, and appear very pretty in the Leaf of Scabious, or the Vine, by pulling afunder some of its principal Ribs, or great Fibres ; between which, may be seen the Spiral Air-Veffels (like Threads of Cob-web) a littie uncoyled : A Figure whereof, Dr. Grew hath given us in his Anat. Plant. Tab. 51, jz.

As to the curicms coyling, and other Things relating to the Structure of those Alr-Veffels , I refer to Malpig. p. 14. ^nd Dr. Gre-x, ib. L. 3. c 3. §.i6. C7*c. and L. 4. c. 4. §.190 ef y\i. Rfly^ from them fucciniflly, hist. Plant. L. i. c. 4.

BookX. Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. 407

the neat Variety and Texture of their Leaves ("/), the admirable Finery, Gaiety, and Fragrancy of their Flowers (^). 1 miglu alio inquire into the

wondcr-

(/) Concerning the Leaves, I shall note only two or three Things. I. As to the Ttbres of the Leaf, ihey Hand not in the Stalk, in an even Line, but always in an Angular, or Circular Poilurc, and their vafcular Fibres or Threads, are 3, 5, or 7. The reason of their Pofition thus, is for the more ered Growth and greater Strength of the Leaf, as alfo for the Security of its Sap. Of all which see, Dr. Grew, L. r. C.4. §.8,crc. and L. 4. Par. r.'c. 3. alfojTab. 4. Fig. x. to II. Another Obfervable in the Fibres of the Leaf, is their orderly Pofition, so as to take in an eighth Part of a Circle, ^%\n Mallows; in some a tenth, but in most a twelfth, as in Holy-Oak; or a fixth, as in S/ryw^a. Id. ib. Tab. 46, 47.

1. The Art in folding up the Leaves before their Eruption out of their Gems, crc. is incomparable, both for its Elegancy and Security, viz.. in taking up (so as their Forms zvill bear) the leafl room ; and in being so conveniently couched as to be capable of receiving Prote^ibn Jrom ether Parts, or of giving it to one another, e. g. rirjl, there is the Bow- lap, where the Leaves are all laid fomewhat convexly one over another, but not plaited ■■ ■ • but where the Leaves are not so thick set, as to flandin the Bow-lap, there we have the Plicature, or the Flat-lap; as inRofe-tree, &C. And so that curious Obferver goeson (hewing the various Foldings, to which he gives the Names of the Duplicature, Multiplicature, the Fore-rowl, Back-rowl, and Trerowl, or Treble-rowl. Grew. ib. L. I. c. 4. §. 14, crc. To thel'e he adds some others, L. 4. P. I. c. I. §. 9. Confult alfo Malpig. deGemmis, p. iz. &c.

To these curious Foldings, we may add another noble Guard by the Interpofition of Films, cr-c. of which Dr. Grew faith, there are about fix Ways, vit. Leaves, Surfoyts, Interfoyls, Stalks, Hoods, and Mantlings. Crew, ib. and Tah. 41, 41. Malpig. ibid.

(g) In the Flower may be considered the Empalement, as Dr. Grew; the Calix, or Perianthium, as Mr. Ray and others, call it, designed to be a Security, and Bands, to the other Parts of the Flower. Floris velut bafs u" fulcimentHm efl. Ray hist. L. t. c, 10. Flowers, whose Petala ^re strong (as Tulips) have no Cj/iv. Carnations, whose Petala are long and flender, have an Empalement of one Piece: And others, such as the Knap-weeds, have it confifVng of several

D d 4 Pieces,

4o8 Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. BookX.

wonderful Generation and Make of the Seed {h), and the great Ufefulnefs of their Fruit : I might shew that the Rudiments and Lineaments of the Parent-Vegetable, though never so large and fpacious, is locked up in the little Compafs of their Fruit or Seed, though some of those Seeds are scarce vilible to the naked Eye {i). And forafmuch as

the

Pieces, and in divers Rounds, and all with a counterchangeable RefpecH: to each other, for the great-er Strength and Security of themselves, and the Petala,&zc. they include.

The next is the Foliation, as Dr. Grew, the Petala, or Folia, as Mr. Ray, and others. In these, not only the admirable Beauty, and luxuriant Colours are obfervable, but alio their curious Foldings in the Calix, before their Expanlion. Of which Dr. Grew hath these Varieties, via. The close- Couchy as in Rofes ; th.t Concave-Couch, as in Blattaria fiore alio; the single- Plait , as in Peafe-Blojfoms ; the Double- Plait, as in Blue-Bottles, &c. the Couch and Piatt together, as in Marigolds, &c. the Rowl , as in Ladies Bower ; the Spire, as in Malloivs; and lastly, the Plan and Spire together, as in Convolvulus Doronici folio. L. i. c. 5. §. 6. and Tab. 54.

As to the Stamina with their Apices, and the Stylus, (called the Attire by Dr. Grew) they are admirable, whether we consider their Colours, or their Make, especially their Ufe, if it be as Dr, Grew, Mr. Ray, and others imagine, namely, as a Male Sperm, to impregnate and frudtify the Seed. Which Opinion is corroborated by the ingenious observations of Mr. Sam. Morland, in Philof. Tranf. No. 287.

Reliqua ufus alimentique gratia genuit [Natura] ideoque fecula annofque frihuit its. Flares vero odorefque in diem gignit : jnagnd (ut palameji) admonitione hominum, qm fpe^latijfim'e jioreant, celerrime marcefcere. Plin. N. H. L.21. C. I.

{h) As to the curious and gradual Frocefs of Nature in the Formation of the Seed or Fruit of Vegetables, Cuts being jieceffary, I (hall refer to Dr. Grew, p. 45, and 209, and Malpig. p. 57.

(i) Vetus efi Empedoclis dogma, Plantarum femina Ova ejff, ab fifdem decidua - Ineft in eo [Ovo vel Semine] velut

jpj cicatrice, non fola viventis carina, fed cum minima trunco ajj'iirge}}tes pi^rtes, Gemma fcilicet, cr inftanis r/tJ'-'h Cs^nus, &c.

Malpig.

BookX. Flowers and Seed of Vegetables, 409

the Perpetuity and Safety of the 'Species depends upon the Safety of the Seed and Fruit in a grcac mcafurc, 1 might therefore take notice of the pccuhar Care the great God of Nature hath taken for the Confervation and Safety hereof: As particularly in such as dare to flicw their Heads all the

Year,

Malpig. ib. p. 8i. vid. plura in tratft. de Stminum veget. p. 14. & paflim.

In Malpighi'i Life, a Debate may be seen between him and Seign. Triumphetti, the Frovolt of the Garden at Rowf, whether the whole Plant be adually in the Seed. The Affirmative is maintained by Malpighi, with cogent Arguments ; among which, this is one ; Nou prdoccupatd menu, oculismicrofcopio armat'ts, lujlret qmfo Phafeolorum, fetninalem plan-' tulam tiandum fatani, in qud folta fiabtita, hs.cqiie ampla evi^ denter o'jfervabit ; in eddem pariter gemmam, nodos,feu unplantationes 'uarias foliorum canlis deprehendet. Canlem injtgnem fibris ligneis, cr utriculorum feriebus conflantem confptcue atlinger. And whereas S. Triumphetti liad objeded, that vegetatione, metamorphofi, inedid plantas in alia: degenerare, ut exemplo plftrium [conflatj prAcipue triticiin loitum, ct" lolii in tr'tticum tierfi. In answer to this, (which is one of the strongest Arguments against Malpighi's Affertion) Malpighi rephes , Nondttm certumefl de imegntate, c^t" fuccejfu experimenti, nam facienti mihi, CT* amtcis, trittci metamorphofn non cejfit. Adtnijja tamen metamorphofi, quoniam hic negletla cultura, aut

vitio foil, aut aeris contmgtt tdeo ex morbofo CT monftrU'

ofo affedlu non licet inferre permanentem Jiatum a Naturd intentum'. Objervo plantas fylvefires culturd varias reddi, &C. I have more largely taken notice of Malpighi's answer, bccaufe he therem (hews his Opinion about the Tranfmutation of Vegetables. Vid. Malpig. Vit. p. 67.

So Mr. Ltxvenhoeck, after his nice Obfervationsof an Orange- Kernel, which he made to germinate in his Pocket, ct-c. concludes, Thus tve see, how [mail a Particle, no bigger than a co'4rfe Sand (as the Plant is reprefented) is increafed, Sec. A plain Demonflration, that the Plant, and all btlongint^ to it, •was atlually in the Seed, iji the •young Plant, its Body, Root, &c. Philof. Tranf. N". 2S7. See alio Rait Cat. Cant, in Acermaj. frqim Dr. Highmore. But in all the Seeds which I have viewed, except the Maple, the Plant appears the plained j.o the naked Eye, and s^Ko very elegant, in the Nux Vomica.

Nadtra

4IO Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. BookX.

Year, how fecurely their Flower, Seed or Fruit is locked up all the Winter, together with their Leaves and Branches, in their Gems {k\ and well

fenced

Natura non obfervat magnitudinis proportionem inter femi' no. cr plantcts ab itfdem ortas, ita ut majm femen majorem femper producat pla»tam, minus minorem. Sunt enim in gtnere herharum non pauca, quarum femina arborum novnullarum fetnmibus non dtco aqualia funt , fed multo majora. Sic V. g. Semtna Fab£, &c. femina Ulmi, &c. myitis vicibus magnitudine fuperant. Rail ubi fupra, L. i. c. 13.

Filicem reliquafque Capillares herbeti Semine carere Veteres flerique -prodidere ; quos etiam fecuti funt e Recentioribus nonnuUi, DodonAm, &c. ■ Alti e contra^ Bauhi-

Ttus, &C. Filices ^ congeneres fpermatophoras efj'e contendimt : Par/im quia Hifloria Creationis , Genef. ji. li. &c. '■

Hanc fententiam •veriffimam ejfe • autopfta convincit.

Tredericus dfius, he laith, was the first that discovered these Seeds with the Help of a Microfcope. And since him, Mr. W. C. hath more critically observed them. Among other Things observed by that ingenious Gent, are these, Pixidu- Is. feu capfuU femina continentes in plerifque hoc gentu plantis perquam exili granulo arens, vulgaris cinere& plus duplo minores funt i imo in nonnullis fpeciebus vix tertiam quartamve arenuls, partem magnitudine Aquant, veficularum quarundam anuulls attt fafciolis vermifirmibus obvolutarum f[^eciem exhibentes. Nonnulla ex his veficulis \oo circiter femina continere defrehendebantur. adeo eximia parvitate ut nudo oculo prorfm effent invifibilia, nee nifi microfcopii interventu detegi poffent, • Ofmunda Regalis, qua aliis omnibui Filicis fpeciebus mole — — antecellit vafcula feminalia obtinet <sque cum

reliquis congeneribus magnitudinls > quorum immtnfa ct*

vifum fugicns parvitas cum magnitudine plants collata — — adeo nullam gerere proportionem invenietur, ut tantam planlam e tantillo femine produci attentum obfervatorem merito in admirationem rapiat. Ray, ibid. L, 3 pag. 131. This f-I^. C. was Mr. Wit. Cole, as he owneth in a Letter I have now in my Hands of his to Mr. Kay, of oHob. 18. 1684.

{k) Vegetantium genus, ut debitam magnitadinem fortiatur, & fuA mortalitatis jaiJuram fuccefftva prolis edu^lione reparety /talis temporibus novcos promit partes, ut tandem emergentes Uteri, recentes edant Soboles. Emanantes igitur a caule, caitdife, ramis, c^ radicibus novelU hujufmodi partes, non illico iax0t£ extcnduntury fed compendia qmdam coagmentatA intra

folii

fenced and covered there with neat and clofc Tunicks. And for iuch as dare not so to cxpofe thcmfelvc5, with what Safety arc they preferved under the Coverture of the Earth, in their Root (/), Seed (w), or Fruit, till invited out by the kindly

folii axillam cuhantes, non parum fubjiflunt, (Jemm* appMaatur,ikc. And then rhat great Man goes on to flicw the admirable various Methods of Nature, in repofiting in that little Compafs, so large a Part of a Tree or Plant, the curious Structure of the Gems, the admirable Guard afforded them, and the Leaves, Flowers and Seed contained in them, c^c. Of which having taken Notice before, I pass over it now, and only refer to our hnxhox Malptghly and Dr. Grew, in the Places cited in Note (/) and (^).

(/) Of Bulbous, and a great many more, probably of the far greater Number of Perennial Roots of Herbs, as Arurrit Rape- Crowfoot, Hc. it is very obfervable, that their Root is annually renewed, or repaired out of the Trunk or Stalk it feif. That is to say, the Bafis of the Stalk continually, and by iiifenlible Degrees defcending below the Surface of the Earth , and hidmg it self therein , is thus both in Nature,

Place and Office, changed into a true Root. So in Brozvnivorr, the Bafis of the Stalk finking down by Degrees, till it lies under Ground , becomes the upper Part of the Root; and continuing Hill to fink, the next Year becomes the lower Fart: And the next after that, rots away ; a new Addition being still yearly made out of the Stalk, as the elder Parts yearly rot away. Grew. ibid. L. 2. pag. 59. ub'i plura vid.

(m) How fafe and agreeable a Confervatory the Earth is to Vegetables, more than any other, is maniteft from their rotting, drying, or being rendred intecund in the Waters, or the Air; but m the Earth their Vigour is long preferved. Thus Seeds particularly, Mr. Ray thmks some, may probably retain their Fecundity for ten Years, and others lofeitin five ; bur, faith he. In terra gremio latitantia, quamiis tot calor'ti, frigoris, humoris z^ ficcitatis zarietatibtcs ibidem obnoxia, diutihs tamtn (utpttto) fertiittatem fuam tucntur quam ab hominibsts diligentifftme ctijlodita ; nam c" ego cr alii ante me multi obfervarunt Sinapeos -vim magnam cnatam in aggi' ribu4 foffarum rec'cns Jailis inque areis gramineis effojfif, ubi poji hominttm memoriam nulla unquatn Sinapeos feges fticcrevtrat. &tiam tamen non fpont'e ortam fufpicor, fed e feminibut in terra per tot anncs refidms etiam prolificii. Ray. hist. PI. L. I. C. J3.

Warmth

412, Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. Book X.

Warmth of the Spring! And when the whole Vegetable Race is thus called out, it is very pretty to observe the Methods of Nature in guarding those infenlitive Creatures against Harms and Inconveniencies, by making some (for instance) to lie down proftrate, and others, to close themselves up («) upon the Touch of Animals, and the most to fliut up their Flowers, their Down (oj, or other their like Guard, upon the close and Cool of the Evening, by Means of Rain, or other Matters thac may be prejudicial to the tender Seed.

And now to these Confiderations relating to the Seed, I might add the various Ways of Nature in diflipating and fowing it, some being for this end, winged with light Down, or Wings, to be conveyed about by the Winds > others being laid in

(») PlantA nonnulU JEfch'jnomens, Veteribus dt£l&y Recentioribm Viva, ct* SenfitivA, cr Mimof&, baud obfcura fenfus indicia produnt ; fiquidem folia, earum manu aut baculo taSla^ ^■paululum comprejfa, plena etiam meridie, fplendente Sole, illico fe contrahunt ; in nonnuliu etiam fpeciebiis cauliculi teneriores concidunt Z7 velut marcefcunt ; quod idem ab a'ere frigidiore admijfa patiuntur. Ray. hist. PI. T. i. L. i8. App. S. i. C.2. p. 978,

{0) I have observed that many, if not most Vegetables, do expand their Flowers, Down, ^c. in warm, Sun-fhiny Weather, and again close them towards Evening, or in Rain, ct'c especially at the Beginning of Flowering, when the Seed is young and tender; as is manifest in the Down pf Dandelion , and other Downs ; and eminently in the Flowers of Pimpernel-, the opening and fhutting of which, are the Country-Man's Weather-wifer ; whereby Gerard faith, he foretelleth what Weather ftiall follow the next Day ; for faith he, // the Flowers be ckfe flmt up, it betokeneth Rain and soul Weather ; contraryzvife, if they be fpread abroad, fair Weather. Ger. Herb. B. 2.. c. 183.

Ejl o' alia [arbor in Tylis] fimilis, foliofior tamen, rofeique jloris; quern no6lH comprimens, aperire incipit Solis exortu, meridie expandit. IncoU dormin earn dicunt, Plin. Nat. hist. L. li. c. II.

elaftick,

BookX. Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. 413

el.iftick, fpringy Cafes, that when they burft and crack, dart their Seed at convenient Diltances, performing thereby the Part of a good Husbandman (/)) j others by their agreeable Tailc and

Smell,

{p') So foon as the Seed is ripe. Nature taketh several MethoJs for its Letng duly Sozvn ; not only in the opening of tht Uterus, but alfo tn the make of the Seed it self. For, Ftrfi, The Seeds of many Plants, zvhich ajfeci a peculiar Soil or Seaty as of Arum, Poppy, ike. are heavy and small enough, without further Care, to fall direclly down into the Ground But if they are so large and light, as to be expos'd to the Wind^ they are often furntjii'd with one or more Hooks, to flay thtm

from Jiraying too far from their proper Place So the Seeds

of Avens have one Jingle Hook ; those of Agrimony and Goolegrafs, many ; both the former loving a warm Bank ; the latter^ an Hedge for its Support. On the contrary, many Seeds ate furniflj'd with Wings or Feathers ; partly with the Help of the Wind to carry them, zvhen ripe, from off the Plant, as of Afh,

&c. and partly to enable them to make their Flight more or

less abroad, that so they may not, by falling together, come up too thick; and that if one jhould mifs a good Soil or Bed, another

may hit. So the Kernels of Fine haze Wings yet jl}ort

•whereby they fly not into the Air, but only flutter upon the Ground. But those of Typha, Dandelion, and mofi of the pappous Kind have long numerous Feathers, by which they are

■wafted every Way. 'Again, there are Seeds which are

fcatterd not by flying abroad, but by being either fpirted or flung away. The firfl of those are Wood Jorrel, which having a running Root, Nature fees fit to fow the Seeds at fotne Dt~ fiance. The doing of which is ejfetled by a white flurdy Cover^

of a tendinous or fpringy Nature. This Cover, so foon as

it begins to dry, bur/Is open on one Side, in an Inflant, and is •violently turn'd Infide outward ■ • and so fmn/:ly throws

off the ,seed. The Seeds of Harts-tongue, /; flung or jhot an-ay by the curious Contrivance of the Seed-cafe, as in Codded-Almart, only there the fpnng moves and curls inward^

but here outward, viz. Every -^'ed-cafe is of a fphcrick

^Figure, and girded about with a Jiurdy Spr:?j^. ihe Surface of the Spring resembles a fine Screw. - -So foon as this Spr!>!^ is become Jlark enough, it fuddenly breaks the Cafe into two Halfi, like izvo little Cups, and so fltn^s tht Sttd. rjrew. ib. p. 199. and in Tab. 71. all thefc admirable Artifices arc handlbmely reprefcntcd.

414 Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. BookX.

Smell, and falutary Nature, inviting themselves to be fwallow'd, and carry'd about by the Birds, and thereby alfo fertiliz'd by palling through their Bodies

6^;» fi quantitas mod'ica fem'inum (Filicis Phyllitidis quoque) a, foltii In fuhjeilam charu munda -fchedam dectitiatur, deter gat lirve, c deinde tn acervum con-verratur, veficu' larum feminalium plurimis una- dtjfilientibus, ^ ftbi invicem altifis, acervulus njarie moveri per partes videbitur, non /ecus

ac fi Syronilius aut ijiiufmodi beftioUs repletus eJJ'et (^um

fi locus tranquillus fit, aure proxime admotd, crepitantium inter rumpendum vafculorum fonitus percipietur i O' fi microfcopio chartam oculis oberres, femina per earn undique /parfa, £7" ad notabtkm ab acervo difiantiam proje^a comperies, Ray ibid. p. 131,

The admirable Contrivance of Nature, in this Plant is mofi plain. For the 3eed-Vejjels being the befi Preserver of the Seed, 'tis there kept from the Injuries of Air and Earth, 'till it be rainy, when it is a proper Time for it to grow, and then it is thrown round the Earth, as Grain by a/kdful Sower. When any Wet touches the End of the Seed VeJJels, with a ftnart Noife and fudden Leap it opens it /elf, aud with a Spring fcatters its Seed to a pretty Difiance found it, where it grows. Dr. Sloane Voy, to Jamaica, p. 150. of tiae Gentianella flore coeruleo, 8cc. ox Spirit -Leaf.

The Plants oi the Cardamine-Family, and many others, may be added here, whose Cods fly open, and dart out their Seed, upon a small Touch of the Hand. But the most remarkable instance is in the Cardamine impatiens, cujus SiliquA (faith Mr. Ray) vel leviter tail&, a^Htkm ejaculantur [Semina] iml, quod longe mirabilius videtur, etfi filiquas non tetigeris, fi tamen manum velut ta^urus proxime admo-veas, femina in approprinquantem evibrabunt ; quod turn Mc* rifonus fe f&pius expertum fcribit, turn ^ohnftonus apud Gerar* iium verum efe affirmat. Hiil. Plant. L. i6. c. 20.

Neither is this Provifion made only for Land Vegetables, but for such alfo as grow in the Sea. Of which I shall give an instance from my before commended Friend Dr. Sloane.

uls to the Fuci, their Seed hath been discover'd, (and fliew'd

me first,) by the Induftry of the ingenious Herbarifl, Air. Sam* Doody, who found on many of this Kind, folid Tuhercules, or Rifings in same Seafons, wherein were lodg'd several round Seeds, as big as Muftard-Seed, which, when ripe, the out' "Ward Membrane of the Tuhercule breaking, leaveth the Seed ta float up and down ivith the Waves, The Seed coming near 6 StoneSf

BookX. Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. 41 5*

dies {q) } and others not thus taken Care of, do many of them by their Ufcfulnefs in human Life, invite the Husbandman and Gardiner carefully to fow and nurse them up. To

Stones, or an'^ folid Foundation, ly Means of a Mucilage h carries wtfh it, fiicks to them, and [hoots forth Ligulae tvtth Branches, and in Time conns to its PerftClion and Magyutude^ Sloan Voy. Jamaica, p. jo.

But although Mr. Doody had hinted, and conjedur'd at the Thing ; yet the firlt that difcovcr'd the Seeds \n Fttci-, was the before commended Dr. Tancred Robin/on ; as may be ieen by comparnig what Mr. Ray faith in his S'^nopf. Stirp. Brit. p. 6. with his Append. Hifi. p 1849. Btfidcs which luct, the Dr. tells me, he obierv'd Vefl'cls and iieed in C*- ralloid shrubs, as alio in fevcral Fungi, not only in the Species ot Crepitus Lupi, but alfo between the LarrietU of other Species, and in that iubterraneous Kind call'd imffies, whose Seed and Veflels open in the Cortex, at some Scafons he faith, like that of Mallows in Sh.ipe.

As to the Crepitus Lupi, I have more than once cxamin'd their Powder, with thole excellent Microfcopcs of Mr. Wd^ son's Make: But the molt fatisfadory View Mr. IV/lfon hiin-» lelf gave me; by which I found the Seeds to be so many exceeding small Puff-Bails, with round Heads, and longer than ordmary sharp-pointcd Stalks, as if made on purpose to prick eafily into the Ground. these Seeds are iiuermix'd with much dully Matter, and become hurtful to the Eyes, probably by their (harp Stalks pricking and wounding that tender Organ,

(q) The ancient Naturalifh do generally agree, that Miffeltce is propagated by its Seeds carried about by, and pafiing through the Body of Birds. Thus Theophrajlus de Cauf. plant. L. 1. c. 24. T« I) is3Ti c-?j c^^l^ui, &c. Initium vero a pafiu avium ■ 'ilU'pp' V'fco detratlo conftcto.'juc in al'

'veis, quod frigidifflmum eji, femen cum excrement 0 puvum dU mittitur, cr faiia mulatione aliqua tn arbore Stercoris cauf4 fullulat, erumpitque, &c. So aifo Pliny faith, V17-. Omnino autem famm LVilcnmj nnllo modo nafcitur, nee nift per alvum Avium redditutn, maxitn'e Palumbis ac Turdi. Hac cf^ natura, tit nifi maturatum in ventre Avium, non proveniat. Phn. N. H. L. 16. c. 44. Whether what Theophraflus and Pliny affirm, be conducive to the better fertilizing the Seciis of MiJJtltoe, I know not; but that it is not of aulblute NccelCty, 1 can affirm upon mine own Experience, having fcfo

the

416 Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. BookX.

To this so fingular a Care about the Propagation and Confervation of the Species of Vegetables, I might add the nice Provifion that is made for their Support and Aid, in (landing and grow-* ing, that they may keep their Heads above Ground, and not be rotted and fpoil'd in the Earth themselves, nor thereby annoy us 5 but on the contrary,

t^e Seeds germinate, even in the Bark of Oak. But although they (hot above an Inch, and seem'd to root in the Tree^ yet they came to nothing, whether deftroy'd by Ants, CT'f. "Which 1 fufpeded, or whether difagreeing with the Oak, I know not. But I since find the Matter put out of doubt by Mr. Doody, which see in Mr. Ray's hist. Plant, jipp. p. 1918.

Nutmegs are said to be fertiliz'd after the same Manner^ as Tavern'ter faith was confirm'd to him by Perfons that lived many Years in those Parts ; whose Relation was, The Nutmeg being ripe, several Birds come from the Iflands toward the South, and devour it whole, but are forced to throw it up again, before it be digefted : And that the Nutfnegy then befmear'd with a vifcous Matter, falling to the Ground, takes Root, and produces a Tree, which would never thrive, was it planted. Tavern, of the Commod. of thd G. Mogul. And Monjieur Thevenot, in his Travels to the Indies, gives this Account; The Tree is produc'd after this Manner; there is a kind of Birds in the Ifland, that having pick'd off the green Hufk-, fwallow the Nuts, which having been some Time in their Stomach, they void by the ordinary Way ; and they fail not to take rooting in the Place where they fall, and in Time to grow up to a Tree. This Bird is (Kap'd like a Cuckow, and the Dutch prohibit their SubjeAs under Pain of Death, to kill any of them. V:d. Sir T. Pope Blum's Nat. hist.

But Mr. Ray gives a fomev/hat different Account : Hunc fruHum [Nucem Mofchatam] -variA qtiidem aves depafcuntury fed maxime Columb& genus album c parvum^ qu& dchifcente Tiucamento, ille6lA fuavitate Macis, hunc cum Nute eripiunt Cr devorant, nee nifi repletd ingluvie capaciffima faginam de*- ferunt. Noftrates ibi mercatores Cclumbis iftis Nut- eaters five Nucivoris nomen impofuerant. <^as antem vorant Nucesy poft integras per alvum reddunt. Reddits. citius deinde gertninant utpote pr&macerat& fervore Ventriculi. Arbores inde nat£ ceu pr&cociores, facile funt corruptioni obnoxis. fru^umque ferunt ceteris multo viliorem, CT* hdc caufd, negleElum incolit contempt nmque, prater Macin^ qucm ad adulterandum tneliarem adhiber.t. Ray H, P. L. 27. c. 4.

minider

BookX. Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. 417

niiniftcr to all their Ends, and ourUfcsj to afford us Houfcs, Ucenfils, Food (r), Phylick, Cloathing, yea, Divcrfion too, by the Beauty of their Looks, by the Fragancy of their Smell, by creating us pleafant Shades againtl the fcorching Beams of Summer, and skreening us againlt the piercing Winds, and Cold of Winter {s).

And it is very obfervable what admirable Provifions are made for this purpose of their Support and Standing, both in such as stand by thtir own Strength, and such as need the Help of others. In such as (land by their own Strength, it is^ by

(r) Arivres blandioribus fruge fnccis hominem mitigAvere. Ex lis recreans membra Olei liquor, virefque potus Vtni : tot denique fapores annul fponte ventcntes : CT* mtnfs. depugnctur licet earum caufd cum feris, v pafli naufragoru'm corporibiii pifces expeiantur, etiamnum tamcn [ecunds.. Alilte praierea fant ujtis eanitn, fint qtabus x/ita degi non poffit. Arbore fulcamusmaria, leirafque admovemus, arbore exs-dificatnui teila. Plin. N. H. L. li. c. r.

(j) Plantarum Ufus latijfim^e paiet, ct* in omni vil£ parte occurrit. Sine illis lauie, fine Hits con/mode non vivitnr, at nee vivitur omnino : (S}u£cunque ad "viclum neceffaria funt, quicunque ad delicim faciunt, e locupletijfimo fuo penu abunde fubminifirant. ffhtanto ex iis menfa ir.nocentior, mundur, Ja- Lubrior xju.itn ex Animalium ade cr lanicnd ? Homo certe naturd Animal carnivorum non e/i ; nullis ad pndam cr rapinam armis injlniclum, non dentikus exertis <y ferrdtis, non non unguibus aduncis. Mantis ad /rutins colligendosy denies dd mandendos comparati. Non legimus ei ante Diluvium carnes ad efum conceffas. At non viSlum tantum nobis fuppeditant, fed u" Vejlitum, cr Medicinam c? Domtcilia aliaque ddi~ ficia, cjy Navigia, c/ Supelletlilem, v Focum, O' ObleHamentd Senfuum Animique : Ex his naribus odoramenia or fufumigid parantur. Horum flores inenarrabili colorum ct* Scherhatum t'drietate, v elegantia, oculos exhilarant, fudvijftma odorutf% t^uos expirant fragantia fpiritus recreant. Horum fru^us gult HlecebrA mcnfas Jecundas inftruunt, o" languentem appetituni excitant. Taceo virorem arnxniffitnum ocuUs amicutn, qiierri per prata pafcua agros, fylvas Jpatiantibus objiciunt, O" umbrat quas contra t/Ium O" folis ardores pnbtnt. Ray. ib. L. i. C< 14. p. 0,6.

£ c Meani

41 8 Flowers and Seed of Vegetables. BookX.

Means of the llronger and more ligneous Parts, (equivalent to the Bones in Animals,) being made not inflexible, as Bones -, because they would then be apt to break ; but of a yielding elaftick Nature, to efcape and dodge the Violence of the Winds 5 and by Means alfo of the Branches fpreading handfomely and commodioufly about, at an Angle of about 4f gr. by which Means they equally fill up, and at the same Time make an iEquilibration of the Top {t).

And as for such Vegetables as are weak, and not able to fupport themselves, 'tis a wonderful Faculty they have, so readily and naturally to make Ufe of the Help of their Neighbours, embracing and climbing up upon them («), and ufing them

as

it) All Vegetables of a tall and fpreading Growth, seem to have a natural Tendency to a hemifpherical Dilation, but generally confine their Spreading within an Angle of 90 gr. as being the most becoming and ufeful disposition of its Parts and Branches. Now the shortest Way to give a most graceful and ufeful filling to that Space of dilating and fpreading out,' is to proceed in flrait Lines, and to difpofe of those Lines, in a Variety of Parallels, zyc. And to do that in ^ GuadraRta! Space, crc. there appears but one way possible, and that is, to form all the Interfedions which the Shoots and Branches make, with Angles of 45 gr. only. And I dare appeal to all if it be not in this Manner, almost to a Nicety obferv'd by Nature, c?-c. A visible Argument that the plailic Capacities of Matter are govern'd and difpos'd by an all-wife and infinite Agent, the native Striclnefies and Regularities of them plainly (hewing from whose Hand they come. Account of the Origine and Format, of Fojf. Shetis, &C. Print. Lond. 1705. pag. 38. 41.

(») In Hedera, fui cult ct* rami hinc inde claviculos, quaji radiculas cmitiunt, qu^ parietihus, iiel occurrentibus arboribui 'veluti digitis jirmantur., zj" in altum fufpenduntur. Hujufmodi radicuU fubrotundd fitnt, CT' pHis cooperiuntur ; cr quod mi ■■ fufnefi, gliitinojum fundunt hmnoremy feu Terebinthinatn, qua

arife lapidibiis neHuntur cr agglutir.antur. Non minori indnftria Natura utiturin Vite Canadcnfi, &c. The admirable 1 and

BookX. The Support of Vegetables. 41 c)

as Clutches to their feeble Bodies : Some by their odd convolving Faculty, by twilling themfejves like a Screw about others > lome advancing themfclves, by catching and holding with their curious Clafpers and Tendrels^ equivalent to the Hands -, Tome by flriking in their rooty Feet ; and others by the Emiflion of a natural Glue, clofclyand firmly adhering to fomething or other that adminilkrs sufficient Support unto them. All which various Methods being To nicely accommodated to the Indigencies of those helplefs Vegetables, and not to be met with in any befides, is a manifest Indication of their being the Contrivance and Work of the Creator, and that his infinite wisdom and Care condefcends, even to the Service, and wellbeing of the meaneft, most weak, and helplefs infenfitivc Parts of the Creation.

and curious Make of wliofe Tendrcls and their Feet, see in the illuftrious Author, Malpig. de Capreolts, &c. p. 48.

Clafpers are of a comjound Nature, betv/een that of a Root and a Trunk. Their Ufe is fometimes for Support only ; as in the ("Clafpers of Vines, Briony, cs'c whole Branches being long, (lender and fragile, would fall by their own Weight, and that of their Fruit ; but thele ClafperJ taking hold of any Thing that is at Hand: Which they do by a natural Circumvolution which they have ; (those of Briony have a retrograde Motion about every third Circle, in the Form of a double Clal'p ; so that if they mifs one Way, they may catch the other.) Sometimes the Ufe of Clafpers is aU so for a- Supply, as in the Trunk Roots of Ivy ; which being a Plant that mounts very high, and being of a cloier and more compadl Subrtance than that of Vmes, the Sap would not be fufficicntly supply'd to the upper Sprouts, unless thele affiited the Mother Root ; but thele serve alio for Support too. Sometimes alfo they serve for Stabilimcnr, Propagation and Shade; for the firlt of thefc lerve the Clafpers of Cucumers; for the fecond, those, or rather the Trunk- Roots of Chamomll ; and for all three the Trunk-Roots of Strawberries, Hams Lex. Tech. in verb, Cialpcrj.

Eel Ijq

42.0 Vegetables peculiarly ufeful. BookX.

In the last Place, to the Ufes ah-eady hinted at, 1 might add a large Catalogue of such among Vegetables, as are of peculiar Ufe 'and Service to the World, and seem to be design'd as 'twere on purpose, by the mod: merciful Creator, for the Good of Man, or other Creatures {iso). Among Grain, I might name the great Fertility (x) of such as serves for Bread, the eafy Culture and Propagation thereof, and the Agreement of every Soil and Climate to it. Among Trees, and Plants, I might inilance in some that seem to be design'd, as 'twere on purpose, for almaft every Ufe (>),

and

(w) Vegetables afford not only Food to Irrationals, but alfo Phyfick, if it be true which AnftotU laith, and after him Pliny; which latter in his 8th Book, Chap. 27. Ipecifies divers Plants made ufe of as Specificks, by divers, both beasts and Birds : As Dittany by wounded Beer, Celandine by Swalloivs, to cure the fore Eyes of their Young, z^c. And if the Reader hath a Mind to see more Initances of this Nature, (many of them fanciful enough,) he may confult Merfenne in Genef. pag. 933.

{x) See before Book IV. Chap. 11. Note {b). (y) Planta h^c unica [Aloe Americana] inqmt Vr. Hernandez, quicquid viti ejf'e poteji neceJJ'ariutn prdflare facile poteft, fi ejfet rebus humanis modus, Tota enim ilia lignorum [epiendofumque agrorum ufum prijiat, cautes tignorum, folia vera tefla tegendi imhricuin, lancium : eorundem nervuli, cr fibr£ eundem habent ufum ad linteamina, calceos, CT" vefiimenta conjicienda quern apud nos Linum, Cannabis, Goffipium, &c. E mucronibus fiunt clavi, aculei, fubuU, quibus perforandis auribus, maeerandi corporis gratia, Indis iiti mos erat cum D<£- monum vacarent cultiii; item aciads., acus, tribuii militants C raflilla idonea peciendis fubtegmmtbus. Prdtcrea e fucca fnananti, cujus evulfis germinibus internis fotiifve tenerioribus cultis [Yztlinis] in mediam cavitaism, fiillat planta, unica ad 50 interdum amphoras (quod diilu est mirabile) Vina, Mel, Acetum ac Saccharum parantur [The Methods of which he tells.] idem fuccus menfes ciet, alvum Unit, Urinam tvocat, Renes ZP" Veficdm emundat, E radice quoque Rejies fiunt firihifjimi, Crajftores foliorum partes, truncufque, deco6ta fuh terra , tdendo funt apta , fapiuntque Citrea frtij}a faccharp' eondiiA : qiiin CT* vulnsra recmfia mire conglutinant. — -Folia

e^uoqtis

BookX. Vegetables feciiliarly nfeful. 411

and Convenience-, lomc ro heal ;he mod ihibborn and dangerous Diltcmpers {z)^ to alleviate and cafe the Pains {aa) of our poor infirm Bodies, all the World over: And some dcfigncd for ihc peculiar Service and Good of particular Places , either to cure such Diftcmpcrs as arc peculiar to them, by

/]Uoque ajft CT" affe6ia hep impofta convuljlonetn curant, ac do- Lores lenmnt (pncipue ft fuc-cus ipfe calens iibattir) quamvis ab Indica proficifcantur lue, Jeiifu^ heleranty atque torporem in^ ducttnt. Radicis fuccut luem I'entrtam curat apud Indos itt Br. Palmer. Ray. ib. L. ii. c. 7. See alfo Dr. Shane I'oy. to Jamaica, p. 247.

There are alio two Sorts of Abe befules, mentioned hy the lame Dr. Shane, one of which is made ufe of for Fiftiing-Liiies, Bow-Strings, Stockmgs, and Hammocks. Another hath Leaves that hold Ra;n-Water, to which Travellers, cc refort to quench their Thirfl, in Scarcity of Welfs, or Waters, in thofedry Countries, ibid. p. Z49.

(i) For an Inflance here, I Avail name the Cortex Peruvi' anus, which Dr. Morton calls uintidotits in levamen arumnariim vitthum.ini plurimarum divinitus concejfa. De Febr. Exer. V. c. 3. In Sanitatem Gentium procuUubio a Deo O. M. conditus. Cuius gratia, Arbor -vits., fiqua alia, jure merito appellari potejl. Id. ib. c. 7. F.heu .' quot convitiis Hercitha qt* divtna ht.c Antidotus jaifabatur ? Ibid.

To this (if we may believe the F.phemer. German. Ann. xi. Obfcr. 74. and some other Authors) we may add Trifolium faludofum, which is becoine the Panacea of the German and Northern Nations.

(aa) Pro dAoribus qHilufcunqne fedandis pnjiantijftmi fetnper ufus Opium habetur ; quamobrem merit}) Nepenthe appellari folet, zsr remedium vere divinum exijlit. Et quidem fatis tmrari vix pojfumus, quomodo urgente vifceris aut tnembri cujufpiam tortura inftgni, c/ intolerahili cruciatu, pharmacum hoc, incantatmnti injlar, levatnen c/ iiaXyria-ixii fubitam, imyno interdum abfque fomno, aut faltem prists quam advcnerit, concedit. Porro adhuc ma^is Jlnpendum ejl, quod donee particuli Opiatici operari, Cy' potentiam fuam narcoticam extrere continuant, immo etiam aliqnamdiu pojlquam [omnia finitur, fumma aleviatio , cr indolentia in parte affeSla perfifii. Willis, Phar. rat. par. i. S. 7. c. i. §. 15.

Ee 5 growing

•4^x Vegetables fecuU^rly ufeful. BookX.

growing more plentifully there than clfewhere {hh) \ or elfe to obviate some Inconvenience there, or to supply some constant necessity, or Occafion, not poflible , or at lead not eafy , to be fupplied any other Way {cc), 'Tis, for instance, an admirable Pfovifion made for some Countries fubjedb to

Drought,

{hh') Tales Plant arum f[>ecies in quacunque regtone a Deo creantur quales hominibus cy animalihus ibidem natis maxime conveniunt ; into ex plant arum nafcentium frequentia je fere animadvertere pojj'c qtiibui tnorhis [cndetniis] qualibet regio fubje^a fit, fcrihit Solenander. Sic apud Danos , Frifios , Hollandos, qnibus. Scorbutus frequens, Cochlearia copios'e provepit. Ray. H. PI. L. i6. c. 3

To this may be added Elfner's observations concerning the Virtues of divers Things in his observations de Vincetoxico Scrophularujn remedio. F. Germ. T. I. Obf. 57.

John Benerovinusy a Phylician of Dort, may be here confulted, who wrote a Book on purpose to ftiew, that every Country hath every Thing ferving to itsOccafions, and particularly Remedies afforded to all the Diftempers it is fubjeft unto. V, Bener, 'Avtu^khci. Batav. five Introd. ad Medic, indigenam.

(cc) The description Dr. Sloane gives of the Wild-Pine is, that its Leaves are chanelled fit to catch and convey Water down into their Refervatories, that these Reiervatories are so made, as to hold much Water, and close at Top when full, to hinder its Evaporation; that these Plants grow on the Arms of the Trees in the Woods every where [in those Parts] as alfo on the Barks of their Trunks. And one Contrivance of Nature in this Vegetable, he faith, is very admirable. The Seed hath long and many Threads of Topientum, not only that it may be carried every where by

the Wind but alfo that it may by those Threads,

when driven through the Boughs, be held fall, and flick to the Arms, and extant Parts of the Barks of Trees. Sofoon as it fprouts or germinates, although it he on the under Part

of a Bough, its Leaves and Stalk rife perpendicular,

or ftrait up, because if it had any other Pofition, the Ciftern (before-mentioned, by which it is chiefly nourifhed — ) made of the hollow Leaves, could not hold Water, which

is necessary for the Nourilbment and Life of the Plant

In Scarcity of Vt'ate:, this Refervatory is necessary and sufficient,

BookX. Vegetables peculiarly nfeful. 413

Drought , that when the Waters every where fail, there arc Vegetables which contain not only Moifture enough to supply their own Vegetation and Wants, but atFord Drmk alfo both to Man and other Creatures, in their great Extremities {dd) j

ficient, not only for the Plant it self, but likcwife is very ufeful to Men, Birds, and all burts of inkets, uhithcr they come in Troops, and feldom go away without Rcfrclhmcnt. Id. ib. p. 188. and Phil. Tranf. N". 15 [, where a Figure is ot this notable Plant, as alio in Lo-jjthorp'% Abrldg. V. i. p.Ci).

The Wiid-Ptne, lb called, cp-c. hath l^eaves that will hold a Pint and a hall, or Quart ot Rain-VVatcr; and this Water retrellies the Leaves, and nounllies the Root. When we find these Pines, we flick our Knives into the Leaves, juft above the Root, and that lets out the Water, which we catch in our Hats, as I have done many Times to my great Relief. Datnpier's Voy. to Campeachy, c. 1. p 56.

{dd) NAvarctteicWs us of a Tree called the Bejuc^, which twines about other Trees, with its End hanging downwards; and that Travellers cut the Nib ofl it, and prelently a Spout of Water runs out from it, as clear as Cryftal, enough and to fpare for fix or eight Men. I drank, faith he, to my Satisfaction of it, found It cool and fvveet, and would drink it as often as I found it in my Way. It is a Juice and natural Water. It is the common Relief of the Herds men on the Mountains. W^hen they are thirlty, they lay hold 6n the Bejuco, and drink their Fill. CoUcfi. of Voy. and Trav. Kot. i. in the Suppl to Navarctte'; Account of China, p. 355.

The iVaterwtth of Jamaica hath the same Ufes, concerning which, my before-commended Friend, Dr. Shane, favoured me with this Account from his Original Papers -.^yr^/; Vine grovjing on dry Hills, in the Woods, where no Water is to be met uith, its Trunk, if cut into Pieces two or three Yards long, and held by cither tnd to the Mouth, affords so plentifully a limpid, innocent, and refreflitng Water, or Sap, as gives nezu Life to the droughty Traveller or Hunter. Whence this is very much celebrated by all the Inhabitants of these Iflands, (U an immediate Gift of Providence to their dijireffed Condition. To this we may add what Mr. Ray takes notice of concerning the Birch-Tree. In initiis Verts antequam folia prodiere, vulnergta duUem fuccurn copiose effundit, quern fitiprefft Pajlores in fylvts fdpenumero potare folent. Nos etiam nonfC' mel e} liquore recreati fumus, ci'.m herbarum grati.i vafias peragravimus fylvas , wqttit Tragus. Rail Cat. Plant, circa, Cantab, in Beiula.

Ee 4 and

42-4 Of Vegetables. Book X.

and a great deal more might be inftanced in of a Jike Nature, and Things that bear such plain Imprefles of the Divme wisdom and Care, that they manifest the Super-intendence of the infinite Creator.

Thus I have given a Sketch of another Branch of the Creation, which (although one of the meaneft, yet) if it was accurately viewed, would abundantly manifest it self to be the Work of God. But because I have been so long upon the other Parts, although less than they deferve, 1 must therefore content my self with those general Hints I have given J which may however serve as Specimens of what might have been more largely said about this inferiour Part of the animated Creation.

As to the Inanimate Part^ such as Stones, Minerals, Earths, and such-like, that which 1 have already said in the Beginning Ihall fuffice.

PraBkal Inferences from the foregotrjg Survey.

M

A VI N G in the preceding Books carried my Survey as far as I care at prcfW^x fcnt to engage my self, all that remain- _ fld4S-«^1^-' ^^'""^ '-"' ^° draw fomc Inferences from the foregoing Scene of the great Creator's Works, and so conclude this Part of my intended Work.

CHAP. I.

That God's Works are Great and Excellent,

TH E first Inference I shall make, shall be by way of Confirmation of the Text, That the Works ef the Lord are j'eat {a). And this is necessary to be observed, not againfl: the Athcifl only, but all other carelcfs, incurious Obfervers of God's Works. Many of our ufeful Labours, and fomc ,of our best modern Books shall be condemned with only this Note of Reproach, That they arc

(<j) F.qu'tdem ne laudare qu'tdem fans pro merit o poffum ejus Sapuniiam ac Potentiam, qui animalia fabric at ut tfi. Nam ejufmodi opera non LaHiiibus mod), verUm eiiam Hymnis funt majora, qud priuffjuam infpexijjemus, fieri non pojj'e ptrfuafutn habeamus, confpicatt vera, falfos nos cpintone fuijje comperipus. Galen. deUf.Part. L. 7. c. ij.

* abou?

41 6 Cods Works are great. Book XI.

about trivial Matters (^), when in Truth they are ingenious and noble Difcoveries of the Works of GOD. And how often will many own the World in general to be a Manifeflation of the Infinite Creator, but look upon the several Parts thereof as only Toys and Trifles, scarce deferving their Regard? But in the foregoing (I may call it) tranlient View 1 have given of this lower, and moil flighted Part of the Creation, I have, I hope, abundantly made out , that all the Works of the Lord, from the moit regarded, admired, and prai* fed, to the mcaneft and moll flighted , are great and glorious Works, incomparably contrived, and as admirably made, fitted up, and placed in the World. So far then arc anv of the Works of the LORD, (even those efteemed the meanefl) from deferving to be difregarded, or contemned by us (<:), that on the contrary they deferve (as shall be shewn in the next Chapter) to be fought out^ enquired after ^ and curiously and diligently pryed into by us j as I have ihewed the Word in the Text implies.

{b) Nan tamen pigere debet LeSiores, ea intelljgere, (^uemadmoiium ne Naturam quidem piguit ea reipsa efficete. Galen, ibid. L. II. fin. •

(c) An igitur etiawfi quemadmodum Natura hu, cr ejuftKodi, fummA rat'tone ac provtden'tiA agere potuit, ita (y not imitari aliquanda poffentus ? Ego vera exifiimo multis noflrum ne id quidem pojfe, neque enim artem Natur& exponunt : Eo enim modo omnino earn admirarentur , Sin minhs^ earn faltem non vftuperarent. Galen, ib. L. lo. c. 3.

CHAP,

Chap. II. 4^7

CHAP II.

That GodV Works ought to be enquird intOy and that such Enquiries are commendable.

THE Creator doubtlefsdid not btftow so much Curionty, and exquifice Workmanfhip and Skill upon his Creatures, to be looked upon with a carclcfs, incurious Eye, cfpccially to have them llightcd or contemned j but to be admired by the rational Part of the World, to magnify his own Power, wisdom and Goodncfs throughout all the World, and the Ages thereof. And therefore we may look upon it as a great Error, not to answer thoVe Ends of the infinite Creator^ but rather to oppofe and affront thcni. On the contrary, my Text commends G O D's Works, not only for being great, but alfo approves of those curious and ingenious Enquirers, that /f<'^' them onf^ or pry into them. And the more we pry into, and discover of them, the greater and more glorious we find tiicm to be, the more worthy of, and the more cxprelly to proclaim their great Creator.

Commendable then are the Refcarches, which many amongll us have, of late Years, made into the Works of Nature, more than hath been done in some Ages before. And therefore when we are asked, Cui Bono ^ To what purpose such Enquiries, such Pains, such Expcnce? The answer h eafy. It is to answer the Ends lor which GOD beftowed so much Art, wisdom and Power about them, as well as given us Scnfes to view and furvey them j and an Underdanding and Curiolity to fearch into them : It is to follow and trace him, when and whither he leads us, that we may

see

4^8 God's JVorks are mantfefl. Book XL

see and admire his Handy-work our selves, and fct it forth to others, that they may see, admire and praise it alfo- I shall then conclude this Inference with what Elihu recommends, Job xxxvi. 24, zf. Remember that thou magnify his Work^ which Men behold. Every Man may see it^ Men may behold it afar off.

CHAP. III.

That God' J Works are manifeji to all: Whence the IJnreafonablenefs of Infidelity.

TH E concluding Words of the preceding Chapter fuggefts a third Inference, that the Works of GOD are so vifiblc to all the World, and withal such manifest Indications of the Being, and Attributes of the infinite Creator, that they plainly argue the Vilenefs ^and Perverfnefs of the Atheifl, and leave him inexcufable. For it is a fign a Man is a wilful, perverfe Atheift, that will impute so glorious a Work, as the Creation is, to any Thing, yea, a mere Nothing (as Chance is) rather than to GOD {a). 'Tis a fign the Man is wilfully blind,

that

(4) Galen having taken notice of the neat Diftribution of the Nerves to the muscles, and other Parts of the Face, cries out, Hu enlm forturiA funt opera ! C&terum turn omn'thus [partibus] imm'tttt, tantofque eJJ'e fingulos [nervos] magfiitudme, quanta partkuh erat neceJJ'e; haud fcto an hom'innm (it fohriorum ad 'Fortunam opificem id revocare. jilioqui quid tandem erit, quod cum Providentid c/ Arte efficitur ? Omnino enitn hoc ei contrarium eJj'e debet, quod Cafu ac Fortuito fit. And afterwards, H£C quidem atque ejufmodi Artis fcil. ac Sapientt£ opera ejfe dicemns, ft modo Fortune tribuenda funt qu£

funt

Chap. III. Gods JVorksare fnanifeJL 419^

that he is under the Power of the Devil, under the Government of Prejudice, Lu(l, and PafTion, not right Rcafon, that will not difcern what eicry one can see ^ wh.it every Man m.iy behold afar ojf^ even the Exilknce and Attributes of the CRE- ATOR from his Works. For as there is no Speech or Language where their Voice is not heard, their Line is gone out through all the Earth, and their JVords to the End of the IVorld : So all, even the barbarous Nations, that never heard of GOD, have from these his Works inferred the Exiflencc of a Deity, and paid their Homages to some Deity, although they have been under great Miftakes in their Notions and Conclufions about him. But however, this shews how naturally and univerfally all Mankind agree, in deducing their Belief of a God from the Contemplation of his Works, or as even Epicurus himself, in I'uUy (b) faith, from a Notion that Nature it self hath imprinted upon the Minds of Men. For, faith he, ivhat Nation is there, or ivhat kind of Men, that ivithout any Teaching or lnflru6lions, have not a kind of jinticipation^ or preconceived Notion of a Deity ? - An Atheill therefore (if ever there was' any such) may juftly be eftecmed a Moniler among rational Beings j a Thing hard to be met with in

funt contrar'ia; fietque jam qttcd in proverhih lluvti

f urf urn fluent ; fi opera qu& nullum halent neque ornamentum neque rationem, neque tnodum Artis ejje ; conirana vero Fortum duxenmui,&:c. Galen, ubi lupra. L. ii. c. 7.

(^) Pr'imum ejje Deos, quod in omnium animts,S)iC. And a little after. Cum enim non indituto aliquo, aut more, a»t lege fit cpiuio conflituta, maneatque ad unum ommum f.rwi*' conftnfio, inielli^i necejft ejl, ejje Deos, quontam injnas tcrum vel poiiiis if'natas cogntiiones halemus. De quo Mutem imntum Nittura conj'entit, id verum ejje necejji eji. Ejje igitur Vtet conjinndum eji. Cicer. dc Nat. Deor. L. i. c. 16, 17.

ihe

430 God'sWorks aremmiifeft. Book XI.

the whole Tribe of Mankind; an Oppofer of all the World {c)\ a Rebel against human Natureand reason, as well as against his GOD.

But above all, monftrous is this, or would be^ in such as have heard of GOD, who have had the Benefit of the clear Gofpel-Revelation. And still more monftrous this would be, in one born and baptized in the Chriftian Church, that hath ftudied Nature, and pried farther than others into God's Works. For such an one (if it be pofHble for such to be) to deny the Exiftence, or any of the Attributes of GOD, would be a great Argument of the infinite Inconvenience of those Sins of Intemperance, Luft, and Riot, that have made the Man abandon his reason, his Senfcs, yea, I had almost said his very human Nature [d\ to engage him thus to deny the Being of G O D.

So alfo it is much the same monftrous Infidelity, at least betrays the same atheiftical Mind, to deny GOD's Providence, Care and Government of the World, or (which is a Spawn of the same Epicurean Principles) to deny Final causes (e) in God's Works of Creation ; or with the Profane in PfaL Ixxiii. ii. to say. How doth God know^

(c) The Atheift in denying a God, doth, as Plutarch

faith, endeavour immobilia movere^ e? helium inferre

non tantum longo tempori, fed cr multis hominibus, gentibus, inr familiis, qum rellgtojus Deormn cultus, quafi divino furore correptas, tenuit. Plutar. de Ifide.

(d) See before Note {b).

{e) Galen having I'ubftantially refuted the Epicurean Principles of Afclepiadei, by iLewing his Ignorance in Anatomy and Philolophy, and by Demonl^rating all the Caujes to be evidently in the Works of Nature, viz. Final, Efficient, Inflrumental. Material And Formal causes, concludes thus against his fortuitous Atoms, ex quibus intelligi potefl : Conditorem npfirum in formandis particulis unum hunc fequi fcopum, nempe tit quod melius ejl eligat. Galen, de Uf. Part. L. 6. c. 13.

And

Chap. IV. Fear and Obedience God's Due. 43 1

And is there Knowledge in the most High ? For as the witty and eloquent Sahian faith (/"j, 7hey that affirm nothing is jecn by GO /), w;7/, in all Probability, take away the Sub fiance^ as well as Sight of

Cod. • But what Jo great Madnc/s, faith he, as

that when a Man doth not deny G (J D to be the Creator of all Things^ he fjotild deny him to be the Go'vet" nourofthcm ? Or when heconfejjeth him to be the Maker^ he should say^ GOD neglecieth what he hath so made ?

{/') DeGubtm. Dei. L. 4. p. 1 14. meo Libra ; alfo L. 7. c. 14.

CHAP. IV.

That G o Ds JForh ought to excite us to Fear and Obedience to God.

Since the Works of the Creation are all of them fomany Demonlhationsof the infinite wisdom and Power of God, they may serve to us as so many Arguments exciting us to the constant Fear of God., and to a Heady, hearty Obedience to all his Laws. And thus we may make these Works as ferviccable to our fpiritual Intcrell, as they all arc to our Life, and temporal liuerelt. For if whenever wc see them, wc would confidcr that these arc the Works of our iiifinice l.ord-ind Mafler^ to whom we arc to be accountable for all our Thoughts, Words and Works, and that in these wc may see his infinite Power and wisdom j this would check us in Sinning, and excite us to serve and pleafe him who is above all Controul, and who hath our Life and whole Happinefs in his Power. After this manner GOD himself argues with his own foolifj People^ and without Under ft anding^ who had Eyes, and

faw

432. Thankfutnefs ts God's T>ue. Book XL

fawnot^ and had Ears^ andkeardnot^ Jer.v. zi,!!* Fear ye not me ? faith the Lord : will ye not tremble at my Pr e fence ^ which have placed the Sand for the Bound of the Sea^ by a perpetual Decree^ that it cannot pass it y and though the JVaves thereof tofs themselves^ yet can they not prevail -, though they roar^ yet can they not pass over it ?

This was an Argument that the most ignorant, ilupid Wretches could not but apprehend 5 that a Being that had so vail and unruly an Element, as the Sea, absolutely at his Command, ought to be feared and obeyed j and that he ought to be considered as the Sovereign Lord of the World, on whom the World's Profperity and Happinefs did wholly depend ; v. 24. Neither say they in their Heartslet us now fear the Lord our God^ that giveth Rain^ both the former and the latter in his Seafon : He re" ferveth unto us the appointed Weeks of the Harvefi.

C H A P. V.

That G o dV Works ought to excite us to Thankfiilnefs.

AS the Demonftrations which GOD hath given of his infinite Power and wisdom should excite us to Fear and Obedience 5 so I {hall shew in this Chapter, that the Demonftrations which he hath given of his infinite goodness in his Works, may excite us to due Thankfulnefs and praise. . It appears throughout the foregoing Survey, what Kindnefs GOD hath shewn to his Creatures in providing every Thing conducing to their Life, Profperity, and Happinefs {a) > how they are all

contrived

{a) Si pauca qms ttbi donnffet jugera, accepijje te diceres henekcium : immeajd terrarum Ui'e patemitttn fpaua ncga;

tjfe

chap. V. Thankftihiefs is God's T>ue. 43 3

contrived and made in the bell Manner, placed in the fitted Places of the World for their Habitation and Comfort ; accoutered in the bell Manner, and accommodated with every, even ail the minuted Things that may minifter to their Health, Happinefs,Omce, Occafions,and Bufmefs in the World. Upon which Account, Thankfulnefs and Praifc is so reafonable, so jull a Debt to the Creator^ that the Pfalmijl calleth upon all the Creatures to praise God, in Pfalm cxlviii. praise him all his Angels^ praise him allhisPIoJls j Sun^ Moon^ Stars of Light ^ Heavcjis of Heavens^ and Waters above the Heavens.' The reason given for which is, f. f,6. For he commanded^ and they were created -y he hath alfo efiabiifljed them forever and ever j he bath made a Decree which they fn all not pass. And not these Celedials alone, but the Creatures of the Earth and Waters too, even the Meteors, Fire and Hail^ Snoiv and Vapours^ Jiormy J^^inds fulfilling his Word. Yea, the very Mountains and Hills^ Trees^ Beajis^ and all Cattle^ creeping "Things^ and fying Fonvl. But in a particular manner, all the Ranks and Orders, all the Ages and Sexes of Mankind are charged with this Duty ; Let them praise the Name of the Lord^ for his Name alone is excellent j his Glory is above the Earth and Heavens^ f.i^.

ejfe beneficium ? Si pecuniam tibi aliquis donaverit, bcneji'

cmm vocabis : to: metalla defodit, lot flutnina emifit in drat fuper qu£ decurrunt fola aurum vehemia : argentt, tris, ferri immane pondus omnibus locis obrutum, cujus invejli^aridi li.i facultatem dedtt, — ne^as te accepijje bene/icium ? Si dornus tibi donetur, in qua marmoris aliquid refplendeat, &cc. Num mediocre tnunus vocabis ? Ingens tibi danjcilium, fine ullo incendiiy aut runiA metu Jlruxit, in quo vides non tenues cruftas fed in terras lapidis preiioflfifni woles, 8<C. negas te uilurt tnunus accepiffef Et cum ijla qux habes t?iaj(no tflpnes, quod tfi ingrati hominis, nulit debere te juduas f Vnde tibi ijhtm quern trahis fpiritum ! Unde ijlam, per quarn duftus vin tut. difponn dtque ordinas, lucem f &i<:. Scnec. de Binef. L 4 c. d.

Ff And

^^^ Homage andWorJhif God'sT>ue. Book XI,

And great reason there is we should be excited to true and unfeigned Thankfulnels and praise {h) to this our great Benefii6tor, if w'e refle£t upon what hath been shewn in the preceding Survey, that the Creator hath done for Man alone, without any regard to the refl of the Creatures, which some have held were made for the Sake of Man. Let us but refleft upon the Excellence and Immortality of our Soulj the incomparable Contrivance, and curious Strudure of our Body j and the Care and Caution taken for the Security and Happinefs of our State, and we shall find, that among the whole Race of Beings, Man hath efpecial reason to magnify the Creator's goodness, and with fuitabie ardent Affedions to be thankful unto him.

iy) Tempefi'tvum t'tbi jam fuer'tt, qui in hifce libris verfaris confiderare, in utram Familiam recipi malts, Platonicamne ac Hippocraticam, z^ alio rum virorum, qui Nature opera miran-^ tttr ; an eorum qui ea infe6iantur , quod non per Pedes natura confiituit effiuere Excrementa. Of which having told a Story of an Acquaintance of his that blamed Nature on this Account , he then goes on , At vero fi de hujufmodi \pecudibus piura verba fecero, melioris mentis homtnes merito mihi forte fuccenfeant, dicantque me polluere facrum fermonemt quern ego C O N D ITO R I S nofiri verum Hymnum componOy

exifiimoque in eo veram ejfe pietatem, ut fi noverim ipfe

primus, deinde zir aliis expofuerim, qu£nam fit ipfius Sapiential qui Virtus, qu& Bonitaf. &iuod enim cultu conveniente exornaverit omnia, nuUiqtie bona inviderit, id perfe5lijfim& Bonitatis Jpecimen ejj'e fiatua; ^ hac quidem ratione ejuf Bonitas Jiymnis nobis efi celebranda. Hoc autem omne invenijj'e quo pacio omnia potiffimitm adornarentur, fumm& SapientiA efi : ejfeciffe autem omnia, quA voluftf Virtutis est inviilA, Galen. deUr. Part. L, 3. c. 10.

CHAP.

Chap. VI. 435-

CHAP. VI.

That we ought to pay God all due Homair^e and fVor/hijp^ particularly that oft he Lords T>ay.

FOR a Conclufion of these Lc(5l:urcs, the lad Thing I {hall infer, from the foregoing Demonflration of the Being and Attributes of G O D, shall be, that we ought to pay GO D all that Homage and IVorf.Hp which his Right of Creation and Dominion entitle him unto, and his great Mercies call for 'from us. And forafmuch as the Creator appointed, from the very Creation, one Day in fcven to his Service, it will not therefore be improper to say lomething upon that Subjeft : And if I infift fomewhat particularly and largely thereon, the Congruity thereof to the Dcfign of these Lectures, and the foregoing Demonllration, together with the too great Inadvertency about, and Negled: of this ancient, univerl'al, and molt reafonable and necelTary Duty, will, I hope, plead my Excufe. But that I may say no more than is necessary on this Point, I shall confine my self to two Things, the Time God hath taken, and xhcBufwefs then to be performed.

I. The Time is one Day infeven, and one of the ancientefl: Appointments it is which GOD gave to the World. For as foon as GO D had finilhed his fix Days Works of Creation, it is said, Gen. \\, Zj ■^. Oe rejled OH the fcuentb Diy from all his IVork which he had made. And GOD blejfed the fe'venth Day^ and fan^lificd it, hecauje that in it he had rejied from all his IVork. This San6biiication {a), and

{a ^"Ip Ufibus div'tnis accommodavit, a communi Cf frofano ufu jegrigavit, in ufum facrum ad cultum Deidtjlinavit. Kirch. Concord, p. 133O. Deflinari ad aluiuid, Hacrari, ixc. Buxtorf. in Verbo.

F f 2 blcfling

43^ Antiquity of the Sabbath. Book XL

blefling the Seventh Day, was fetting it'apart, as a i Day of Diftin6lion from the rest of the Week- ' Days,- and appropriating it to holy Ufes and purposes, namely, the Commemoration of that great Work of the Creation, and paying Homage and Worship to that infinite Being, who was the Effedor of it.

This Day, thus confecrated from the Beginning, for the Celebration of the r^jtiV/^y '^kciov the World's Birth-Day^ as Philo calls it, was probably in some measure forgotten in the following wicked Ages, which God complains of, Gen. vi, f. and so after the Flood likewife. But after the Return out of JEgypt^ when GOD fettled thtjewijlj Polity, he was pleafed to renew this Day, and to eftablifh it for a perpetual standing Law. And accordingly it was observed down to our bleiTed S A V I O U R's Time, countenanced, and ftri6tly observed by our great LORD and Mailer himself, and his Apo- Itles and Difciplcs in, and after his Time $ and although for good reasons the Day was changed by them, yet a feventh Day hath been constantly observed in all Ages of Chriftianity, down to our present Time.

Thus we have a Day appointed by G O D himself, and observed throughout all Ages , except some few perhaps, which deferve not to be brought into Example.

And a wife Defignation of Time this is, well becoming the divine Care and Precaution j ferving for jthe recruiting our Bodies, and difpatching our Affiiirs, and at the same Time to keep up a Spiritual Temper of Mind. For by allowing fix Days to labour, the Poor hath Time to earn his Bread, the Man of business Time to difpatch his Affairs, and every Man Time for the Work of hisrefpective Calling. But had there been more, or all our Time allotted to Labour and business, and none to

rest

QhNl.AfeveHtb^Day a "jL^'tfc Appointment. 437

rest and recruit, our Bodies and Spirits would have been too much fatigued and wafted, and our Minds have been too long engaged about worldly Mntters, To as to have forgotten divine Things. Butthc infinitely wife Ruler of the World, having taken the feventh Part of our Time to his own Service, hath prevented thefc Inconvenienciesj hath given a Relaxation to our selves j and Eafe and Refrefhment to our wearied beasts, to poor fatigued Slaves, and such as are under the Bondage of avaritious, cruel Mafters. And this is oneReafon Mofes gives of the Refervation and rest on the Seventh Day, Dciit.s. 13,14, ij-. Six Days pjalt thou labour^ and do all thy Work -, but the Seventh is the Sabbath of the LO RD thy GOD; in it thou /Jjalt not do any Work^ thou, nor thy Children, Servants, Cattel, or Stranger, that thy Man Scyjant and Alciid Servant may refl as well as thou. Jnd remember^ that thou wajl a Servant, &cc. therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day. That carnal, greedy People, so bent upon Gain, without luch a Precept, would have fcarcs favoured their own Bodies, much less have had Mercy upon their poor Bonds-men and beasts, but by this wife Proviiion, this great Burden was taken oft'. But on the other hand, as a longer Liberty would too much have robbed the Maftei's Time, and bred Idlenefs, so by this wife Provifion, of only one Day of rest, to fix of Labour, that Inconvenience was alfo prevented.

Thus the wile Governour of the World, hath taken Care for the Difpatch of Bu(inefs. But then as too long Engagement about worldly Matters, would take oft" Mens Minds from God and divme Matters, so by this Refervation of every Seventh Day, that great Inconvenience is prevented alfoj all being then bound to worfhip their great Lord and Mafter, to pay their Homages, and Acknowledg-

F f 5 mcnts

^3 8 Lord's T>ay must he remember' d. Book XI.

ments to their infinitely kind Benefa61:or 5 and in a word, to exercife themselves in divine, religious business, and so keep up that fpiritual Temper of Mind, that a perpetual, or too long Application to the World would deiboy.

This, as it was a good reason for the Order of a Sabbath to the Jews ; so is as good a reason for our Saviour's Continuance of the like Time in the Chriftian Church.

And a Law this is, becoming the infinitely wife Creator and Confervator of the World, a Law, not only of great Ufe to the perpetuating the Remembrance of thofegreateft of God's Mercies then commemorated, but alfo exadly adapted to the Life, Occafions, and State of Man j of Man living in this, and a-kin to another World : A Law well calculated to the Difpatch of our Affairs, without hurting our Bodies or Minds. And since the Law is so wife and good, we have great reason then to pra61:ife carefully the Duties incumbent upon us j- which will fall under the consideration of the

IL Thing I propofed, the business of the Day, which God hath referved to himself. And there are two Things enjoyned in the Commandment, a CeJJation from Labour and worldly business, and ih-M^e. remember to keep the Day holy.

I . There must be a Ceflation from worldly business, or a rest from Labour, as the Word Sabbath (b) fignifies. Six Days thou Jhalt do all thy fFork^ but the Se'venth is the Sabbath of the Lord thy GOD (not thy Day but his) in ivhich neither thou^ mr any belonging to thee^ Jhall do any IVork. 1 n wh ich Injun6tion it is obfervable, how express and particular this Commandment is, more than others, in ordering all Sorts of Perfons to ceafe from Work.

1. We

Chap. VI. Lord's T)ay mufl be remember'' d. ^n)

I. We mud remember to keep the Day holy. Which Remembrance is another Thing alfo in this, more than in the other Commandments, and implies,

ly?, That there is great Danger of our forgetting, neglcfting, or being hindrcd from keeping the Day holy, cither by the Infirmity and Carnality of our own Nature, or from the Avocations of the World.

2/>', That the keeping it holy, is a Duty of more than ordinary consequence and Necedity. And of greatest: consequence this is,

/;>y?. To perpetuate the Remembrance of those grand Works of G O D commemorated on that Day i in the first Ages of the World, the Creation j in the middle Ages, the Creation and Delivery from jEgypt ', and under Chriflianity, the Creation and Redemption by Chrift. Which Mercies, without such frequent Occaiions, would be ready to be forgotten, or difregarded, in so Jong a Tradt of Time, as the World harh already Hood, and may, by God's Mercy still Hand.

Secondly^ To keep up a fbiritual Temper of Mind, by those frequent weekly Exercifcs of Religion, as hath been already mcntion'd.

Thirdly^ To procure GOD's BlcHing upon the Labours and business of our fix Days, which we can never expc6l should be profperous, if we are nc^ gligent of GOD's Time. For how can wp expea GOD's Blefling upon a Week so ill begun, with a Negled, or Abufe of GOD's firrt Day? And therefore if we become unprofperous in the World) if Loflcs, Troubles or Dangers befall us, let us reflcd how we have fpcnt the Lord's Day j whether we have not wholly neglected it, or abufed it in Riot, or made it a Day for taking Jour.' neys, for more private business, and Ids fcancjalous Labour, as the Cuilom of too many is.

r f 4 Thuj

440 Lord'sDay how to be celebrated. Book XI.

Thus having shewn what reason there is to remember to keep holy the Day dedicated to GOD, I shall consider how we are to keep it holy, and so conclude. Now the Way to keep it holy, is not by bare refting from Work j for that, as a Father faith, is Sabbatum Bourn (^ Afmorum^ a Sabbath of Beajls : But holy Afts are the proper business for a holy Day, celebrated by rational Beings. Among all which, the grand, principal, and most- univerfally praelis'd, is the Publick IVorfiip of GOD, the aflembling at the publick Place of his Worfhip, to pay (with our Fellow- Creatures) our Homages, Thanks, and Praifes to the infinite Creator and Redeemer of the World. This as it is the most reafonable Service, and proper business for this Day, so is what hath been the Praftice of all Ages. It was as early as Cain and Abel's Days, Gen. iv. 3. what was pra6lis'd by religious Perfons in the following Ages, till the giving of the Law} and at the giving of that, God was pleas'd to order Places, and his particular VVorfiiip, as well as the feventh Day. The Tabernacle and Temple were appointed by God's express Command j befides which, there were Synagogues all over the Nation ; so that in our Saviour's Time, every great Town or Village had one, or more in it, and 'jerufalem 460, or more {c).

The Worfhip of thele Places, our blefied SA- VIOUR was a constant and diligent frequenter of. 'Tis said, He 'went about all the Cities and Villages^ 'Teaching in their Synagogues^ and Preaching, and Healing, 6cc. Mat. ix. ^f^ And St. Luke reporteth it as his conflant Cuftom or Pradice, Luke iv. 16. And as his Ciiflom was, he lijent into the Syna* gogue on the Sabbath- Day.

(c) Vid. Lightfoot's Works, Vol: a, p. 35. and 646.

Having

Chap.VI. TublkkJVorJhipnot indifferent. 441

Having thus mcntion'U tlie Prr<61icc of CHRIST, it is not ncccniiry 1 flioulii say much of the Pra* 6lice of his Jpojlles^ and the following purer Ages of Chriftianity, who, in llioit, as their Duty was, dili<2,cntly follow'd their great Mallei's Example. 1'hcy did not tbrnk it enough to read and pray., and praise God at Home, but 'made Confcieuce of appeariiig in the publick AJfemhlies, from which nothing hut Sicknefs and abfolute necessity did detain them 5 and if Sick, or in Prifon, or under Banifiment, nothing troubled them more, than that they could not come to Church, and joyn their Dcjotions to the common Ser- "vices. If Perjecntion at any Time forc'd them to keep a little close j yet no fooncr was there the leajl Alitigation, but they prefently return d to their open Duty, and publickly met all together. No trivial Pretences, no light Excufes were then admitted for any ones Abfence from the Congregation, but according to the A^erkof the Cauje, fever e Cenfures were pass'd upon them, 6vc. to express it in the Words of one of our bell Antiquaries (<r/).

The publick IVorfnp of GOD then, is not a Matter of Indifference, which Men have in their own Power to do, or omit as they pleafej neither is it enough to read, pray, or praise God at Home, (unless ibme inevitable necessity hindereth j) bc» caufc the appearing in GOD's house, on his Day, is an A6t ot Homage and Fealty, due to the CRE- ATOR, a Right of Sovereignty we pay him. And the with-holdmg those Rights and Dues from GOD, is a kind of rejecting GOD, a difowning his Sovereignty, and a withdrawing our Obedience and Service. And this was the very reason why [he Profanation of the Sabbath was punilh'd with Death among the Jews, the Sabbath being a

{d) Dr. r-vc'i Pr;> Qhrljl. Pir. i. c. 7.

Sign,

442' TrofanationoftheSahbathy^c. Book XI.

Sign, or Badge of the GOD they own'd and worfhipp'd. {e) Thus Exod. xxxi. 15. My Sabbaths ye jhall keep j for it is a SIGN between me and you^ throughout your Generations ; that ye may know that I am the LORD^ that doth fanBify you j or as the Original may be render'd, a Sign to acknowledge^ that I Jehovah am your SanSiifier^ or your God : For as our learned Mede observes, to be the San5lifier of a People^ and to be their God, is all one. So likewife very expreflly in Ezek. xx. 20. Hallow my Sabbaths^ and they Jhall be a Sign be"

(e) At this Day it is cuflomary for Servants to wear the Livery of their Mailers, and others to bear Badges of their Order, Profeffion, Servility, c/c So in former Ages, and divers Countries, it was ulual to bear Badges, Mark? and Signs on divers Occafions. In ETLek. ix. 4. A Murk was to be set on the Forehead of those that lamented the Abofninathns of the City. The like was to be lonatupon them in Rev. vii. 3, and ix. 4. So the WorfliipperFof the beast, Rev. xiii. 16. were to receive a x'^^Vf^'^f -^ Mark in their right Hind, on their Foreheads. Thole pt^a^ay/K.*?*, 1><p^yihi;, Badges, &c. were very common. Soldiers and Slaves bare them in their Arms or Foreheads; such as were matriculated in the Heterix, or Companies, bare the Badge or Mark of their Company; and whoever lifted himself into the Society of any of the several Gods, received a ;t«g^7^of, or a Mark in his Body, (commonly made with red-hot Needles, or some burning in the Flefli,) of the God he had lifted himself under. And after Chriftianity was planted, the Chriftians had alfo their Sign of the Crofs. And not only Marks in their Flefii, Badges on their Cloaths, o'c. were qfual; but alfo the Dedication of Days to their imaginary Deities. Not to speak of their Feftivals, crc. the Days of the Week were all dedicated to some of their Deities. Among the Romans, Sunday and Monday, to the Sun and Moon; Tuefday to Mars, Wednefday to Mercury, &c. So our Saxon Anceftors did the same ; Sunday and Monday, (as the Romans did,) to the Sun and Moon; Tuefday to Tuyfco; Wednefday to Woden ; Thurfday to Thor ; Friday to Friga ; and Saturday to Seater : An Account of which Deities, with the Figures under which they were worfhipp'd, may be met with in our learned Verflegan. Chap. 3. p. 68.

tween

Chap. VI. NcceJJityofTiihVtckJVorjh'tp. 443

tiveen me and you, that ye may know that J am the LORD your GOD -, or rather as before, to ac* knowledge that I JEHOVAH am your GOD.

The Sabbath being thus a Sign, a Mark, or Badge, to acknowledge God to be their God, it follows, that a Neglcd or Contempt of that Day, redounded to GOD j to flight that, was flighting Godj to profane that, was to affront Godj for the Punifliment of which. What more equitable Penalty than Death? And although under Chriftianity, the Punifliment is not made Capital, yet have we no lels reason for the flridt Obfervance of this holy Day, than the Jews, but rather greater Rcafons. For the GOD we worfliip, is the same: If after fix Days Labour, he was, by the Seventh, own'd to be GOD, the Creator -y no less is he by our Chriftian Lord's Day: If by the Celebration of the Sabbath, the Remembrance of their Deliverance from the ./Egyptian Bondage was kep^up, and GOD acknowledged to be the Effcder thereof i we Chriftians have a greater Deliverance, wc own our Deliverance from Sin and Satan, wrought by a greater Redeemer than Mofes, even the blcfled JESUS, whofc Refurrcdion, and the Completion of our Redemption thereby, was pcrform'd on the Chriflian Lord's- Day.

And now to fum up, and conclude thefc Inferences, and so put an End to this Part of my Survey : Since it appears, that the Works of the LORD arc so great, so wifely contriv'd, so accurately made, as to deferve to be enquir'd into -, since they are alfo so manifest Demonllrations of the Creator's Being and Attributes, that all the World is fcnfible thereof, to the great Reproach of Atheifm : What remaineth ? But that we Icar and obey {o great and tremendous a Ikmg j that we be truly thankful for, and magnify and prailc

his

444 ^^^ Conclujion. 'Book XI.

his infinite Mercy, manifefted to us in his Works, And forafmuch as he hath appointed a Day on iPurpofe, from the Beginning, for these Services, that we may weekly meet together, commemorate ^nd celebrate the great Work of Creation, that isve may pay our A£ls of Devotion, Worfhip, Homage iind Fealty to him 5 and since this is a wife and excellent Diftribution of our Time, What should we do, but confcientioufly and faithfully pay GOD these his Rights and Dues ? And as carefully and diligently manage GOD's Time and Difcharge his Buimefs then, as we do our own Upon our fix Days 5 particularly that with the pious Pfalmiji^ IVe love the Habitation of God's house^ and the Place where his Honour dwelleth -, and therefore take up his good Refolution in Pfal. V. 7. with which I shall conclude > But as for me^ J will come into thine house in the Multitude of thy Mercy ^ and in thy Fear will I worfjjip towards thy holy Temple.

Now to the same infinite GOD, the omnipotent Creator and Preferver of the W^orld, the most gracious Redeemer, Sandtifier, and Infpirer of Mankind, be all Honour, praise and Thanks, now and ever. Amen.

H

F.W.jJ

m^Si^^M^

Principal Matters contained in this" BOOK.

A' Pages

ABHinence unufual ii r Age of Man in all Ages or the World lyz

Aged Perfons 173

Ages of Learning and Ignorance 172. Air 4 —^Innate lii — necessary to Vegetable- Life 9 — VelTels in Vegetables 406 — Bladder of Fiflres 401 •^Pump, Experiments in it 5 — Ule in enlightning the

World Tz

—Heat under the Line, and in Lat. 81. 13

Alee and Machlis 317

Aloe Americana 410

Amphibious Oeatures 157 Anatomy comparative 3r8 Anger 307

Animals in general 84

— In Particular iCo

— Places dellroy'd by vile

ones 56

Animalcules of the Waters

186 J87 401 — In Pepper- Water 368

Ant 111 37 1

Antipathy 135

Aqueous Humour of the Rye repair'd ic6

Aiabians 17^

Archytas's Dove ij6 176

Art and Nature compar'd

Page 4z6 Armature of Animals 23S Arteries '301

Arts, by whom invented 17<5 Afcent of Liquors. ji

Afckpiades 160 190 430

Afpera Arteria in Birds 341 Afs free from Lice 377

Atniofphcre 4

Attratftion 31 40 5^

Auditory Nerves riS

Augullus Gaefar's Height io<> Augullus King of Poland igt Aurtrian- Wells, how made ^6

B

BAck-bone k^o

Badges, their Antiquity

Balance of Animals Balls on Vegetables Bat Beaver Bees Beetles Bcjuco-Tree Bembsbury-Camp Birch-Tree

^34387 S3i<J

231 240

3<^3

Birds

—Bills

— Boyancy

— lu^

— Incubation

4^3

34.4 34t>' IM 342 35i

— A wonderful Inll in (51 of one

6 -M-;a-

The TABLE.

—Migration Page 347

—Motion 164

—Necks and Legs 165 34^ •—Rapacious is<5

—Stomachs 34f

Births, Burials, &c. 174

Blood, its Contrivance

20I 32.9 Blood-Hound 104

Bluftiing, how caufed 307 Bohaques iii

Bonafus ^4'^

Bones ftrudure, &c.

159 Z94 300 Brachmans 169

Brain 319

Branches of Vegetables 418 Bread i8j

Breafts ^SS

Breath ftiort on high Mountains 6 Bredon-hill 64 Breezes, Sea and Land 18 19 Briar-Balls 39° Brutes out-do Man in some Things 80 85 Bulbous Plants 4" Butterflies Colours 365 —White ones 37° 37^ C

CAbbage Excrefcences 249 Cadews 234

Camel 314

Canales Semicirculares l^^ Capillary Plants have Seed

Cardamine 414

Carotid Arteries 311

Carps 7

Cartes vindicated 271

Caffada Plant 58

Cafes on Willow and other Vegetables 387

Caftor 198 316

Caterpillars 241 39J

Caves bellowing 130

— Goutiers and others 64 67 Celandine 42-0

z

Camaeleon Pages 91 240 Chance 189 194 313 435 Cheep's Height 290

Chickens 210

Children numerous 178

China 279

Chyle 200

Circulation of the Blood reftor'd 145

Clafpers 419

Clocks Variation under the

iSquinodlial 39

Clock-work, its Invention

17J Cloathing of Animals 214 Clouds 20 49 74

Cold, how provided against in the northern Regions 217 Colours felt 143

Colymbi 3^5

Combs of Bees, &c. 232 Coneys 229

Confent of Parts, whence 305 Cormorants Eye 104

Cortex Peruvianus 421

Countenance, whence its variation arifes 308 Cranes 208 Cricket • 365 —Mole 2.33»3^J Crocodile 238 243 Crofs-Bill 193 Crow 307 Cryftalline Humour 104 Cuntur of Peru 169 Cup of a Pepper-Corn 367 D

DAndelion 412

Dangerous Things not eafily discover'd 266

Daniel 270

Day and Night 45

Days of the Week 436

Dead Perfons found in the

same posture as alive 24 Deaf Perfons cured by a Fever 304 — understand by the Motion of

The T A B L E.

of the Lips Page 1 1 3

—Hear by ihc Help ot a Noilc

Death-Watch 59

Deer, Worms in their Heads

Degree, its Meafurc 43

Defcent of heavy Bodies 31 Dellru(flion of Places by vile

Animals SS

Dialecfts 309

Diamonds grow 64

Diaftole of the Heart 147 Digel^ion 189

Difeafes fometimes ufeful 304 Diftribution of the Earth and

Waters is well 47

Dittany 410

Divers 131

Dog-Fidi ZC9

Dogs 197, 204

Dolphin 238

Douckers 355

Drebell's fubmarinc Ship 5 Drink afforded by Plants 422 Dromedary 199, 324

Drowned Perfons reviving

Ducklings naturally run to the Wntx 168, 18S

Ducks Bills 193,205

Dugs 255

Dung a guard to Animals 242 E.

EAgle 206,230,347

—Wooden one of Regiomontanui 276,356

Ear, outer in divers Animals 115, 117 — inward 120

—in the Womb 120

— Confent with other Parts

— EfFedsof its Lofs u8 — Mulclcs 119

— Wax II r

Earth-worm 223,393,399 Earwig 3<i.:

Eds tggs — Cicatnciiia and

Pjge 20}

35« Trcddics

— Of Inferts well laid up 38*

— due Number laid 251 Egypt famed for Art 269 Elephant 256,316, 323 Elcphantiafis 398 Queen /:/;~di#//»'$ Height 290 Elk 316 Elm Leaves, a Scarab bred

, therein

l^phcmeron

Epicurus

Erea Vifion

Evaporations

— howcaufed

Excellence of God's

182,234, 247

160, 19.0

III

Works

lOf

X06

Eye

— of Birds and Fifiics

— Monocular

— Shining or Feline

— Wounds of it cured Eyc-hds, Struaure,c;'c.

F.

FAce 308, 309

Farcy cured 58

Fearful Animals couragious when they haveYoung 208,

Feathers 221,334,336

Feeding the Young 255

Feeling 141

Fern-feed 410,414

Feet 163,206,233,338

Figure of Man's Body 288 Fingers 183

Fiflies Agreement with Birds, 103, 341,402

——Boyancy whence -^Lowfy —Motion, erf.

Teeth

Flowers Fleih-FIy, cT-f. FJy of Iron

40}

»48

Flying

The TABLE.

Flying Page 338

— Of Man 2.67 337

Fostus, Blood's Circulation in it 153

Folding of Leaves and Flowers 407 Food of Animals 179,254 Fool, Obfervables in one opened 329 Foot 285,316 Foraraen Ovale 154, 157, 326 Foffiks 63 Fouritains where found 65 — brigine 23,25,51,75 Fox . 204 Froedlicius's observations on Mount Carpathus 131 Frogs I 63 > 3^5

'Rain ^4S

The great Froft 218

Frniits, where Infe<fts hatch 3 7 5 , ——communicate with the Root 405^

Fuci, Fungi, Cfc and their Seed 414

G.

GAlens Arguments against Chance 26,428,430 — his Hymns to God 425, 434 Galli Sylveftres 212,229 Galls 388

Gafcoigne Knight 134

Gems, and Stories

— of Vegetables

Generation

— — j5iquivocal

-^ — Of Infeds

Grenius of Man

Giants.

Gifts of Man are

of them

244, 145

244, 380

of God 263, 268 —r- to be improved 281 Gill's of Fifties 401

Gizzard 199, 345

Giama 242

Glands 196

Glaffes broken with the Voice

Glaucus 209

Gnat 191, 367

Generation 375? 383

Goat tame and wild 3 r 7

Graftioppers 363

Gratitude from Seneca 432 Gravity 31

Green, Anne, revived after being hanged 156

Green Scum on the Waters

Grotta delli Serpi 398

Grottos 67

— Podpetfchio 68

Growth of Grain fpeedy in the frigid Zone 184

Gryllctalpa 233, 365

Guira Tangeima 232

Gullet 196

Guns heard afar off 133

— Shot, its Velocity 28

Guts 200

Gymnofophills 269

H

HAbitatioiis of Animals

Hair 220

Hapd 282 298

— Writing 308

Hanged Perfons reviving 146 Hang-Neft 232

Hare 242

Hawks 206

Head of Birds 340

Headlefs People 89

Hearing 113

— How perform'd 124 342 Heart 298 325

— Of the Lamprey 300

— Situation in Quadrupeds

3^^

Heat Subterraneous 49

— Of the torrid Zone 17 50

— Of our Bodies 17

—And Cold not Effects, but

causes of the Variations

of the Winds ij

Heavy Bodies defcent 31

Hedge-

The T A B L E.

Hedge-hog 139

Hemlock 58

Heron 256, 347

Hills run Eatt and Weft 74 Hollanders faw the Sun fooncr than ordinary near the Pole 13

Homer afcribes Men's Endowments to God 163 Honeywood Mrs. Mary 175 Hop-ltrngs Ufe visible Horizon Hornets ipij

horse-Fly Hurtful Creatures few

Hyaena Hydrocanthari I.

J

40 s

^57

170,

3^3

Aws

Ichneumon-Fly 575, 379, 385,388

Wafp 37i>384. 38s

Henry Jenkins Age 173

Ignorant Ages 271

Impofthume unufually difcharged 30Z

Incubation 253, 351

Inclinations of Men 263 Incus Auris 123

Infant's Eat in the Womb 120 Inferiour Creatures cared for 58,213, 2j8 Infers 359

*—— Antenna 361,362

•— - Care of their Young 207, 129,373 *'■ 'Conveyance from Place

to Place fmgular 364

■ '■ Cornea and Eyes 359

— ■ Male and Female how

known 363

— Mouth 189,193,233 * ■' - Nidification 383 ' Poiles 366 — — Sagacity 369 r— Shape 359

Inftindl 203,114,119,231

Intercoftal Mufclcs 151

Nerves 318, 330

Invention 265

of the AnciciUs 276

Job 269

Joints 161

Iron in the Foreft of Dean 63 Iflands, why warmer than the Continents 49

IflTue numerous 178

July 396

Ivy 418

K.

Klfling, whence it affecfts

Knives, o'c. fwallowcd and difcharged 301

L.

LAbyrinthofiheEar 127 Ladeals 200

Lakes 2r7

Larynx 148

Laughter, howcaufed 306 Learned Men 273

Ages 272

Leaves of Vegetables 250 ■ InfeAs bred in them

250, 376 io6, 298,316,338

3S

S

Legs

Levity

Lice

Life in Vacuo

in compreflfed Air

iti Length

Caufcof long Life

— — Proportion to Death 176 Light 12,26

—— its Velocity 28,29

Expanfion and Extent 30

l^ikeneis of Men 308

Lion's Bones 318

Liilning, what it doth ia6 Lord's- Day ^-j^e

Why Capital among the

Jews to prophanc it 443

Lungs i4s, r^o

C g sun

The T A B L E.

Full of Duft

of Birds

Luxury

M

A TAggots in Sheeps IVJL fes, Cows Back,

No-

Magnet

Magnus Orbis

Males and Females Proportions

Malleus auris, by whom discovered

Man

X70

Whether all Things

made

Mulcles 158,194,198

——Equilibrations oi those

of the Eye 96

■ Triangular 153

Mulick, by whom invented

EfFeSs 134

MuftardSeed 411

for him Mandevilhy Sir J&hn Manfor Marfh-Trefoil Marriagcs> Births and

als Mafti cation

Medicine 57

— — Local Memory Metallick Trades,

invented Mice 212

Migration of Birds Milk Minerals and Metak

8,9i.i99»^05

N

Buri-

. 4^0

by whom

_220

grow

u6

Mifleltoe Mole

Ear

Money

Moths Colours

Motion of Animals

— of the Terraqueous Globe

Motory-Nerves of the Eye

Mountains and Valleys 70 — — Their Riches and Poverty 75 Mouth 189 —— Whence affedled by the Sight 307

N.

Eck of beasts Nerves in Birds

Man

m

Different

beasts Fifth Pair

Water-Newt Nidicating Membrane Nidificaiion Nidiots or Niditts Nodurnal Animals Eyes

Bills

,344 and

3^8,330

Northern Nations , fpeedy Growth of Vegetables there

— — Proviiions against their Cold 217

Noftrils 137

Noxious Creatures 56,82,

— — Remedies against them

Nutmegs 416

O. ^Ak-Apples and Galls 38J Objetfts, how painted on the Retina iir

Obfervatory at Pekin in China 279 Odours J37 Old Perfons 172 Opium 421 Opoffum 206,208 Original of Nations and Arts

Orkney Ifiands 218 Os Orbicularc, by whom dif^ covered 124

Oftrich

o

The T A B L E.

Ollrich Pages ZS9 353 354 Ottclc's Age aad Beard 1 7 3 Otter 316

Oyl-Bag 334

P.

PArrots 19^ y^thiopian zo8

ParVagum 3^8

PafTions and AfFedions 330 PcdinatedWork in Birds Eyes

Pedoral muscles 337

Pendulums Variation under the Line 39

Pericardium in Man andBeafts 185,317 Perpetual Motion 267

Perlpiration inlenfible 119 Phaeton in a Ring 367

Phalaenae, Generation of some of them zij, 376

Pharmacy 57

Phryganeae 234

Pigeons Incubation 253

Pimpernel Flowers 412.

Place of Animals 166

Plague, its cause 16

Prevented or cured by

the Winds ibid.

- Sore difcharged unufually 302

Planets Motion round their

Axes 33

Figure 39

Plants, no Tranfmutation of

them 409

■ Poyfonous 58

Plexus Cervicalis 318

Plumb-Stones, the Danger of

fwallowmg them 301

Polling of the Body 18 1

Polygamy unnatural 175

posture of Man i8i

Poyfon 397

Preening and Drcffing of

Birds 334

Printing, its Invention

^1S ^78

Pronunciation Pages 309 Propagation of Mankind 174 Providence divine, Objciflions against it answer'd 55 Pulices Aquatici 186

Pumps, cause why Water rifeth in them ii

Pupil of the Eye 99 100 Pythagoras 169

Q

Quadrupeds 31 j

Quail Migration and iucngth 350

R

RAin, how made ro • —Its Ufe ibid

— most about the ^Equinoxes

IX,

— More in the Hills than

Vales 78

— Bloody, and other preternatural 13 Z45 — Of divers Places 13 79 Rapacious Birds 339 Rattles, Inventions of them Z76 Rattle-Snake 57 39<5 Rats 108 zzo Raven 183 Z05 Refracflions 13 Z84 The Reformation Z78 Reptiles 393 respiration 145 —Of watery Animals 7 — ill Vegetables 406 — In comprelTed Air 5 — In rarify'd Air- 6 — Ufes 145 Rete mirabilc 3zz Ribs ijz 161 Rivers Origin 75 — Changing the Hair zz4 -—Long Tradl of some 51 Rotten-Wood, its ufc to the northern People 405 Royal Society vindicated 4x6 Rumination 100 3Z4

G 6 1

RuHies,

The T A B L E.

Ruftics, Animals bred in tjiem Page 349 S

SAgacity of Animals about Food 202.

Salamander 241

Saltnefs of the Sea 400

Skeleton of Sexes different

I (jo Scolopendra 396

Sea-Calf ^S7 3^S

Sea-Pie 193

Secretion 300

Security of the Body against

Evils ibid

Seed of Vegetables 437, &c. Self-Prefervation 238

Semination 412

The five Senfes 85

Senfitive Plants 412

Serpents 394

Shark 57 143

Shells 239

Sight, its Accuracy in some

— Acuated by Difeafe 304 —Why not double with two Eyes 94

Silk-Worms 385

Skin 299

Sky, why azure 12

Sleep procur'd 58

—Prejudicial after Sun-rifing

Smellen Cave 130

SmeHing 137 204

Smoak emitted through the

Ears 123

Snails 91 no 395 399

Snakes 394

Snipes 192

Snow, its Ufe 24

Soils and Mould? 61

Sound in Air rarify'd and

condcns'd 130

—In Italy, and other Places

r-On the Tops of high

Mountains Page 131 —Velocity 28 133

Soul 261

Speaking-Trumpet 129

Specifick Medicines 422

Spiders Eyes 90

— Darting their Webs 364 — Textrine Art 235 384 — Poyfon 236

Spinning, by whom invented

Springs Origine 23 51 76 — Where found ^S 11

Squaring the Circle 266

Squatina 209

Squillulse Aquaticae 190 364 Squunk or Stonk 242

Staladites "64

Stapes Auris, by whom found out 123

Stature, Size, and Shape of Man 288 290

Sting of Bees, Sec. 240

Stoicks Arguments for a Deity in Tully 2 37 44 54 99 108 rzo 137 144 159 167 177 180 182 203 207 220 241 264 282 297 298 Stomach 197 324

— Of Birds 345

— Animals found in it 379 Stones eaten by Worms

192 247 Storm in 1703 245^

Strata of the Earth 63

Straw-Worms 234

Strong Men 291

Subterraneous Trees, &c. i r Sucking 209 25J

Summer if cold, why wet 22 Sun's distance from the

Earth 29 30

— Motion round its own

Axis 33

— Standing still, &c. 44 45 Swallows and Swifts 339 349 Swans Afpera Arteria 341 Swine, 205 212 254 319

Sword-

The T A B L E.

Sword-Fiflies Eye icj

Sycophantick-l'lants 415

Syraculian Sot 351

T

TAbon or Tapun Bird 3S3 Tadpole 163

Tail* of Birds 337

Tarantula's Bite 13s

Taftc 14^

—Cenfent with the Smell 141 Tears 108 307

Teeth 193

Tdefcopes, Invention of

them Z7 5

— Long ones 39

Tents, their Inventer 266 Terraqueous Globe balanced

—Bulk and Motions 43

»— Figure 39

—Situation and Diftribution

•— Objecflions against its Strudure answer'd 47 70 80 — cause of Its Sphaericity 40 Thankfulnels to God from

Seneca 54 81 216 433

Thirties ufeful in making

Glafs 405

Thornback loi

Tides 400

Tong-tail'd Titmou'"c 231 Tongue 149 295

—Its Lofs 149

Tortoife 158 211 224239 325 Trades, Inventors of them,

&c. 266

Tranfmutation of Plants 409 Trees delight in various Soils 6r —how nouriflied ibid

Tronningholm Gardiner ijf Tuba F.ultachian^ 122

The hot Tuefday 17

Tunicks of the Eye, why

lin'd with black 96

Turnep Excrefccnces 249

Tympsnum of the Ear

Page 123 V

V Alleys and Mountains 73 Vapours what, and how rais'd 20 48

—Quantity rais'd 35

—How precipitated 22

Variety of I'hings for the

World's Ufe 5 3 181 404420 Vegetables 404

Vegetation 61

Veins 298

Ventriloquous Perfons 149 Vertue, its great Ufe and

Benefit 83

Veficulae of the Lungs whether mufculous ijr Velpae-Ichneumons 228 363 371 38s V)pers 394 397 — Cloathing 224 Vifcera 298 Vifion double 95 — Erecft lie Unilons 13^ Voice 308 Volcano's <58 Upminftcr Regifter 174 —how much above the Sea 51 Ufeful Creatures moll plentiful 169 —Things fooneft discover'd 1(56 W

WAnderingJew 173 Wafps Nidification

191 233 M7 3% Waters 400

—Forcible Eruptions of them

Waterwirh of Jamaica 423 Weather heavy and dark 20 — Prefages of it 50412

Wells how dug in Aurtria,

W'hales 401

Wheal 181

T!-R.ainino:

The T A B L E.

—Raining it Page 144

Whifpering-Places 119

Wild- Pine 4Zi

Dr. Willis's Reprefentation of respiration 145

Winds 14

—Healthful 15 16

—The Author's observations

^-Trade-Winds 41

—The Produdt, not cause of

Heat and Cold 15

Wind-Pipe in divers Animals

Wings of Birds 335

—Of Infeds 365

Winter, the Prefervation of

Aninoals therein tii

wisdom, where feated 319 Wood 2,Z7

Woodcocks 191 20J

Wood-Peckers 193 339 342.

Works of Nature and Art

compar'd Pages 38 367 World visible and invifible

— Beginning afferted by Ariflotle 177

—Kept clean 183

Worms in the Flefli 378 —In the Guts 380

— In other Parts ibid

Wornils 378

Worfliip ,of God 441

Wry- Neck 2x5 i^z

Y

YOlk of the Egg its Ufe

Young taken Care of 207 —In a certain Number

168 t^z Z 'TF Irchnitzer Sea 68

FINIS.

V^OOl^S printed for W I lli am and John Innys.

MR. Derham's Aftro-Theology : Or, A DcmonHration of the Being and Attributes of God, from a Suivey of the Heavens, illuthated with Copper-Plates. The Third Edition, Odavo, 17 19.

The wisdom of God manifeftcd in the Works of the Creation. In Two Parts, viz. The Heavenly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, Follils, Vegetables, Animals, beasts, Birds, Fifties, and Infers) more particularly in the Body of the Earth, its Figure, Motion andConfiftency in the admirable Strudure of the Bodies of Man, and other Animals ; as alfo in their Generation, &c. With answers to some Objecftions. By John Ray, late Fellow of the Royal Society. The Seventh Edition, Od:ivo, 1717.

Three Phyfico-Theological Difcourfes, concerning,

I. The Primitive Chaos, and Creation of the World. II. The general Deluge, its causes and EfFeds. HI. The Diflulution of the World, and future Conflagration. Wherein are largely difcuffed the Production and Ufe of Mountains ; the Original of Fountains, of formed Stones, and Sea Fifties Bones and Shells found in the Earth ; the EfFeds of particular Floods, and Inundations of the Sei, the Eruptions of Vulcano's; the Nature and causes of Earthquakes. Alfo an Hiftorical Account of those two Lite remarkable ones in Jamaica and England. With Pra<51ical Inferences. The Third Edition. lUuftrated with Copper-Plarcs, and much more enlarged than the former Editions, from the Author's own Manufcripts, Odlavo, 17 13.

Philofophical Letters between the late learned Mr. Ray, and several of his ingenious Correfpondents, Natives and Foreigners. To which are added those of Francis Willuphby, Efq; the whole conJifting of many curious Difcovcries and Improvements in the Hiftory of Quadrupeds, Birds Fifties, Infeas, Plants, Fofliles, Fountains, &c. Pubhihed by the Reverend Mr. Derham, Odtavo. 17 18.

Perfualive to a Holy Life, from the Happinefs which attends it both in this World, and in the World to come.

Synopfis Methodica Avium & Pifcium, opus poflhumum quod vivus recenfuit & pcrfecit iple inligmnimus Au:hor; in quo, multas species, in iplius Ornithologia 6c Ichthyologii defideratas, adjecit, Methodumque (uam Fiicium naturse majgisconvenientcm reddit. Cum Appendices Iconibus. Edente W. Derham. 0<ffavo, 1713.

Philofophical Tranfadfions, giving some Account of tho present l^ndertakings, Studies and Labours of the in<'eni-

^ ous

Books printed for W. aud J. I n n y s.

ous, in many confukrable Parts cf World. Continued and pnblifKed by Edm. Hailey, J. V. D. Savillian Profeflbr of Geom. Oxon. and Reg. Soc. Seer. Quarto. Where may be had complet Seats, or fmgle Numbers.

Opticks: Or, A Treatife of the Reflexions, Refradions, Inflexions and Colours of Light. By Sir Ifaac Newton, Knt. The Second Edition, with Additions, Odtavo, 17 17.

A Treatife of Algebra, in Two Books : The first treating of the Arithmetical, and the fecond of the Geometrieal Part. By Philip Ronayne, Gent. Odavo, 1717.

The Lives of the French, Italian, and German Philofophers, late Members of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Paris. Together with Abftrads of the choiceft Pieces communicated by them to that illufttious Society. To which is added the Preface of the ingenious Monfieur Fontenelle, Secretary and Author of the Hiftory of the said Academy, GXavo, 1717.

Dr. Robert Hooke's pofthumous Works, in which the present Deficiency of Natural Philofophy is difcourfed of ; with the Methods of rendring it more certain and beneficial, &c. Publifh'd by Richard Waller, Efq; Folio.

Botanick Effays in Two Parts. The first containing, The Strufture of the Flowers, and the Frudification of Plants, with their various Diftributions into Method. And the fecond, the Generation of Plants, with their Sexes, and Manner of impregnating the Seed: Alfo, concerning the Animalcula in Semine Mafculino. Together with the Nouriftiment of Plants, and Circulation of the Sap in all Seafons, analogous to that of the Blood in Animals, with many curious Remarks, and several Difcoveries and Improvements, adorned with Figures. By Patrick Blair, M, D. Fellow of the Royal Society, Odavo, nzo.

Mr. Martin's Diicourfeof Natural Religion, Odavo, 1710. His Differtation on the 7^*^ Verle of the 5*^'^ Chapter of St. Johns first Epiftle, There are three that bare Record in Heaven y^c. Odavo, 1719-

His Defence of the Teftimony given to our Saviour by Jofephus, Odavo, 1719.

■ His Examination of Mr. Emlyn's answer to his

Differtation on St. John, &c. Odavo, 17:9.

Dr. Sennet's discourse on the Trinity, Odavo, 17 18.

... His Diredions for ftudying Divinity, Odavo, 17 19^ — discourse of Schifm, Odavo, 17 18.

Pious Thoughts, by the late Archbilhop of Cambray, Odavo, 1719.

Mr. Bragg's pradical observations on the Parables and Miracles of ourblefTed Saviour. Four Volumes, Odavo, 17 19.

■ I DATE DUE

■^^

■

^^f^e^^^

un J

/" \

^

y^

■"■**

iiiii_niiniiim

•'^ »»>•». «- ,

^*^

» *- n

^^

Ia*^

7-.

V/

4^x

^

^^ ^.Z*'*;;-/ ^/?5<^ ^..6««>i: ^n^r^f/c^J