VIZ.

The heavenly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, FoffiJs, Vegetables, Animals, (beasts, Birds, Fiflies, and insects) more particularly in the Body of the Ea^rth, its Figure, Motion, and Confiftency \ and in the admirable Stru(51:L!re of the Bodies of Man and other Animals: as alfo in their Generation, l^c. With answers to some Obje61:ions. '*

s/J</Upu^ C^/l Jc/Uxy^

By JOHN RAT, late Fellow of the

The Tenth Edition, Correc^ted.

L o N D o .N'J'^drK:^. i^

Printed by Wi L L i a m I n nys and Richard M a n b y, Printers to the Royal Society y at the Wefl-End of St. Paurs

M Dec XXXV.

'•■'•^^v:*

T O T H E Much honoured and truly religious

LAD Y,

THE

Lady Lettice Wendy,

o F

Wendy in Cambridgepire.

Madam,

WO or three reasons induce me to present this discourse to your Lady- {hip, and to make choice of you for its Patronefs. . Firji, because I owe it to the Liberality of your honoured' Bcother that I have this Leifure to write any thing. Secoitdly\ because alfo your many and fignal Favours, feeing I am not in a Capacity to requite them, seem to exaft from me at least a

A 2 jpublick

T^he Epijile Dedicatory. .- publick Acknowledgment, which such a Dedication gives me an Opportunity to make. Thirdly^ because of such kind of Writings I know not where to chufe a more able Judge or more can-; did Reader. I am sensible that you do so much abhor any thing that looks like Flattery, tha out of an Excefs of Modefty, you cannot pat ently bear the hearing of your own juft Commendations J and therefore (hould I enlarge upon that Subjed:,, Linow I ffcould have but little Thanks for my Pains. '

Indeed you have much better Motives to do well than the praise of Men, the Favour of God, Peace of Confcience, the Hope and Expectation of a future Reward oi eternal Happi7iej5', znd therefore I had rather write of you to others, to provoke them to imitate so excellent an Example, than to your self, to encourage you in your Chriftian course^ and to fortify you in your athletick Conflids with the greatest of temporal Evils, bodily Pain and Anguifhj tho' I do not know why you should rejed: any consideration that may conduce to fupport you under so heavy Preffures, and of so long Continuance ; of whictv to ingenious Nature?, true. HQnour,, that is, the current Teftimony and Approbation of good Men, is not the meaneft'. No less Man than St. Augujlin was doubtful whether the E^xtremity of bodily Pain were not the greatest > Evil that human Nature was capable of fuffei'ing 5 Nay (faith "he) / was Jbmetimes compelVd to'honjhit to C'ornelius Cdfus, /to 7^ %\as:Jo\ neither did hi% % - K- Jleajom

T'he Epijik Dedicatory.

reasons seem to me absurd^ we being compounded of two Parts, Soul and Body, of which the frji is the better, the latter the worfer -, the great est Good 7nuft be the best thing belonging to the better Fart, that is^ wisdom 'y and the great est Evil the worft thi?ig i?2cident to the worfer Part (the Body) that is^ Pain. Now, tho' I know not whether tliis reason be firm and conclufive, yet I am of accord with ^im, that of all the Evils we are sensible of in this World it is the foreft, the most refolute Patience being baffled and proftrated by a fierce and lafting Paroxyfm of the Gout, or Stone, or Cholick, and compeird to yield to its furious Infults, and confefs itself vanquifh'd, the Soul being unable to divert, or to do any thing elfe but pore upon the Pain j and therefore those Stoical Vaunts of their wife Man's being happy mPhalaris^ Bull, I utterly rejecSt and explode, as vain Rhodomontades and chimerical Figments, for that there never was such a wife Man among them, or indeed could be ; yet do I not say that the Patience of a good Man can be so far conquered by the fliarpeft and fevereft Torments as to be compell'd to deny or blafpheme God or his Religion^ yea, or so much as to complain of his Injuftice; tho' perchance he may be brought with fob to curfe his Day, yet not curfe his God, as his Wife tempted him to do.

Now^that the great kydv6^Ti\^ and B^S<l/T^i^, the most juft Judge and Rewarder, would be pleased so to qualify and mitigate your Sufferings,

as

Tie Eptjlle Dedicatory.

as not to exceed the measure of your Strength and Patience^ or elfe arm you with such an high degree of Chriftian Fortitude, as to be able to grapple with the most Extreme ; and when you have finifli'd your course in this World, grant you a placid and eafy passage out of it, and dignify you as one of his Vidors, with a Crown of eternal Glory and Felicity, is the Prayer of.

MA DA My

Tour LADYSHIP'S

Mojl devoted in all Service^

iV" all Jges wherein Learning hath jioiaij},) d^ Complaint hath been made of the Itch of Writings and the MuU titude of worthlefs Books wherewith importunate Scriblers have pejlerd the World: Scribimus indoflii do-

Tenet infanabile multos fcribendi cacoethes. / ajn fenfble that this TraBate

dtique : And

may likely incur the Cenfure of a fuperfuous Piece^ and^myself the Blame of giving the Reader unnecef fary Trouble ^ there having been so much so well written of this SuhjeB by the most learned Men of our 7ime, Dr. Moore, Dr. Cud worth , Dr. Stilling- ^fleet, late Bifj/)p of Worctdtr, Dr, Parker, late of Oxen ; and, to name no more, the honourable Robert Boyle Efq-, so that it will fieedfome Apology, -. first therefore in Excufe of it 1 plead, that there are in it some Conf. derations new and untouched by others -, wherein i/-^ I be mifiaken, I alle^ge^ Secondly, That

the

The PREFACE.

the Manner of Delivery and 'Exprejjion may he more fait able tofome Mens Apprehenjion, andfacil to their TJnderJlandi7tgs, If that will not hold^ I pretejid^ Thirdly, T^hat all the Particulars contain d in this Book cannot be found in a7iy one Piece known to mCy but lie fcatterd and difpers'd in many^ and so this tnayferve to relieve those fajiidious Readers that are not willing to take the Pains to fear ch them out-, and pofjibly there may be some whose Ability (whatever their Indufiry might be) will not serve them to pur chafe ^ nor their Opportunity to borrow those Books^ who yet may fpare Money enough to buy so inconfiderable a 'Trifle. If none of these Excufes fuffice to acquit me of Blame ^ and remove all Prejudice^ I have two farther reasons to offer ^ which I think will reach home^ andju/lify this Undertaking. first, That all Men who prefume to write^ at leafi whose Writijtgs the Printers will venture to puhlifh^ are of some Note in the World -^^ and where they doy cr have livd and convers'd^ have some Sphere of Friends and Acquaintance^ that know and efieejn them^ who it is likely will buy any Book they fjall write for the Author s Sake, who otherwije would have read none of that SubjeB, tbo ten times better -, and so the Book, however inferior to what have been already publifod,' may happen to do much Good. Secondly, By Virtue of my FunBion I fufpeB my self to be obligd to write fomething in Divinity, having written so much on other SubjeBs ', for being not permitted to serve the Church with my Tongue in Preaching, I know not but it may be my Duty to serve it with my

Hand

The PREFACE.

Hand by Writing : And I have made choice of this Subject^ as thinking myjelf hejl qualify d to treat of it. If what I have now written Jh all find so fa-- vourable Acceptance as to encourage me to proceed^ God granting Life and Health the Reader may expe5l more 5 ifotherwife^ I ?7mfi be content to be laid a side as ufelefs^ and satisfy myjelf in having made this Experiment,

^ As J or this discourse^ I have been careful to ad^ mit nothing for Matter of FaB or Experime?it but what is undoubtedly true, left I Jhould build upon a fandy and ruinous Foundation ; and by the Admix^ ture of what is falfe, render that which is truefuf picious,

I might have added many more Particulars j 72ay^ my T'ext warrants me to run over all the visible Works of God in particular, and to trace the Foot-- fieps of his wisdom in the Compcfition, Order, Har^ mony, and Ufes of every one of them, as well as of those that I have feleBed, But, first, this would be a Task far trajfcendhig my Skill and Abilities ; nay, the joint Skill and Fndeavours of all Men now living, or that fjall live after a t hot f and Ages ^ foould the World laftfo long. For no Man can find . out the Work that God maketh from the Beginning to the End, Ecclef iii. 1 1. Secondly, I was willing to confult the Infirmity of the Reader, or indeed of Marikiiid in ge?ieral -, which, after a fbort Confinement to one sort of Dijh^ is apt to loath it, thd never so wholfome, and which at first was most pleafaiit ajid acceptable-, and so to moderate my Dif course, as to make an end of writing before I might prefume he ftjould be quite tird with reading,

B ^ IJhall

The PREFACE.

T fkall now add a Word or two concerning the Vfcfidnefs of the Argument^ or Matter of this Difcourjcy and the reason I had to make choice of it^ be^ Jidei "what I have already offer d,

first, T^he Belief of a Deity being the Foundation of all Religion (Religion being nothing but a devout worjljipping of God^ or an Inclination of Mind to serve and worfhip him) for he that cometh to God must believe that he is God, it is a Matter of the highejl Concernment to be firmly fettled and efiablijh'd in a full Perfiiafion of this main Point y now this mujl be demonfirated by Arguments drawn from the Light of Nature and Works of the Creation \ for as all other Sciences^ so Divinity^ proves not^ but fuppofes its SubjeBsy taking it for granted^ that by natural Light Men are fufficiently convincd of the Being of a Deity ; there are indeed fupernatural T>emonftratio7ts of this fundamental Truths but not common to all Perfons or I'imes^ and Jo liable to Cavil and 'Exception by atheijiical Perfons^ as inward . Illuminations of Mindy a Spirit of Prophecy ^ and foretelling future Contingent s^ illujtrious Miracles, and the like ^ but these Proofs^ taken from EffeBs and OperatioJiSy expos d to every Mans VieWy not to be denyd or quejtiond by any, are moji effectual to convince all that deny or doubt of it ; neither are they only conviBive of the great est and fubtleft AdverfarieSy but intelligible alfo to the meanefi Capacities y for you may hear illiterate PerfonSy cj the loweft Rank of the Commonalty y affirming^ that they need no Proof of the Being of a God, for that every Pile of Graf or Ear of Cornfufficiently proves that ; for ^ say tbey^ all the Men of the World cannot make 9 fich

The PREFACE.

such a thing as one ofthefe ; and if they cannot do it^ who can or did make it but God? To tell them that it made itself^ or fprung up by chance^ would be as ridiculous as to tell the great eji Philojbpher so.

Secondly, The Particulars of this discourse serve not only to de^nonjlrate the Being of a 'Deity ^ but alfa to illiijlrate some of his principal Attributes ; aSy namely^ his infinite Power a7id wisdom\ the vafl * Multitude of Creatures^ and those 7iot only small^ but imme?ifely greats the Sun arid Moon^ and all the hea-- 'vejily Hofi^ are EffeBs and Proofs of his Almighty Power, The Heavens declare the Glory of God^ and the Firmament iheweth his Handy-work, PfaL xix. I. The admirable Co7itrivance of all and each of them y the adapting all the Parts of Animah to their several Ufes^ the Provifion that is made for their Suftenance^ which is often taken notice of in Scripture, Pfal. cxlv. 15, 16. The Eyes of all wait upon thee: thou giveft them their meat in due season. Thou opened thy hand, and fatisfieft the deiire of every living thing. Matth. vi. 26. Behold the fowls of the air, for they fow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Pfil- cxlvii. 9. He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young Ravens when they cry. And lafily^ their ??mtual Subferviency to each others and imani?HOus confpiring to promote and carry on the Publick Good^ are e-vtde?2t Demonft rat ions cf his Sovereign IVifdom.

last!y, They few e to fiir up and increafe in us the Afi-ecl ions a?id Habits of Adtniration^ Hu?ni!ityy and Gratitude. Pfal, viii. 3. When I consider the heavens, the work of thy fin§ers> the moon

B z and

the P R E F A C E.

'And the stars which thou haft ordain'd : What U jnan that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou viliteft him ? j^nd to these Furpojh the holy Pfalmijl is njery frequent in the Enumeration and Conjideration of these Works, u^hich may warrant me doing the like^ andjuftify the denonnnating such a discourse as this rather theological than philofophicaL

\Notey That by the Works of the Creation in the Title, I mean the Works created by God at first, and by him conferv'd to this Day in the same State and Condition in which they were at first made; for Confervation (according to the Judgment both of Philofophers and Divines) is a continud Creation^

T H E

s^<

mj^

e232K332S232--S2(K;S2K2SD3aiCS2''3C'SCS0

THE Multitude of Creatures an Argument of the wisdom and Power of God, Page i8. and 26.

That the fixed Stars are innumerable, agreed on all Sides, as 'well as by such as embrace the new Hypothefis.

That there are so many Suns placed at unequal Difiances, and each having its Planets moving about it, furnifly'd with their Inhabit" tants, like the Earth ; as by those that adhere to the old, that they are all fituate in the same fpherical Superficies. p. 18, 19, 20.

A Guefs at the Number of terrejirial Bodies. 1 . Inanimate, as Stones, Earths, concrete and inconcrete Juices, Metals and Minerals. ■ 2. Animals, Birds, Beafis , Fijhes and Infers. 3. Plants, Herbs , and Trees. p- 21, 22, 23, 24.

Working the same Effect by divers Means and Infiruments, an Argument of wisdom ; and that God doth this in the Works of the Cre-* ation, proved by several Examples. . p. 25, 26, 27, 28.

That the material Works of God are wifely contrived and adapted to Ends both general and particular. p- 29, 30<

The Ariiloteljan Hypothefis , That the World was (O-eternal with God, condemned, " P- 3o> i'*

Bj

Tbi

The CONTENTS.

^he Epicurean Hypothefis, 7hat the World was made by a eafual Concurrence and Cohejton of Atoms ^ rejeBed^ 31, 32, 33. T^heir Declination of Atoms jujily deride dj and their whole Hypothefis ingenioujly confuted by Cicero. Page 34, 35, 36, 37.

^e Cartefian Hypothefis, That fuppojing God had only created Matter, divided it into a certain Number of Parts y and put it into Motion, according to afezv Laws, it would of itself have produced the World without any more ado, confuted in Dr. CudworthV Words. P- 37> &^c. to 46.

pes Cartes his AJfertion, That the Ends of God in any of his Works are equally undifcoveid by us, cenfur d and reproved.

p. 38, 39, 40, 41.

His Opinion concerning the cause of the Motion of the Heart.

p. 45, 46, 47.

^e honourable Mr. BoylcV Hypothefis confder'd, and pleaded ^« gainjl. p. 48, 49, 50.

The Author^s Miflake concerning the Hypothefis of Mr. Boyle, acknozvled^d. p- 50.

The Parts of the Body forin^d and fituated contrary to the Laws of the fpecifick Gravity. P- 5 1 ♦

\4 plajiick Nature under God, fuperintending and e feeing natural Produ5lions. p. 52, 53.

Their Opinion that hold the Souls of Brutes to be material, and the whole animal Body and Soul to be a mere Machine, not agreeable to ihe general Senfe of Mankind. p. 54, 55, 56.

Of the visible Works of God, and their Diviflon, p. $"], 58. The atomick Hypothefis approved. p. 59.

^be Works of Nature far more exquijitely formed than the Works of Art. p. 59, 60.

Hhe various Species of inanimate Bodies to be attributed to the divers Figures of their Principles, or minute component Particles, p. 60. That these Principles are naturally indivifible, proved, ibid. They are not very nufnerous. . p. 61.

Of the heavenly Bodies, p. 61. That the whole Vnlverfe is divided into two Sorts of Bodies, viz. thin and fluid, denfe and confiflent, ibid. That this laji Sort are endtCd zvith a twofold Power, i . Of Gravity. 2. Of circular Motion, and zvhy, p. 62. The heavenly Bodies 7nov''d in the mojl regular, facil, and convenient manner.

p. 63, 64.

f>f the Sun , his Ufes , and the Co?ivenience of his Situation and Motion. p. 65.

Of the Moon, and its Ufes. p. 66.

Of the rest of the Planets, and fixed Stars ; the Regularity and Conjlancy of their Motions ; zobence Cicero rationally infers, that they

are govertid by reason, p. 67.

'^clipjes

The C O N T E N T S.

Eclipfes ufeful to fettle Chronology ^ and determine Longitudes,

Page 68.

Of terreflrial inanimate fimple Bodies , as Elements , commonly fa called: i. Fire, its various Ufes i p. 69, 70. Of Air, its JJfs and necessity for breathing to all Sorts of Animals, aquatick as well as t err ef rial; nay, in a sort to Plants themselves, p. 71, 72, 73. ne Effects and Ufes of its Gravity and elaflick ^ality,

P- 72 7?

That the Foetus in the Womb hath a kind ofRefpiration, and whence it receives the Air. P- 73» 74, 75.

That the Air infinuates itself into the Water for the respiration ef Fifhes, p. 76. and even into fubterraneous Waters, whence it clears

* the Mines of Da?nps, p. 76, yj. A plafiick Nature necejfary for putting the Diaphragm and muscles for respiration into motion at

first- p. 77.

Of Water, its Ufes, p. 78, Of the Sea, and its Tides, p. 79. An ObjeBion concerning the Needlefnefs of so much Sea, of 710 Ufe to Mankind , answer d ; and the wisdom of God in thus unequally dividing Sea and Land, manifefled and ajferted, p. 80, 8 1 . The XJfe of Floods. p. 82, 83.

That the Winds bring up more Vapours from the Sea than they carry down thither. p. 84, 8 c.

That the Motion of the Water levels the Bottom of the Sea, p. 8r, The reason why the Sea Plants grow for the mofi part flat, like a Fan, and none in the great Depths. p. 86.

Of Springs and Rivers, Baths and mineral Waters. Simple Water nourifheth not. P- 87.

Of the Earth, its Ufes and Differences. ibj^,

Cy Meteors, or Bodies' imperfeStly mix'd. And, \. Of Rain, p. 88. 2. Of Wind, and its various Ufes. p, oq^

Of tnanirnate mix'd Bodies. \. Stones, their ^talities and Ufes, p.- 91 » 92» 93- Particularly of the Loadftone , its admirable Phcenomejia, Effe^s and Ufes, p. 95. 2. Metals, their various Ufes, of great bnportance to Mankind, as Iron, without which we could have had nothing of Culture or Civility ; Gold and Silver for the coining of Money, which how many ways ufeful, is fhezvn out of Dr. Cockburn'j Effays. p. ^6, 97.

That the minute component Particles of Bodies are naturally indivifible, proved. p. cj8, 99.

0/ Vegetables or Plants, their Stature and Magnitude, Figure, Shape, and Site of Leaves, Flowers, and Fruits, and their Part s; all determind, as alfo their Age and Duration, p. 100, 101. The admirable explication of the feminal Plants, p. loi , 102. The Ufes of the several Parts of Plants, Roots, Fibres, Vejels, Barks and Leaves y p. 103, 104. -The Beauty and Elegancy of the Leaves^

B 4 Flowers j^

The C O N T E N T S.

slow its, and Fruits of Plants^ p. 105. That there is fuel a thing as Beauty and Cornel inefs of Proportion, proved. Page io6.

TheUfes of Flowers, p. 107. Of Seeds ^ and their Teguments, and observations concerning them, p. 108, 109. Their lajiing Vitality or Fcecundity, p. no. The pappons Plumage of Seeds, ibid. 7'he Tendrels and Prickles of Plants, of what Ufe. p. 1 1 1 .

7bat Wheat, the beji of all Grains, is patient both of Heat and Cold, and fear ce refufeth any Climate, and that fear ce any Grain is more fruitful. p. 112.

Of the Signatures of Plants, p. 113.

Of Animals, the Provifion that is made for the Continuance of Species, p. 114. That Females have within them from the beginning the Seeds of ail the Young they pall ever bring forth, p. 1 1 5- -/in observation of Q'lctro's about multiparous Creatures, p. 116. Why Birds lay Eggs, ibid. Of zvhat Ufe the Tolk of the Egg is to the Chicken, p. 117.

Birds that cannot number, yet omit not any one of their Young in feed- ^^g (f them, p. 117. Tho' they cannot number, yet that they can diftinguif? many from fezv, proij'd, p. 118. The fpeedy Growth of the 'young Birds in the Neft, p. 119. The process of building their Nejis, and Incubation, p. 120. Feeding, breeding, and defending their Young, and the admirable STcf> w, ibid. The due nufnerical Proportion between Males and Females in all Kinds of Animals kept np conflantly, p. 121. The Conveniency of the Time of the Year ^ when the several Sorts of Animals are brought forth, p. 122. Why Birds fwallozu Pebble-Stoves, p. 1 30. The Provifion of Nature for keeping ofBirds-Nefis clean, p. 132,133. Various firange InfiinRs cf Animals, p. 125, 126, 127, &c. as, that Animals should knozu -where their natural Weapons are fituate, and how to make ufe of them I that the Weak and Timorous should be made fzvift of Foot or IVing for Flight ; that they fljould naturally know their Enemies, end such as prey upon them, tho' they had never seen them before ; that as foon as they are brought forth they should knozv their proper Food ', that Ducklings, tho' led by a Hen, so foon as they see Water should venture into it, the Hen in vain endeavouring to hinder or reclaim them ; that Birds of the same Kind should make Nefts exactly aliki, wherefoever bred, and tho^ they had never seen a Nefi made.

7he Migration of Birds from one Country to another , a f range and unaccountable Aa ion, p. 128.

Thi

The CONTENTS.

Ihe zvonderful Art ohfevjnhle in the ConflruBion^ Situation, and Ttgure of the Cells in Honcy-Combsy p. 132, 133, 134. ^hat Bees and other Animals lay up in Jlorc^ either for the Food of their Toungy or their own Winter Frovifon. Page 135.

The Frovifion that is made for the F refer-:' ation and Security of zveak and timorous Creatures, and for the diminijhing of the rapacious.

p. 136, 137, 133.

Tbe Fitnefs of the Parts of the Bodies of Animals to every one'^s Nature and manner of living y injlanc^d in. i. ne Szuine^ p. 139, &c. 2. The Mole , p. 141. 3. The Tamnndua, or Ant -Bear y p. 142. 4. The Chamselion, p. 143. 5. 77?^ whole Genus ^Wood-peckers, ijpid. 6. Swallows, p. 144. 7. Doukers or Loons, p. 145,

In Birds all the Members are fitted for the life of flying, p. 146, &o The Ufe of the Tail in Birds. p. 1 47.

^^he Bodies ofFiJhes mojl conveniently forrnd and provided for the Ufe of fzuimming y p. 150, 151. And particularly those of cetaceous FiJheSy for the respiration, and preferving their natural Heat, p 151, 152. And of amphibious Creatures. ibid.

The fitting of the Farts of Animals one to another y viz. the Genitals of the Sexes y p. 153. The Nipples of the Faps to the Mouth and Organs of Su ft ion, ibid. The admirable Stru5lure of the Breajls or PapSy for the preparing and feparatingy the cofitaining and retaining of the Milky that it doth not slow out without Frejfure or Suction . p. 154.

Several observations (?/*Ariflotle'i relating to the Fitnefs of the Parts to the Creatures Nature and manner of living, and to their refpeaive Ufes. p. 155, 156.

Another remarkable Inftancey in proportioning the Length of the Necks to that of Legs in Animalsy p. 157, 158. Of the Aponeurofis in the Necky why given to most ^adrupeds, and not to Many p. 157. That some Birds have but Jhort LegSy and yet long Necks ; and why, p. 158. That this Infiance cannot be accounted for by Athcijls. ibid.

The various Kinds of Voices the same Animal ufes on divers Occafions, and to divers purposes, argumentative of Providence and Council in conferring them upon it, being so extrea?nly ufeful and fervice^ able to the Creature. p. 159.

An Objection again/} the Ufe of fever a I Bodies I have infianc''d in relating to Man, anfzver'd, p. i6o. A Difourfe in the P erf on of Almighty Qod to Man. p. 161, 162, &c.

The incredible Smallnefs and Subtlcnefs of some Animalcule s, an Argument and Proof vf the admirable Art of the Creator, p. 166, 167.

Pralfical

The C O N T E N T S.

"PraBical Inferences from the precedent discourse, wherein it is shewn^ that the World was in some Senfe made for Man, yet not so as to have 710 other End or Vfe of its Creation but to serve him, p. 169, 1 70, &c. The Contemplation and consideration of the Works of Cod may probably be some Part of our Employment in Heaven^

Page 171, 172.

^he Sun, Moon, Stars, Sec. are called upon to praise God, which they can do no otherwife, than by affording Man, and other intelligent Being\ Matter or Subject of praifing him ; and therefore Men and Angels are called upon to consider those great EffeBs of the divine Tower, wisdom and goodness, and to give God the praise and Glory due to him for them, p. 178, 179, 180, &c. T:hat God dotb, and may jujily intend and deftgn his own Glory.

p. 182, 183, 184, 185,

I./^ F the whole Body of the Earth \ and fir Jl of its Figure, which \_) is demonjlrated to be fpherical. Page 190, 191.

*Ihe Conveniences of this Figure Jhewn for Union of Parts y Strength, CoTivenience of Habitation, and circular Motion, upon its own Poles ^

p. 191, 192, 193.

II. Of its Motion, both diurnal upon its own Poles, and annual in the Ecliptick ; and both these shewn to be rational, and not dijjonanf to Scripture, p. 193, 194, &c. The present Direction and constant Parallelifm of its Axis tu itself, fiezvn to be most convenient for the Inhabitants of the Earth, by the Inconvenience of any different Pofit ion, p. 196, 197, 198, &c. That the Torrid Zone is habitable, and Jlor'd with great Multitudes of Men and other Animals, contrary to the Opinion of some of the Ancients, p. 200. Neither are the Heats there prejudicial to the Longevity of Men, ibid. A Digrejjion, to prove that the Lives of Men are longeji in the hottefi Countries, p. 201, 202- That it zuould not be more convenient for the Inhabitants of the Earth if the Tropicks food at a greater difiance, proved, p. 204, 205. A very considerable, and heretofore ujiobfervd Convenience of this Inclination of the Earths Axi?, which Mr. Keill affords us. p. 203, 204.

Of the Ufefulnefs of the present Figure y constitution, and Confifiency of the several Parts of this terraqueous Globe. p. 205, 20b, 207.

An Enu?nerativn of some Plants which afford almoji whatever is necessary for human Life. p. 208, 209, 210, &c.

Pla?its having a kind of Cijlerns or Bafons forni'd of their Leaves compacted together y for the containing and preferving of Water, Scq: p. 212.

Of

The C O N T E N T S.

Of Mountains, and their Ufes, Pa^e 215. to 220.

II. The wisdom of God dijcover'd in the Stru^ure of the Bodies ef

Men and other Animals. "Eleven general observations demonf rating this wisdom and goodness

of God in forming our Bodies.

1. The ereB Foflure of the Body of Man, p. 221. commodious, [i.} For the fujlaining of the Head, p. 222. [2.] For ProfpeSt, ibid. [3.] For walking and uftng our Hands, p. 223, 224. That this EreSlion of the Body zuas intended by Nature, proved by fever at Arguments, and particularly by the faftcning the Cone of the Heart to the Midriff', of -which an Account is given out of Dr. TyfonV Anatomy of the Orang-Outang. p. 225, 226.

2. In that there is nothing deficient or redundant in the Body of Man, p. 227. J notable Story of a Man^s giving Suck to- a young Child, well attefted. ibid.

3. The Parts of the Body mof conveniently fituate, for Ufe, for Ornament, and for mutual Afftjiance. p. 229, 230.

4. Ample Provifion made for the Defence and Security of the principal Parts, Heart, Brain, and Lungs. p. 231, 232, 233,.

5. Abundant Provifion made against evil Accidents and Inconveniences, p. 234, 235.

^ome observations concerning Sleep, p. 235, 236.

^hat the Infenfiblenefs of Pain during Sleep proceeds^ rather from the

Relaxation of the Nerves than their ObJiruBion. p. 237.

6. The Con [I an cy obferv'd in the Number, Figure, and Site of the principal Parts, and the Variety in the less. p. 238.

7. The annexing of Plea Jure to thoje Anions that are necessary for )he Support of the Individuum, and the Continuation and Propagation of the Kind. p. 239.

8. The Multitude of Intentions the Creator mujl have in the Formation and fitting the fever al Parts for their refpefiive ASlions and ^f^' _ p. 240, 241.

9. The fitting and accommodating some Parts to divers Offices and Ufes, an Argument of wisdom and design in the Contrivance of the Body of Man and other Animals. p. 241, 242.

1 o. In the Nourijhment of their Bodies, viaking that Food -which is proper to preferve them in a healthful State, grateful to the Tafie, and agreeable to the Stomach. Of the great Ufe of Pain.

p. 243, 244.

II. The Variety of Lineaments and Difftmilitude of the Faces of Men, as alfo of their Voices and Hand-zvritings, all of mighty Importance to Man. p. 245, 246, 247.

Of

The C O N T E N T S.

Of the particular Parts of the Body. And; i. Of the Head arid Hair, p. 248. 'The reafoTi ofBaldnefs. 2. Of the Eye, its Beauty, p. 249. Its Humours and Tun ides transparent , p. 250, Src. [i.] For the Clearnefs, [2.] For the Difin>^nefs of Fifon, ibid. The Parts of the Eye of a Figure most co?wenie?it for the Collet^ ion of the vifual Rays, viz. convex, p. 252. The uveous Tunicle hath a inufculous Pozuer for contraBing and dilating of the Pupil, ibid. Its infide^ and that of the Choroids, why blackened, p. 253. The Figure of the Eye alterable, according to the Exigency of the ObjeB, in re-

Jpe8 of Dijlance or Propinquity, p. 254, 255. Why the optick Nerve is not infer ted right behind the Eye, ibid. PFhy, tho' the Rajs be decuffated in the Pupil of the Eye, the Object is not seen. inverted, p. 255. The Ufe of the aqueous Humour, and that it is

fuddenly reparable, p. 256. The Tunica Cornea protuberant above the White of the Eye, and why, p. 257. The Ufe of the muscles if the Eye, ibid. The Provifion for the Defence and Security of this precious Part, p. 258. The Ufes of the Eye-lids, and their

frequent winking, p. 259. That as Man wants, so he needs not the

feventh or fufpenfory muscle, zuhich is of great Uje and NeceJJity ta Brutes, p. 261. The Need and Ufe of the nictating Membrane in Brutes, and that Man needs it not. ibid.

Tliirdly, Of the Ear, p. 262. The Ufe of the Auricula, p. 263. Of the TyTc\'^^ViWvci of theEar, its Bones, and their muscles -, and of the Ufe of the Ear -wax. See. p. 264.

Fourthly, Of the Teeth, nine remarkable observations concerning their Situation, StruBure, and Ufes. p. 264, 265, 266, Sic,

Fifthly, Of the Tongue, and its various Ufes -, for tajiing, and gathering of Food ; for managing of Majiication ; for forming of Words, &c. p. 268. Speaking proper to Man, ibid. Of the Ductus Salivales, and of the great Ufe of the Saliva, or Spittle, p. 269.

Sixthly,* Of the Wind-pipe, its admirable StruBure and Ufes. p. 270.

Seventhly, Of the Heart, the Ufe and Neceflty of its Pulfe for the Circulation of the Blood, and the admirable Make and Contrivance cf it for that Office, p. 271 , 272, &c. Oj the ?nufcular Coat, ajid Palfe of the Arteries, effected by a kind of Conjlri^ion, or perijUltick Motion, and not merely by a Wave of the Blood every Pulfe,

P- 273' 274, &c-

The wonderful Artifice cf Nature in regulating the Motion of the Blood in the Veins and Arteries, by i fifing and promoting it in the one, and ?nod crating it in the other. The Ufe of the Vena iine pari. ' p. 277.

Eighthly, Of the Hand, its Stru^ure and various Ufes, not eaftly to le enumerated. . ' p. 278, 279.

s Ninthly,.

The C O N T E N T a

Ninthly, Of the Back- Bone, its Figure y and why divided into Vertehres, Page 282, 283.

Ihe Provifio7i that is made for the eafy and expedite Motion of the Bones in their Articulation by a twofold Juice, i. An oily one, Jupplfd by the Marrow. 2. Mucilaginous ^ prepared and feparated iy certain Glandules made for that purpose, p. 284, 285. This JnunSlion of the head of the Bones with theje Juices is ujefdy 1 . To facilitate Motion, 2. To prevent Attrition. p. 286.

Why the Bones are made hollozu. p. 287.

Why the Belly is flejhy^ and not inclosed with Bones like the Breaft,

p. 288.

The Motion of the GutSy p. 289. Of the Liver, and Ufe of the Gall,

ibid.

Of the Bladdery its Stru^ure and Ufe', of the Kidneys, and Glandules^ and Ureters, their Compojition and Ufes, ibid.

The adapting all the Bones, muscles and Veffels to their fever al Ufes, a?id the pining and co?np acting of them together noted. p. 290-

The geometrical Contrivance of the muscles, and fitting them for their several Motions and Actions , according to the exa^eji Rules of Mechanicks. ibid.

The packing and thrvfiing together such a Multitude of various and different Parts so close, that there pould be no unneceffary Vacuity in the Body, nor any clajhing between them, but mutual JJJiJlance, admirable. ibid.

Membranes capable of a prodigious Extenfion , Ufe in Geftation of Twins, Sec. p. 291.

The Parts that seem of little or no Ufe, as the Y2X,Jhetun to be greatly ufeful, p. 292. How feparated from the Blood, and received into it again. - P- 293, 294.

The consideration of the formation of the Foetus in the Womb zvav d, and luh). p- 295, 296.

What a Fitnefs the^eed hath to fajhion and form, and why the Child resembles the Parent, and Jometimes the Ancejior. p. 296.

The ConflruBion of a Set of temporary Parts for the Ufe of the Fcetus only while in the Wo?nb, a clear Proof of design. p. 297.

JVtf equivocal or spontaneous Generation, but that all Animals are generated by Animal Parents of their own Kind, p. 298, 299. And probably all Plants too produc'^d by Seed , and none spontaneous , proved and vindicated , and the Obje£tions againfi it anjwer''d,

p. 300. to 307.

That the CofTus of the Ancients was not the Hexapod of a Beetle, as I thought, but an Eruca, agreed with Dr. Lifter. p. 307.

The Loufe fear thing out fordid and nafiy Clothes to harbour and breed in, probably drfign^d to deter Men and Women from Sluttifhnefs and Unclcaniimfs. p. 308.

Ati

The C O N T E N T S.

An additional and most effe5lual Argument again/} spontaneous Geniration, viz. ^hat thtre are no new Species of Animals produced.

Page 308, 309.

Whence those vajl Numbers of f mall Frogs, which have been obfervd to appear upon refrejhing Shozvers after Drought, do probably proceed, Jhez&n in an Injiance of his own observations by Mr. Derham.

p. 316, 317.

Of Toads found in the Heart of Timber Trees, and in the middle of great Stones. P- 323, 324.

Mifcdlaneoui observations concerning the StruHure, Anions and Ufes of some Parts of Animals, omitted in the fir Jl Part-, as alfo the reasons of some InJlinBs and Anions of Brutes, p. 325, 326, &c, TSe Stvine''s Snout fitted for digging up of Roots, which are his natural Food, as likewife the Porpeffe for rooting up of Sand-Eels ,

ibid.

The Manner and Organs of respiration accommodated to the Temper of Animals, their Place and manner of living, shewn in three Sorts of respiration. i . By Lungs, with two Ventricles of the Heart in hotter ^ni?nals, p. 327. 2. By Lungs, with but one Ventricle, 3. By Gills, with one only Ventricle of the Heart, p. 329, &c. Why the Foramen Ovale is kept open in some amphibious Animals, p. 330. In some of them the Epiglottis is large, and why, P- 33i- No Epiglottis in Elephants, and zvhy ; and hozu that Creature fecures himself from Mice creeping up his Proborcis into his Lur.gs.

p. 332,

Two notable observations of the Sagacity of the Tortoife, the one of the Land, the other of the Si a Tortoife. P- 333» 334-

The Armour of the Hedge-Hog ^;^^ Taton, and their Power of contracing themfehes into a round Ball, a great Infiance of design for their Defence and Security. P- 335» 33^-

The Manner and Ufe of the extending and withdrawing the Curtain cf the- Periophthalmium , or nictating Membrane, in beasts and Birds, p. 338, 339. That the aqueous Humour of the Eye will not freeze. p. 343.

Of the Make of a CamePs Foot, and his Bags to referve Water in his Stomach for his Needs. p. 344, 345.

The Ufe of rapacious Creatures . fwallowing some of the Hair, Furr and Feathers of the Beafis or Birds they prey upon. ibid.

A Conjecture by zuhat means cartiL^ginous Fifkes raise and fink tbem- J elves in the Water. p. 346.

That Nature employs all the Methods and Artifices of Chymifis, in analizing of Bodies , and feparating their Part- , and out-does them, and t^e fever al Particulars infianc'^d in. p. 347-

observations about the Gullet and Diaphrag?n. p. 348.

Ar,

The CONTENTS.

An admirable Story out of Galen, about the taking a Kid out of the Womb of its Damy and bringing it up by hand ; and Remarks upon it. Page 349, 350.

7be natural Texture of Membranes so made, as to be ifnmenfely dilatable, oj- great Ufe and Necejfity in Gejlation. p. 353.

A notable hijlance of Providence in the Make of the Veins and Arteries near the Heart. p. 354, 355.

An Anfzuer to an Objection againji the wisdom of God in making' inferior Ranks of Creatures. p. 357.

The Atheijis main Subterfuge and Pretence, to elude and evade all our Arguments and instances, to detnonjirate the 'Necejfity of Providence, Defgn and Wifiom, in the Formation of all the Parts of the World, viz. That Things made Ufes, and not Ules Things, precluded and confuted. p- 357, 358.

Of the Ufe ofthofe vast Numbers of prodigioujly small Infers that are bred in the Waters. p. 363, 364.

An ObjeSlion againji the Wifdoin of God in creating such a Multitude of ufelefs InJ'e^s, and some aljo noxious and pernicious to Man, and other Animals, anfzver'd j and the various Ufes of them dcclar''d,

p. 368, 369, &c.

MaJiy practical Inferences and observations, from 375 to the End of the Book.

THE

WISDOMofGOD

Manifeiled in the

^^^59?SiScCSi3fiCC33fiCE ]

iScia355£fJ

r iVrrr'r ts n' tY rrm'

F33?«

PART. I.

rrtrnfrfTr-ni rin tsr^nn rrfri

Ps AL. civ. 24.

How manifold are thy Worh^ 0 Lord! In Wijdoin hajl thou made them alL

N these Words are two Claufes j in the firfl whereof the Pfahnift admires the Multitude of God's Works, H(nv inanifold are thy Wo7^ks, V Lord! In the fecond he celebrates his wisdom in the Creation of them j In Wijdom haji thou made them all, ^

C Of

i8 77)eWisDou of GOD Parti.

Of the first of these I shall say little, only briefly run over the Works of this visible World, and give some guefs at the Number of them ; whence it will appear, That upon this Account they will deferve Admiration, the Number of them being uninveftigable by us, and so affording us a demonflrative Proof of the unlimited Extent of the Creator's Skill, and the Foecundity of his wisdom and Power. That the Number of corporeal Creatures is unmeafurably great, and known only to the Creator himself, may thus probably be coUedled : first of all. The Number of fixed Stars is on all Hands acknowledg'd to be next to infinite : Secondly, every fix'd Star, in the now-receiv'd HypotheJiSy is a Sun, or Sun-like Body, and in like Manner incircled with a Chorus of Planets moving about it ; for the Fixd Stars are not all placed in one and the same concave Spherical SuperJicieSy and equidiftant from us, as they seem to be, but are varioufly and diforderly fituate, some nearer, some further off, juft like Trees in a Wood or Foreft, as Gajfendus exemplifies them. And as in a Wood, tho' the Trees grow never so irregularly, yet the Eye of the Spectator, wherever plac'd, or whitherfoever remov'd, defcribes still a Circle of Trees : So would it in like Manner whenever it were in the Foreft of Stars, describe a Spherical Superjicies about it. Thirdly, Each of these Planets is in all likelihood furnifhed with as great Variety of corporeal Creatures, animate and inanimate, as the Earth is, and all as different I in

Fart I. /;^ /^^ C R E A T r o N. 19

in Nature as they are in Place from the Terreftrial, and from each other. Whence it will follow, That these must be much more infinite than the Stars ; I do not mean absolutely according to Philofophick Exadnefs infinite, but only infinite or innumerable as to us, or their Number prodigioufly great.

That the fix'd Stars are innumerable, may thus be made out : those visible to the naked Eye are by the least Account acknowledged to be above a Thoufand, excluding those towards the South Pole, which are not visible in our Horizon : Befides these, there have been incomparably more detected and brought to Light by the Telefcopes ; the Milky-way being found to be (as was formerly conjedur'd) nothing but great Companies or Swarms of Minute Stars fingly invifible, but by reason of their Proximity mingling and confounding their Lights, and appearing like lucid Clouds. And ic is likely that, had we more perfed: Telefcopes, many Thoufands more might be discovered ; and yet, after all, an incredible Multitude remaim, by reason of their immenfe Uiftance beyond all Ken, by the best Telefcopes that could poflibly be invented or polifti'd by the Wit and Hand of an Angel: For if the World be (as Des Cartes would have it) indefinitely e^^tended, that is, so far as no human Luelledl- can fancy any. Bound of it -, then what we see, or can come to see, must be the least Part of what is undifcoverable by us, the whole Univerfe extending a thoufand times farther beyond the

C 2 ^ utmoft

xnmoft Stars we can possibly dcfcry, than those i)e diftant from the Earth we live upon. This Hypothejh of the Fix'd Stars being so many Su7iSy &c. seems more agreeable to the -Divine Greatnefs and Magnificence. But that which induces me much to doubt of the Magnitude of the Univerfe, and immenfe distance of the Fixd StarSy is the ftupendous P/j^nome?ia of Comets^ their fudden Accefilon, or Appearance in full Magnitude, the Length of their Tails, and Swiftnefs of their Motion, and gradual Diminution of Bulk and Motion, 'till at last they difappear. That the Univerfe is indefinitely extended, des Cartes^ upon a falfe Ground, (that the formal Ratio of a Body was nothing but Extenfion into Length, Breadth, and Profundity, or having partes extra partes^ and that Body and Space were fynonymous Terms) afferted ; it may as well be limited this Way, as in the old HypothefSy which places the Fix'd Stars in the same Spherical Superficies ; according to which (old Hypothefis) they may alfo be demonftrated by the same Mediums to be innumerable, only instead of their distance fubftituting their Smalnefs for the reason of their Invifibility.

But leaving the Ccelefiial Bodies, I come now to the T^errefliial ; which are either inanimate ^ or aiiimate. The inanimate are the £/^- mejits. Meteors^ and Fojils of all Sorts, at the Number of which last I cannot give any probable Guefs : But if the Rule, which some confiderate Philofophers deliver, holds good, mz. t how

Part L 171 the Creation. 21

how much more imperfecft any Genus^ or Order of Beings, is, so much more numerous are the Species contain'd under it. As for Example: Birds being a more perfed: Kind of Animals than- Fi(hes, there are more of these than of those 3 and for the like reason more Birds than Quadrupeds, and more Infefts than of any of the rest, and so more Plants than Animals, ISlature being more fparing in her more excellent Produdions. If this Rule, I say, holds good, then should there be more Species of FcJ^ Jils^ or generally of inanimate Bodies^ than of Vegetables^ of which there is some reason to doubt, unless we will admit all Sorts of formed Stones to be diftincS: Species,

Animate Bodies are divided into four great Genera, or Orders, Beajis^ Birds, Fijhes, and InfeBs,

The Species of Beajis, including ahb Serpents, are not very numerous: Of such as are certainly known and defcrib'd, I dare not Hiy above 150; and yet I believe, not many, that are of any considerable Bignefs, in the known Regions of the World, have efcap'd the Cognizance of the Curious. (I reckon all Dogs to be of one Species,^ they mingling together in Generation, and the Breed of such Mixtures being prolifick.)

The Number of Birds known and defcrib'd may be near 500 ; and the Number oi Fijhes, fecluding. Sbell-Fijh, as many : But if the ShelL Fijld be taken in, more than fix times the Number. How many of each Genus remain yet undifcover'd, one cannot certainly nor very near-

C 3 - ly

ly conjedlure ; but we may suppose the whole Sum of Beajls and Birds to exceed by a third Part, and Fijhes by one half, those known.

The InfeBs, if we take in the Exanguious both Terrejirial and Aquatick^ iriay, in Derogation to the precedent Rule, for Number, vie even with Plants themselves : For the Exangui" cus alone, by what that Learned and Critical Naturalift, my honour'd Friend, Dr. Martin JJjier^ hath already obferv'd and delineated, I conjedure, cannot be fewer than 3000 Species^ perhaps many more.

The Butterflies or Beetles are such numerous Tribes, that I beheve in our own native Country alone the Species of each Kind may amount to 150 or more. And if we ihould m.ake the Caterpillers and Hexapods^ from whence these come, to be diftind: Species, as most Naturalifts have done, the Number will be doubled, and these two Genera will afford us 600 Species-, But if those be admitted for diftindl Species^ I see no reason but their Aureli(2 alfo may pretend to a fpecifick Difference from the Caterpillers and Butterfies, and so we shall have 300 Species more ; therefore we exclude both these from the Degree of Species, making them to be the same hifeB under a different Larva or Habit.

The Fly-kind, if under that Name we comprehend all other flying Infers, as well such as have four, as such as have but two Wings, of both which Kinds there are many fubordinate Genera^ will be found in Multitude of Species

to

to equal, if not exceed, both the foremen tion'd Kinds.

The creepmg InfeBs that never come to be wing'd, tho' for Number they may fall fliort of the flying or winged, yet are they alfo very numerous ; as by running over the several Kinds I could eafily demonftrate. Supppfing then there be a Thoufand several Sorts of Infedte in this Ifland and the Sea near it, if the same Proportion holds between the Infedls native in England^ ann those of the rest of the World, as doch between Plants domejiick and exotick^ (that Is, as I guefs, near a Decuple) the Species of insects in the whole Earth (Land and Water) will amount to loooo, and I do believe they rather exceed than fall {hort of that Sum. Since the Writing hereof, having this Summer, Ann. 169 1, with some Diligence profecuted the* Hiftory of our Englijh InfedVs, and making Collections of the several Species of each Tribe, but particularly and especially of the Butt erf ics^ both nodurnal and diurnal, I find the Number of such of rhefe alone as breed in our Neighbourhood (about Braintree and Notely in Ejjex) to exceed the Sum I last Year afiign'd to all England^ having my self obfcrv'd and defcrib'd about 200 Kinds great and small, many yet remaining, as I have good reason to believe, by me undifcover'd. This I have, fmce the writing hereof, found troie in Experience, having every Year obferv'd not a few new Kinds: Nor do I think that, if I should live 20 Years longer, I fljould by- my utmoft Diligence and Induftry in fearch^

C 4 . ing

ing them out, come to an End of them. If then, within the small Compafs of a Mile or two, there are so many Species to be found, furely the most modeft Conjecture cannot eftimate the Number of all the Kinds of Fapilio\ native of this Illand to fall (hort of 500, which is twice so many as I Igft Summer guefs'd them to be ; wherefoBe, ufing the same Argumentations, the Numiber of all the Britifh hijedfs will amount to aooo, and the total Sum of those of the whole Earth will be 20000. The Number of Plants contained in C. Bauhtn^ Penax is about 6000, which are all that had been defcrib'd by the Authors that wrote before him, or obferv'd by himself ; in which Works, befides Miftakes and Repetitions incident to the most wary and knowing Men in such a Work as that, there are a great many,* I might say some Hundreds, put down for different Species, which in my opinion are but accidental Varieties : Which I do not say to detrad: from the excellent Pains and Performance of that Learned, Judicious and Laborious Herbarift, or to defraud him of his deferv'd Honour, but only to shew that he was too much fway'd by the Opinions then generally current among Herbarifts, that, different Colour or Multiplicity of Leaves in the Flower, and the like Accidents, were sufficient to conftitute a fpecijfick Difference. But fuppofing there had been 6000 then known and defcrib'd, I cannot think but that there are in the World more than triple that Number j there being in the vast Continent of America as great a Variety

of

of Species as with us, and yet but few common to Europe, or perhaps Africk and AJia, And if, on the other Side the Equator, there be much Land still remaining undifcover'd, as probably there may, we mull suppose the Number of Plants to be far greater.

What can we infer from all this? If the Num^ ber of Creatures be so exceeding great, how great, nay immenfe, mufl: needs be the Power and wisdom of him who form'd them all ! For (that I may borrow the Words of a noble and excellent Author) as it argues and manifells more Skill by far in an Artificer, to be able to frame both Clocks and Watches, and Pumps, and Mills^ and Granadoes, and Rockets, than he could difplay in making but one of those sorts of Engines; so the Almighty difcovers more of his wisdom in forming such a vast Multitude of different Sorts of Creatures, and all with admirable and irreproveable Art, than if he had created but a few; for this declares the Greatnefs and unbounded Capacity of his understanding. Again • the same Superiority of Knowledge would be difplay'd, by contriving Engines of the same Kind, or for the same purposes, after different Fafhions, as the moving of Clocks or other Engines by Springs instead of Weights: So the infinitely wife Creator hath shewn in many Inflances, that he is not confin'd to- one only Influument for the working one Effed:, but can perform the same Thing by divers Means^ So, tho' Feathers seem necessary for flying, yet hath he enabled several Creatures to fly without

them,

*26- ne Wis-Dou of GOD Parti.

them, as two Sorts of Fifhes, one Sort of Lizard, and the Batt , not to mention the numerous Tribes of flying Infeds. In like Manner, tho' the Air-bladder in Fiflies seems necessary for fwimming, yet some are so form'd as to swim without it, viz, first, the Cartilagineous Kind, which by what Artifice they poize themselves, afcend and defcend at pleasure, and continue in what Depth of Water they lift, is as yet unknown to us. Secondly the Cetaceous Kind, or Sea-beasts, differing in nothing almost from Quadrupeds but the Want of Feet. The Air which in respiration these receive into their Lungs, may serve to render their Bodies equiponderant to the Water; and the Conftridtion or Dilatation of it, by the Help of the Diaphragm and muscles of respiration, may probably affift them to afcend or defcend in the Water, by a light Impulfe thereof with their Fins.

Again, Tho' the Water being a cold Element, the most wife God hath so attemper'd the Blood and Bodies of Fifhes in general, that a small Degree of Heat is sufficient to preferve their due Confiftency and Motion, and to maintain Life; yet to (hew that he can preferve a Creature in the Sea, and in the coldeft Part of the Sea too, that may have as great a Degree of Heat as Quadrupeds themselves, he hath created Variety of these cetaceous Fiflies, which converfe chiefly in the Northern Seas, whose whole Body being incompafs^d round with a copious Fat or Blubber ( which, by reflecting and redoubling the internal Heat, and keeping oflfthe external

nal Cold, doth the same thing to them that Cloaths do to us) is enabled to abide the greatest Cold of the Sea- water. The reason why these Fijhes delight to frequent chiefly the Nor^ them Seas, is, I conceive, not only for the Quiet which they enjoy there, but because the Northern Air, which they breathe in, being more fully charg'd with those Particles fuppos'd nitrous, which are the Element of Fire, is fitteft to maintain the vital Heat in that Adivity which is sufficient to move such an unweildy Bulk as their Bodies are with due Celerity, and to bear up against and repel the ambient Cold; and may likewife enable them to continue longer under Water than a warmer and thinner Air could.

Another instance to prove that God can and doth by different Means produce the same EfFedt, is the various Ways of extradling the nutritious Juice out of the Aliment, in several Kinds of Creatures.

I. In Man and viviparous ^adrupeds the Food moiften'd with the Spittle (faliva) is first chew'd and prepared in the Mouth, then fwallowed into the Stomach, where being mingled with some diffolvent Juices, it is by the Heat hereof concodted, macerated, and reduc'd into a Chyle or Cremor, and so evacuated into the Inteftines, where being mixed with the Choler and Pancreatick]\ncQy it is further fubtiliz'd and rcnder'd so fluid and penetrant, that the thinner and finer Part of it eafily finds its Way in at the ftreight Orifices of the lafteous Veins.

2. Infi8 TkWi%Dou of GQD PartL

2. In Birds there is no Maftication or Gomminution of Meat in the Mouth.^ but in such as are not Carniverous, it is immediately fwallow'd into the Crop or Craw, or at least into a Kind of Anteftomach ( which I have obferv'd in many, especially in Pijcivorous Birds) where it is moiftned and mollified by some proper Juice from the Glandules diftilling in there, and thence transfer 'd into the Gizard or Mufculous Stomach, where by the working of the muscles compounding the Side of that Ventricle, and by the Affiftance of small Pebbles ( which the Creature fwallows for that purpose) it is, as it were by Mill-stones, ground small, and so tranfmitted to the Guts, to be further attenuated and fubtiliz'd by the fore-mentioned Choler and Pancreatick Juice.

. 3. In oviparous ^ladrupeds^ as ChamelionSy Lizards^ Frogs, as alfo in all Sorts of SerpentSy there is no Maftication or Comminution of the Meat either in Mouth or Stomach ; but as they fwallow insects or other Animals whole, so they avoid their Skins unbroken, having a Heat, or Spirits, powerful enough to extradt the Juice they have Need of, without breaking that which contains it; as the Parijian Academijis leW us. I myself cannot warrant the Truth of the observation in all. Here, by the by, we take Notice of the wonderful Dilatability orExtenfivenefs of the Throats and Gullets of Serpents : I myself have taken two entire adult Mice out of the Stomach of an Adder, whose Neck was not bigger than my little Finger. these Creatures, I say, draw out the Juice of what they fwallow

with-

without any Comminution, or so much as breaking the Skin ; even as it is seen that the Juice of Grapes is drawn as well * whole Grapes pluck'd from the * Rape, where from the Ciufter, and thev remain whole , as "^i^e pour'd upon the^i from a Vat, where they are ^^ ^ ^''^^"^• bruis'd ; to borrow the Parijian Philofophers Similitude.

4. Fipes^ which neither chew their Meat in their Mouths, nor grind it in their Stomachs, do by the Help of a diffolvent Liquor, there by Nature provided, corrode, and reduce it, Skin, Bones and all, into a Chylus or Cremor ; and yet (which may seem wonderful ) this Liquor manifefts nothing of Acidity to theTafte : But notwithftanding , how mild and gentle foever it fcems to be, it corrodes Flefh very ftrangely and gradually, 2^^ Aquafortis^ or the like corrofive Waters, do Metals, as appears to the Eye \ for I have observed Fifli in the Stomachs of others thus partially corroded, iirfl the fuperficial Part of the Flefh, and then deeper and deeper by Degrees to the Bones.

I come now to the fecond Fart of the Words, /;; Wijdom haft thou jnadethem all-, in difcourfing whereof I shall endeavour to make out in Particulars what the Pfalmiji here afTerts in general concerning the Works of God, that they are all very wifely contrived and adapted to Ends both particular and general.

But before I enter upon this Taflc, I shall, by Way of Preface^ or IntroduBion^ say fonnctning concerning those Syftems which undertake to

give

30 TheWisDOM of GOD Parti.

give an Account of the Formation of the Univerfe by Mechanical Hypothefes of Matter, mov'd either uncertainly, or according to some Catho- Hck Laws, without the Intervention and Affiftance of any fuperior immaterial Agent.

There is no greater, at least no more palpable and convincing Argument of the Exiftence of a Deity, than the admirable Art and wisdom that difcovers itself in the Make and constitution, the Order and disposition, the Ends and Ufes of all the Parts and Members of this (lately Fabrick of Heaven and Earth : For if in the Works of Art (as for Example) a curious Edifice, or Machine, Council, design, and Direction, to * an End appearing in the whole Frame, and in all the several Pieces of it, do necessarily infer the Being and Operation of some intelligent Architeft, or Engineer ; why should not alfo, in the Works of Nature, that Grandeur and Magnificence, that excellent Contrivance for Beauty, Order, Ufe, &c, which is obfervable in them, wherein they do as much tranfcend the EfFeds of human Art, as infinite Power and wisdom exceeds finite, infer the Exiftence and Efficiency of an Omnipotent and All- wife Creator ?.

To evade the Force of this Argument, and to give some Account of the Original of the World, Atheiftical Perfons have set up two Hypothefes.

Thefirft is that of Ariftotle, that the World was from Eternity in the same Condition that now it is, having run through the Succeffions of infinite Generations} to which they add, Selfex-

Part L in //^^ C r e at i o n. 3 j

exiftent and Unproduc'd : For Arijlotle doth not deny God to be the efficient Canfe of the World \ but only aflerts, that he created it from Eternity, making him a necessary Caiife thereof; it proceeding from him by Way of Emanation, as Light from the Sun.

This Hypofhejis, which hath some Shew of reason, for fomething must necefTarily exift of itfd ; and if fomething why may not all Things ? This Hypothejis^ I say, is so clearly and fully confuted by the Reverend and Learned Dr. I'illotjon^ late Lord Archbifliop of Ca?iterhury^ and Primate of all England^ in his firil printed Sermon ; and the Right Reverend Father in God, "Jokn^ late Lord Biiliop of Chejler^ in Book I. Chap. V. of his Treatife of the Principles of Natural Religion^ that nothing material can by me be added: To whom therefore I refer the Reader.

T'bc Epicurean Hypothejis rejeBed.

The fecond Hypothefu is that of the Epiciiream ^ who held, that there were two Principles self-exiftent. first, Epace^ or Vacuity ^ Secondly, Matter^ or Body \ both of infinite Duration and Extenfion. In this infinite Space, or Vacuity, which hath neither Beginning, nor End, nor Middle, no Limits, or Extreams, innumerable minute Bodies, into which the Matter was divided, call'd Atoms, because by reason of their perfed; Solidity they were really indivifible (for they hold no Body capable of Divifion,

vifion , but what hath Vacuities interfpers'd with Matter, of various but a determinate Number of Figures, and equally ponderous, do perpendicularly defcend, and by their fortuitous Concourfe make compound Bodies, and at last the World itself But now, hecaufe if all these Atoms (hould defcend plum down with equal Velocity, as according to their Dodlrine they ought to do, being (as we said ) all perfectly folid andimporous, and the Facuum notrefifting their Motion, they would never the one overtake the other, but like the Drops of a Shower would alv/ays keep the same distances, and so there could be no Concourfe, or Coh^lion of them, and consequently nothing created ; partly to avoid this deftrudtive consequence, and partly to give some Account of the Freedom of Will ( which they did aflert contrary to the Democratick Fate ) they did abfurdly feign a Declination of some of these Principles, without any Shadow, or Pretence of reason. The former of these Motives you have set down by Liicrc^ tim de Nat, Rerum^ L. 2. in these Words :

Corpora cum deorfum reBum per inane fenintur Ponderibus propriisy incerto T'empore forte^ Incertifque locis^ Spatio difcedere paulum \ Hantum quod 7iomen mutatum dicer e pojjis. And again,

^od niji declinare filer ent^ omnia deoffium Imbris uti guttce caderent per inane profundum^ Necforet offenjus natiiSy nee plaga creata Trincipiis^ it a nilunquam natura credjfet.

Now

Now Seeds in downward Motion must decline, Tho' vary little from th' exadleft Line ; For did they dill move ftrait, they needs must

fall Like Drops of Rain, diffolv'd and fcatter'd all. For ever tumbling thro' the mighty Space, And never join to make one fingle Mafs.

>The fecond Motive they had to introduce this gratuitous Declination, of Atoms, the same Poet gives us in these Verfes, Lib, 2.

Sifemper motm conneBitur omnis^

Et vet ere exoritur femper novus 07^di?2e certo j Nee declinajido faciimt primordia motiis Principiiim qiwddam quod fat i feeder a rumpat^ Ex infifiito ne caufam caufafequatur -, Libra per terras unde hcec animantibus, extafy Unde hac eji^ inqiiam^ fatis avolfa 'voluntas ?

Befides, did all Things move in direcfl Line^

And still one Motion to another join

In certain Order, and no Seeds decline.

And make a Motion fit to diffipate

The well-wrought Chains of causes and strong

Fate ; Whence comes that Freedom living Creatures

find? Whence comes the Will so free, so unconfin'd^ Above the Power of Fate ?

The Folly and Uiireafonablenefs of this ridiculous aod ungrounded Figment, I cannot bet-

D ^ ter

ter difplay and reprove than in the Words oF Cicero, in the Beginning of his first Book De Finibus Bonoriim & Malorum. This Declination (faith he) is altogether childifhly feign'd, and yet neither doth it at all folve the Difficulty, or effed: what they defire : For, first, They say the Atoms decline, and yet affign no reason why. Now nothing is more fhameful and unworthy a Natural Philofopher \turpius Phyjico] than to aflert any thing to be done without a cause, or to give no reason of it. Befides, this is contrary to their own Hypothefis taken from Senfe, that all Weights do naturally move perpendicularly downwards. Secondly, Again fuppofing this were true, and that there were such a Declination of Atoms, yet will it not effedt what they intend ; for either they do all decline, and so there will be no more Concourfe than if they did perpendicularly defcend ; or some decline, and some fall plum down, which is ridiculoufly to affign diftindt Offices and Tasks to the Atoms, which are all of the same Nature and Solidity. Again, in his Book De FatOy he fmartly derides this fond Conceit thus 5 What cause is there in Nature which turns the Atoms afide ? Or do they cast Lots among themselves which shall decline, which not ? Or why do they decline the least Interval that maybe, and not a greater? why not two or three minima as well as one ? Optare hoc quidem eji non dijpiitare. , For neither is the Atom by any extrinfical Impulfe diverted from its natural course ; neither can there be any Gaufe imagin'd in the Vacuity through I which

Part. I. in /^^ C r e a t i o n. 35

which it is carried, why it should not move diredlly ; neither is there any Change made in the Atom it self, that it should not retain the Mo^ tion natural to it, by Force of its Weight or Gravity.

As for the whole Atoinical Hypothefis^ either Epicurean or Democritick^ I shall not, nor need I, fpend Time to confute it 3 this having been already folidly and fufficiently done by many learned Men, but especially Dr. Cudworth^ m his IntelleBual Syjiem of the Univerfe, and the late Bifhop of Worcejler^ Dr. Stillingjleet^ ia his Oiigines Sacra, Only I cannot omit the C/- ceronian Confutation thereof, which I find in the Place first quoted, and in the first and fecond Books De Naturd Deorum^ because it may serve as a general Introdudion to the following Particulars. Such a turbulent ConcouFfe of Atoms could never, (faith he) hu?7c mundi ornatum effLcere^ compofe so w^ell-order'd and beautiful a Strudure as the IVorld-, which therefore both in Greek and Latin hath from thence \ab ornatti & munditie] obtain'd its Name. And again mod fully and appofitely in his fecond De Nat, Deorum : If the W oiks oi Nature are better, more exad and perfed, than the Works oi Arty 2indi Art effeds nothing without reason, neither can the Works of Nature be thought to be efifeded without reason; for, is it not absurd and incongruous, .that when thou beholdeft a Statue or curious Pidure, thou should'ft acknowledge that Art was us'd to the making of it ; or when thou feed the course of a Ship upon the Waters, thou

D 2 ^ fliouldft

fhouldft not doubt but the Motion of it is regulated and diredled by reason and Art ; or when thou conlidereft a Sun-dyal or Clock, thou fhouldft understand prefently, that the Hours are fliewn by Art, and not by Chance ; and yet imagine or believe, that the World, which comprehends all these Arts and Artificers, was made without Counfel or reason ? If one should carry into Scythia or Britain such a Sphere as our Friend PqlJidofiitis lately made, each of whose Converfions did the same Thing in the Sun, and Mooriy and other five Planets, which we see effefted every Night and Day in the Heavens, who among those Barbarians would doubt that that Sphere was compos'd by reason and Art? A Wonder then it must needs be, that there (hould be any Man found so ftupid and forfaken of reason, as to pc^-fuade himself, that this most: beautiful and adorn'd World, was, or could, be produced by the fortuitous Concourfe of Atoms. He that can prevail with himself to believe this, I do not see why he may not as well admit, that if there were made innumerable Figures of the one and twenty Letters, in Gold, suppose, or any other Metal, and these well {haken and mixt together, and thrown down from some high Place to the Ground, they, when they lighted upon the Earth, would be so difpos'd and rank'd that a Man might see and read in them E?iniuss A?inah -, whereas it were a great Chance if he should find one Verfe thereof among them all : For if this Concourfe of Atoms could make a whole World, why may it not fometimes make, I and

Part L /;/ /^^ C r e a t i o n. 37,

and why hath it nof fomewhere or other in the Earth made, a Temple, or a Gallery, or a Fortico, or a house, or a City ? which yet it is so far from doing, and every Man so far from believing, that {hould any one of us be cast, suppose, upon a defolate I [land, and find there a magnificent Palace, artificially contriv'd according to the exadteft Rules of Architedlure, and curiblifly adorned and furnifli'd, it would never once enter into his Head, that this was done by an Earthquake, or the fortuitous fliuffling together of its component Materials 3 or that it had flood there ever iince the Conftruftion of xht Worlds or first Coha^fion of Atoms ', but would pre fen tly conclude, that there bad been some intelligent Architev^l there, the Effe6l of whose i\rt and Skill it was. Or should he fi-nd there hut one fingle Sheet of Parchment or Paper, an Epiftle or Oration written, full of profound Senfe, express'd in proper and fignificant Words, illuflrated and adorn'd with elegant Phrafe ; it were beyond the Poflibility of the Wit of Man to perluade him that this was done by the temerarious Daflies of an unguided Pen, or by the rude Scattering of Ink upon the Paper, or by the lucky Projidtion of so many Letters at all Adventures; but he v/ould be convinced by the Evidence of the Thing at first Sight, that there had been not only some Man, but some Scholar there.

T[ke Cartcfian Flypothefis consider'd and ccnjurd.

•Having rejefted this Atheifllck Thpotbejh of D 3 ' ^ Epicurus

'Epicurus and Democritus, I should now proceed to give particular instances of the Art and wisdom clearly appearing in the several Parts and Members of the Univerfe ; from which we may juftly infer this general Conclufion of the Pfalmift. In Wtfdom haji thou made them all: But that there is a Sort of profeffed Theijlsy I mean Monf. Des Cartes^ and his Followers, who endeavour to difarm us of his decretory Weapon to evacuate and exterminate this Argument, which hath been so fuccefsful in all Ages to demonftrate the Exiftence, and enforce the Belief, of a Deity, and to convince and filence all Atheiftick Gainfayers. And this they do,

first, By excluding and banifliing all consideration of final causes from Natural Philofophy, upon Pretence, that they are all and every one in particular undifcoverable by us j and that it is Raflinefs and Arrogance in us to think *we can find out God's End, and be Partakers of his Councils. Atque ob hanc u?iicam raiionemy totum illud caufarum genus quod a fine peti folet^ in rebus Phyficis nullum ufum habere exijiimo \ non enim abfque temeritate me puto invefiigare pojj'es fines Dei, Medit. Metaph. And for this only reason, I thinks all that Kind of causes which is wont to be taken from the End^ to have no life in Thyfics or natural Matters j for I cannot without Rafionefs thiiik my self able to find out the Ends of God, And again, in his Principles of Philofophy ; Nullas unquam rationes circa res NaturaleSy a fine quern Deus aut Natura in iis faciendis fibi propofuity admittimuSy quia non tantum nobis de-

^ bemus

Part L in the Creation. 39

bemiis arrogare ut ejus Concilioriun participes effe pcfjimus. We can by ?20 Means admit any Reajbns about natural Thifigs^ take?! from the E?id which God or Nature proposed to themfclves in making of them ; because we ought not to arrogate so 7nuch to our selves, as to think we may be Partakers of his Counjels. And more exprefly in his fourth answer, viz. to GaJJendus\ Objedions ; Nee fingi potefi^ oiiquos Dei fines viagis quam alios in propatulo elTe-, omnes enim imperfcrutabili ejus S apt entice. abyjTo funt eodem modo reconditi ; That is, Neither can nor ought we to feign or imagine that some of God's Ends are inore manifejl than others -, for all lie in like Manner^ or equally hidden^ in the unfearchahle Abyfs of his wisdom.

This confident Aflertion of Des Cartes is fully examin'd and reprov'd by that honourable and excellent Perfon, Mr. Boyle^ in his Difquifition about the final causes of natural l^hi?tgs^ Sed:. i. from page 10. to the End 5 and therefore I ihall not need say much to it, only in brief this, that it seems to me falfe, and of evil consequence, as being derogatory from the Glory of God, and deftru6tive of the Acknowledgment and Belief of a Deity.

For first, Seeing (for instance) that the Eye is employ'd by Man and all Animals for the Ufe of Vifion, which, as they are fram'd, is so neceifary for them, that they could not live without it; and God Almighty knew that it would be so ; and feeing it is so admirably fitted and adapted to this Ufe, that all the M^it and

D 4 Art

jlrt of Men and Angels could not have contriv'd it better, if so well 5 it must needs be highly absurd and unreafonable to afnrm, either that it was not design d at all for thisUfe, or that it is impoffible lor Man to know whether it was or not.

Secondly, How can Man give Thanks and praise to God for the Ufe of his Limbs and Sen-rfes, and tliofe his good Creatures which serve for his Suftenance, when he cannot be fure .they were made in any Refpeft for him ; nay, when 'tis as likely they were not, and that he doth but abufe them to serve Ends for which they were never intended?

Thirdly, This Opinion, as I hinted before, fuperfedes and caffates the best Meditwi we have to demonftrate the Being of a Deity, leaving us no other demonftrative Proof but that taken from the innate Idea-, which, -if it be a Demon-r ftration, is but an obfcure one, not fatisfying many of the Learned theinfelves, and being too fabtle and metaphyseal to be apprehended by vulgar-Capacities, and consequently of no Force to perfuade and convince them.

Secondly, They endeavour to evacuate and difannul our great Argument, by pretending to folve all the FljcZ:nomena of Nature, and to give an Account of the Production and EfFormation of the Univerfe, and all the corporeal Beings therein, both celeftial and terreftrial,- as well animate as inanimate, not excluding Animals themselves, by a flight Hypothejis of Matter so and so divided and mgved. Tht Hypothefis you

have

Parti. //^ //6^ Cre ATioN. 41

have in Des Cartes^ Principles ofPhilofoph)\ Part 2. All the Matter of this vijible PVorld is by him fuppos'd to ha've been at firji divided by God into Farts nearly equal to each other ^ of a nieafi Size^ viz. about the Bigne/'s of tho/e whereof the Heanjenly Bodies are now co7npounded \ all together having as much Motion as is now found in the World ; and these to have been equally movd feveroMy every one by it self about its own Center^ and among one another^ Jb as to coinpoje a fluid Body \ and alfo many of them joi?2tly^ as in company^ about fever al other Points Jo far difiant fro?n one another^ and in the same Manner difposd as the Centers of the fix d Stars ?ww are. So that God had no more to do than to create the Matter, divide it into Parts, and put it into Motion, according to some few Laws, and that would of it self produce the World, and all Creatures therein.

For a Confutation of this Hypothefisy I might refer the Reader . to Dr. Cudwortb's Syltem p. 603, 604. but for his Eafe I will tranfcribe the

Words: God, in the mean Time, {landing

by as* an idle Spectator of this Luciis Atomorum^ this fportful Dance of Atoms^ and of the various results thereof Nay, these mechanick Thcifts have here quite outftripp'd and outdone the yi/i?- mick Theifts themselves, they being much more extravagant than ever those were ; for the profeffed Atheifis durft never venture to affirm, that this regular Syflem of Things refulted from the ' fortuitous Motions of Atoms at the very first, before they had for a long Time together produced many other inept Combinations^ or aggregate

Forms

42 jrl}e WnsDOM of GOD Parti.

Forms of particular Things,and mnfenfica/ Syjiems of the Whole; and they fuppos'd alfo, that the Regularity of Things here in this World would not always continue such neither, but that some Time or other, Confufion and Diforder will break in again. Moreover, that befides this World of ours, there are at this very Inftant innumerable other Worlds irregular, and that there is but one of a thoufand, or Ten Thoufand among the infinite Worlds that have such Regularity in them J the reason of all which is, because it was generally taken for granted, and look'd upon as a common Notion,that ruv aVo tv^^m ^cl\ Tov ctVTO/Lioirov ovS'h ciei corce ylvirai, as Arijiotle expreffeth it ; none of those Things which are from Fortune, or Chance, come to pass always alike. But our mechanick 'Theijls will have their Atoms never so much as once to have fumbled in these their Motions, nor to have produc'd any inept Syftem, or incongruous Forms at all, but from the very first all along to have taken up their Places, and ranged themselves so orderly, methodically and direftly, as that they could not poflibly have done it better had they been direfled by the moll perfect wisdom. Wherefore these Atomrck Theijh utterly evacuate that grand Argument for a God taken from the Phc^nomenoii of the Artificial Frame of Things, which hath been so much infilled upon in all Ages, and which commonly makes the flrongeft Impreflion of any other upon the Minds of Men, ^c, the Atheijisy in the mean Time, laughing in their Sleeves^ and not a little triumphing to see the

Caufc

cause of Tbeifm thus betrayed by its profefs'd Friends and Afferters, and the grand Argument for the same totally flurr'd by them, and so their Work done, as it were, to their Hands.

Now as this argues the greatest Infenfibility of Mind, or Sottifhnefs and Stupidity in pretended Theijisy not to take theleaft Notice of the regular and artificial Frame of Things, or of the Signatupesof the Divine Art and wisdom in them, nor to look upon the World and Things of Nature with any other Eyes than Oxen and horses do;,so are there many Phanomenasin Nature, which being partly above the Force of these mechmiick Powers^ and partly contrary to the same, can therefore never be folv'd by them, nor without Jinal CaufeSy and some vital Principles : As for Example, that of Gravity, or the Tendency of Bodies downward, the Motion of the Diaphragm in respiration, the Syjiole and Diajiole of the Heart, which is nothing but a Mufcular Conllridion and Relaxation, and therefore not mechanical but vital. We might alfo add, among many othefs, the Interfedtion of the Planes of the Equator and Ecliptick^ or the Earth's diurnal Motion upon an Axis not parallel to that of the Eclipticky nor perpendicular to the Plane thereof: For tho* Des Cartes would need imagine this Earth of ours once to have been a Sun, and so it self the Centre of a leffer Vortex^ whose Axis was^ then direded after this Manner, and which therefore still kept the same Site or posture, by reason of the ftrait Particles finding no fit Pores, or Traces, for their PalTages through

44 T/^e Wis-DOM of GOD Parti.

it, but only in this Diredion-; yet does he himself confefSj that because these two Motions of the Earth, the Annual and Diurnal, would be much more conveniently made upon parallel ^xeSy therefore, according to the Laws of mechanism, they {hould be perpetually brought nearer and nearer together, till at length the Equator and Ecliptick come to have their ^;c^^ parallel, which, as it hath not yet come to pass, so neither hath there been for these last Two Thoufand Years (according to the best observations and Judgments of Aftronomers) any nearer Approach made of them one to another. V/herefore the Continuation of these two Motions of the Earth, the Annual and Diurnal, upon :A:>^e^s not parallel, is refolvable into nothing but ^ f?2al and mental cause, or the to BlAri^cr, because it was best it should be so, the Variety of the Seafons of the Year depending thereupon. But the greatest of all the particular Pfe;2(5;;^^77^, is' the Formation and Organization of the Bodies of Animals, consisting of such Variety and Curiofity, that these mechanick Philofophers being no way able to give an Account thereof from the necessary' Motion of Matter, imgiiided by Mind for Ends^ prudently therefore break off their Syftem there, when they should come to Aninials, and so leave it altogether untouch'd. We acknowledge indeed there is a Pojlhumous Piece extant, imputed to Carter, and entitled, De la Formation du Fcetus^ wherein there is some Pretence made to folve all this fortuitous mechanism. But as the Theory thereof is built wholly upon a falfe Suppofition,

Parti. 7>//;5^ Cre ATioK. 4^

lition, fufficiently confuted by our Harvey, m his Book of Generation, 'that the Seed doth materially enter into the Compofition of the Egg ; fa is it all along precarious and exceptionable : Nor doth it extend at all to Differences that are in several Animals, nor offer the leail reason why an Animal of one Species might not be formed out of the Seed of another. Thus far the Docior, wich whom for the main I do confent. I shall only add, that Natural Philofophers, when they endeavour to give an Account of any of the Works of Nature, by preconceived Principles of their own, are for the moil: Part grofly miftaken, and confuted by Experience ; as Des Cartes in a Matter that lay before him, obvious to Senfe, and infinitely more eafy to find out the cause of, than to give an Account of the Formation of the World ; that is, the Pulfe of the Heart, which he attributes to an Ebullition and iiidden Expanfion of the Blood, in its Ventricles, after the Manner of the Milk, which being heated to such a Degree, doth fuddenly, and as it were all at once, flu ill uo and run over the Veffel. Whether this Ebullition be caus'd by a Nitro-Sulphureous Ferment lodg'd especially in the left Ventricle of the Heart, which mingling with the Blood, excites such an Ebullition, as we see made by the Mixture of some chymical Liquors, viz. Oil of Vitriol, and deliquated Salt of Tartar ; or, by the vital Flame warming and boiling the Blood. But this Conceit of his is contrary both to reason and Experience : For, firfr, it is altogether

unrea-

unreafonable to imagine and affirm that the cool venal Blood should be heated to so high a Degree in so short a Time as the Interval of two Pulfes, which is less than the lixth Part of a Minute. Secondly, in cold Animals, as for Example, Rehy the Heart will beat for many Hours after it is taken out of the Body, yea, tho' the Ventricle be open'd, and all the Blood fqueez'd out. Thirdly, The process of the Fibres which compound the Sides of the Ventricles running in Spiral Lines from the Tip to the Bafe of the Heart, some one Way, and some the contrary, do clearly feew that the Syjlole of the Heart is nothing but a Mufcular Conftridion, as a Purfe is fhut by drawing the Strings contrary-ways; which is alfo confirmed by Experience : For if the Vertex of the Heart be cut off, and a Finger thruft up into one of the Ventricles, in every Syjlole the Finger will be fenfibly and manifeftly pinch'd by the Sides of the Ventricle. But for a full Confutation of this Fancv, I refer the Reader to Dr. Loii-ers Treatife De Corde^ cap. 2. and Des Cartess Rules concerning the transferring of Motion from one Body in Motion to another in Motion, or in rest, are the most of them by Experience found to be falfe y as they affirm who have made Trial of them.

The Pulfe of the Heart Dr. Cudworth would have to be no Mechanical, but a Vital Motion, which to me seems probable, because it is not under the Command of the Will; nor are we confcious of any power to cause^ or to reftrain it, but it is carried on and continued without our

Know-

Part L in /^^ C r e at i o n. 47

Knowledge, or Notice ; neither can it be caufed by the Impulfe of any external Movent, unless it be Heat. But how can the Spirit, agitated by Heat, unguided by a vital Principle^ produce such a regular reciprocal Motion? If that Site which the Heart and its Fibres have in the Diajiole be most natural to them, (as it seems to be) why doth it again contrad: it self, and not rest in that Pojfture ? If it be once contracted in a Syjiole by the Influx of the Spirits, why, the Spirits continually flowing in without Let, doth it not always remain so ? [for the Syjiole seems to resemble the forcible Bending of a Spring, and the Dia/lole its flying out again to its natural Site.] What is the Spring and principal Efficient of this Reciprocation ? What diredts and moderates the Motions of the Spirits ? They being but ftupid and fenfelefs Matter, cannot of themselves continue any regular and constant Motion, without the Guidance and Regulation of some intelligent Being. You will say. What Agent is it which you would have to eflfed: this? The fenfitive Soul it cannot be, because that is indivifible ; but the Heart when feparated wholly from the Body . in some Animals ^ continues still to pulfe for a considerable Time: Nay, when it hath quite ceas'd, it may be brought to beat a-new by the Application of warm Spittle, or by pricking it gently with a Pin, or Needle. I answer, it may be in these instances, the fcattering Spirits remaining in the Heart, may for a Time, being agitated by the Heat, cause these faint Pulfations> tho' I should ratloer attribute them to a plajiick

^ Nature^

Nature^ or vital Princple, as the Vegetation of Plants must alfo be.

But, to proceed, neither can I wholly acquiefce in the Hypothefis of that Honourable and defervedly Famous Author, I formerly had Occafion to mention, which I find in ]i\s free Enquiry into the vulgar Notion of Nature, p. 77, 78. delivered in these Words. " " I think it probable, "' that the great and wife Author of Things did, " when he first form'd the Univerfe and undi- " ftinguifh'd Matter into the World, put its Parts " into various Motions, whereby they were ne- *' cefiarily divided into numberlefs Portions of " differing Bulks, Figures, and Situations, in Re- '' fped; of each other : And that by his infinite " wisdom ftjfid Power, he did so guide and over- " rule the Motions of these Parts, at the Begin- " ning of Things, as that (whether in a shorter '' or a longer Time, reason cannot determine) *' they Y^ere finally difpos'd into that beautiful '' and orderly Frame that we call the IVorld; *' among whose Parts some were so curiously^ " contrived, as to be fit to become the Seed, or '' feminal Principles, of Plants and .Animals. '' And, I further conceive, that he fettled such " Laws, or Rules, of local Motion among the *' Parts of the Univerfal Matter, that by his or- " dinary and preferving Concourfe, the several " Parts of the Univerfe thus once com pleated, " should be able to maintain the .great Con- '' ftrudion, or Syftem, and Oeconomy of the *' Mundane Bodies, and propagate the Species '' of living Creatures." The i'^mt ■ Hypothejis he

repeats

repeats again, pag. 124, 125. of the same Treatife.

ThAsHypothefSy I say, I cannot fully acquiefce in, becaufc an intelligent Being seems to me requifire to execute the Laws of Motion : For firll, Motion being a fluent Thing, and one Part of its Duration being absolutely independent upon another, it doth not follow, that because ahy thing moves this Moment, it 'must necessarily continue to do so the next, unless it were aftually polTefs'd of its future Motion, which is a Contradidion ; but it stands in as much Need of an Efficient to preferve and continue its Motion, as it did at first to produce it. Secondly, Let Matter be divided into the fubtileft Parts imaginable, and these be mov'd as fwiftly as you will, it is but a fenfelefs and ftupid Being still, and makes no nearer approach to Senfe, Perception, or vital Energy, than it had before ; and do but only flop the internal Motion of its Parts, and reduce them to rest, the fineft and most fubtile Body that is, may become as grofs' and heavy, and flifF, as Steel, or Stone. And, as for any external Laws, or eflablifh'd Rules of Motion, the flupid Matter is not capable of obferving, or taking any Notice of them, but would be as fuUen as the Mountain was that MaJmnet commanded to come down to him \ neither can those Laws execute themselves : Therefore there mufl, befides' Matter and Law, be some Efficient, and that either a Quality, or Power, inherent in the Matter it self, v/hich is hard to conceive, or some

E ' external

external intelligent Agent, either God himself immediately, or some Plajlick Nature^

Happening lately to read The Chrijitan Virttiqfdy written by the same Author of the Enquiry into the vulgar Notiom of Nature^ (the illuftrious Mr. Boyle) I find therein these Words : *' Nor will the Force of all that has been said " for God*s fpecial Providence be eluded, by *' faying, w'ith some Deifts, That after the firil *' Formation of the Univerfe, all Things were " brought to pass by the fettled Laws of Nature. " For though this be confidently, and not with- *' out Colour, pretended, yet, I confefs, it doth

" not fatisfie me : For I look upon a Law as

" a Moral, not Phyfical cause, as being indeed " but a notional Thing, according to which an '* intelligent and free Agent is bound to regukte " its Adtions. But inanimate Bodies are utterly " uncapable of understanding what it is, or what " it enjoins, or when they aft conformably, or *' unconformably to it : Therefore the Adions " of inanimate Bodies, which cannot incite, or " moderate their own Adlions, are produced by ** real Power, not by Laws.

All this being confonant to what I have here written, against what I took to be this Honourable Perfon's Hypothejis, I must needs, to do him Right, acknowledge my self miftaken -, perceiving now, that his Opinion was, that God Ahnighty did not only eftablifh Laws and Rules of local Motion among the Parts of the univerfal Matter, but did, and does al so himself, execute them, or move the Parts of Matter^ according

to

to them : So that we are in the main agreed, differing chiefly about the Agent that executes those Laws, which he holds to be God himself immediately, we a Plaftick Nature ; for the reasons aliedg'd by Dr. Cudworthy in his Syftem, pag. 149. which are, first, because the former, according to vulgar Apprehenfion, would render the Divine Providence operofe, folicitous, and diftraftious ; and thereby make the Belief of it entertained with greater Difficulty, and give Advantage to Atheifts. Secondly, It is not so decorous in Refpefl: of God, that he £hould cLvrcvpyeiv cvnxvroLy set his own Hand, as it were, to every Work, and immediately do all the meaneft and trifling'ft Things himself drudgingly, without making Ufe of any inferior or fubordinate Minifter. these two reasons are plauflble, but not cogent j the two following are of greater Force. Thirdly, The slow and gradual process that is in the Generation of Things, which would seem to be a vain and idle Pomp, or trifling pormality, if the Agent were omnipotent. Fourthly, Thcfe aV^pT>i/>6ara, as Arijiotle calls them, those Errors and Bungles which were committed when the Matter is inept, or contumacious, as in Monfters, &c, which argue the Agent not to be irreflftible ; and that Nature is such a Thing as is not altogether uncapable, as well as human Art, of being fometimes fruftrated. and difappointed by the Indifpofition of the Matter: Whereas an omnipotent Agent would always do its Work infallibly and irrefiftibly, no Ineptitude, or Stubbornefs of the Matcer^ being ever.

E 2 able

T2 neWisDouo/GOD Parti.

able to hinder such an one, or make him bungle, or fumble in any thing. So far the Dodlor. For my Part, I flaould make no Scruple to attribute the Formation of Pla?2ts, their Growth and Nutrition, to the vegetable Soul in them ; and likewife the Formation of Afzimalsy to the Vegetative Power of their Souls 5 but that the Segments and Cuttings of some Plants, nay, the very Chips and smallest Fragments of their Body, Branches, or Roots, will grow and become perfect Plants themselves, and so the vegetable Soul, if that w^ere the Architedl, would be divifible, and consequently no fpiritual, or intelligent Being; which the Tlafiick Principle vnuG: be, as we have {hewn: For that must prefide over the whole Oeconomy of the Plant, and be one fingle Agent, which takes Care of the Bulk and Figure of the Whole, and the Situation, Figure, Texture of all the Parts, Root, Stalk, Branches, Leaves, Flowers, Fruit, and all their VefTels* and Juices. I therefore incline to Dr. Cudworth'% Opinion, that God ufes for these Eifefts the fubordinate Miniftry of some inferior Plajtick Nature ; as, in his Works of Providence, he doth of Angels. . For the description whereof I refer the Reader to his Syjiem.

Secondly, In particular I am difficult to believe, that the Bodies of Ajiimah can be form'd by Matter divided and mov'd by what Laws you will, or can imagine, without the immediate Preiidency, Diredion, and Regulation of some intelligent Being. In the Generation,, or first Formation of, suppose, the human Body out of I (tho'

(tlW not an homogeneous Liquor, yet) a fluid Subflance, the only material Agent, or Mover, is a moderate Heat. Now how this, by producing an inteftine Motion in the Particles of the Matter, which can be conceiv'd to differ in nothing elfe but Figure, Magnitude, and Gravity, should, by Vertue thereof, not only feparate the Heterogeneous Parts, but affemble the HoiiK)geneous into Mafles, or Syftems, and that not each Kind into one Mafs, but into many and disjoined Ones, as it were so many Troops 5 and that in each Troop the particular Particles should take their Places, and cast themselves into such a Figure ; as for Example, the Bones, being about 300, are form'd of various Sizes and Shapes, so fituate and conneded, as to be fubfervient to many hundred Intentions and Ufes, and many of them confpire to one and the same Adiion, and all this contrarily to the Lawg of Specifick Gravity, in whatever posture the Body be formed ; for the Bones, whose component Parts are the heavier, will be above some Part's of the Flefh which are the lighter ; how much more then, feeing it is form'd with the Head, (which for its Bignefs is the heavieft of all the Parts) upperm.oft. This, I say, I cannot by any Means conceive. I might instance in all the Homogeneous Parts of the Body, either Sites and Figures, and ask by what imaginable Laws of ^Motion their Bulk, Figure, Situation, and Connedion can be made out ? What Account can be given of the Valves, of the Veins and Arteries of the Heart, and of the Veins

E 3 ^ elfe-

elfewhere, and of their Situation ; of the Figure and Confiftency of all the Humours and Membranes of the Eye, all confpiring and exadly fitted to the Ufe of Seeing ? But I have touched upon that already, and shall discourse it largely afterward. You will ask me. Who, or what, is the Operator in the Formation of the Bodies of Man,- and other Animals ? I answer. The fenfitive Soul it self, if it be a fpiritual and immaterial Subftance, as I am inclinable to believe ; but if it be material, and consequently the whole Anunal but a mere Machine, or Automaton^ as I can hardly admit, then must we have recourfe to a Plajiick Nature,

That the Soul of Brutes is material, and the whole Animal, Soul and Body, but a mere Machine, is the Opinion, publickly own'd and declared, of Des Cartes^ Gajfendus, Dr. Willis^ and others. The same is alfo necessarily confequent upon the Dodlrine of the Peripateticks, viz. That the fenfitive Soul is educed out of the Power of the Matter ; for nothing can be educed out of the Matter but what was there before ; which mufl: be either Matter, or some Modification of it. And therefore they cannot grant it to be a fpiritual Subftance, unless they will affert it to be educed out of nothing. This Opinion, I say, I can hardly digeft : I ihould rather think, Animals to be endu'd with a lower Degree of reason, than that they are mere Machines. I could instance in many Adions of Brutes, that are hardly to be accounted for without reason and Argumentation j as that commonly

monly noted of Dogs, that running before their Mafters, they will ilop at a Divarication of the Way, 'till they see which Hand their Mafters will take ; and that when they have gotten a Prey, which they fear their Mafters will take from them, they will run away and hide ir, and afterwards return to it. What Account can be given why a Dog, being to leap upon a Table which he fees tp be too high for him to reach at once, if a Stool, or Chair, happens to stand near it, doth first mount up that, and from thence the Table ? If he was a Machine, or Piece of Clockwork, and this Motion caused by the ftriking of a Spring, there is no reason imaginable why the Spring being set on Work, should not carry the Machine in a right Line tov^^ard the Objedt that put it in Motion, as well when the Table is high as when it is low ; whereas I have often obferv'd the first Leap the Creature hath taken up the Stool, not to be diredly toward the Table, but in a Line oblique, and much declining from the Objed: that mov'd it, or that Part of the Table on which it ftood.

Many the like Adions there are, which I shall not fpend Time to relate. Should this be true, that beasts were Automata^ or Machines, they could have no Senfe, or Perception of pleasure, or Pain, and consequently no Cruelty could be exercis'd towards them; which is contrary to the doleful Significations they make when beaten, or tormented, and contrary to the common Senfe of Mankind, all Men naturally pitying them, as apprehending them to have such a

E 4 . Senfe

56 7%e Wis-DOM, of GOD Parti.

«

Senfe and Feeling of Pain and Mifery as thcmfelves have ; vv^hereas no Man is troubled to see a Plant torn, or cut, or ftampt, or mangled how you pleafe ; and at last feemingly contrary to the Scripture too ; for it is said, Prov. xii. lo. ^ righteous Man regardeth the Life of his Beajiy but the tender Mercies of the Wicked are cruel. The former Claufe is ufually Englifli'd, A good Man is merciful to his Beaji ; which is the true Expofition of its as appears by the oppoiite Claufe,. that the Wicked are crueL What less then can be inferred from this Place, than that Cruelty may be exercis'd towards beasts, which, were they mere Machines, it could not be r To which I do not see what can be answer'd, but that the Scripture accommodates it self to the common, tho' falfe. Opinion of Mankind, who take these Animals to be endued with Senfe of Pain, and think that Cruelty may be exercised towards them 5 tho', in reality, there is no such thing : Befides, having the same Members and Organs of Senfe as we have, it is very probable they have the same Senfations and Perceptions with us. To this Des Cartes answers, or indeed faith, he hath nothing to answer ; but that if they think as well as wcj they have an immortal Soul as v/eU as we: Which is not at all likely, bccaufe there is no reason to believe it of some Animals without believing it of all ; whereas there are many too imperfedi to believe it of them, such as are OyJterSy and SpongeSy and the like. To which I answer, That there is no Ncceflity they (hould be immortal,

be-

because it is pdfTible they may be deflroy'd, or annihilated. But I shall not wade further into this Controverfy, tecaufe it is befide my Scope, and there hath u^n as much written of it already, as I have to say, by Dr. Moore^ Dr. Ciidworth^ Des Cartes^ Dr. Willisy and others. Pro and Con.

Of the njijible Works of God ^ and their Divifon.

I come now to take a View of the Works of the Creation, and to observe fomething of the wisdom of God difcernable in the Formation of them, in their Order and Harmony, aqd in their Ends and Ufes : And first, I (hall run them over (lightly, remarking chiefly what is obvious and exposed to the Eyes and Notice of the more carelefs and incurious Obferver. Secondly, I (hall feled: one or two particular Pieces, and take a more exad: Survey of them ; tho* even in these, more will efcape our Notice than can be discover d by the most diligent Scrutiny; for our Eyes and Senfes, however arm*d or aflifted, are too grofs to difcern the Curiofity of the Workman(hip of Nature, or those minute Parts by which it ad:s, and of which Bodies are compos'd y and our understanding too dark and infirm to discover and comprehend all the Ends and Ufes to which the infinitely wife Creator did design them.

But before 1 proceed, being put in Mind thereof by the mention of the A(ri (lance of our Eyes, I cannot omi-t one general observation concerning the Curiofity of the Works of Nature

ture in Comparifon of the Works of Art, which I shall propofe in the late Bifliop of Chejlers Words, \TreatiJe of Natural Religion^ Lib. i. c. 6.) " The observations which have been made in " these latter Times by the Help of the Micro- *' J'cope^ since we had the Ufe and Improvement *' of it, discover a vast Difference between Na- *^ tural and Artificial Things. Whatever is Na- '' tural, beheld thro' that, appears exquifitely *' formed, and adorn'd with all imaginable Ele- *' gancy and Beauty. There are such inimita- «^ ble Glidings in the fmallefl Seeds of Plants, " but especially in the Parts of Animals, in the *' Head, or Eye, of a small Fly ; such Accu- *' racy. Order, and Symmetry in the Frame of ** the utmoll minute Creatures, a Loufe^ for Hx- *' ample, or a Mite^ as no Man were able to con- «' ceive without feeing of them. Whereas the *' most curious Works of Art, the {liarpeft and «' fineft Needle, doth appear as a blunt rough «' Bar of Iron, coming from the Furnace, or the «' Forge: The most accurate Engravings, orEm- <' bofments, seem such rude, bungling, and de- «' form'd Work, as if they had been done with a «' Mattock, or Trowel ; so vast a Difference is <' there betwixt the Skill of Nature, and the «' Rudenefs and Imperfection of Art. I might «' add, that the Works of Nature, the better '* Lights and Glaffes you ufe, the more clear " and exadtly form'd they appear; whereas the " Effedts of human Art, the more curiously they ** are viewed and examin'd, the more of Defor- " mity they discover.

This

This being premifed, for our more clear and diftind: Proceeding in our curfory View of the Creation, I shall rank the Parts of this material and visible World' under several Heads. Bodies are either inanimate or animate. Inanimate Bodies are either calejiial or terreftriaL Ccelejlialy as the Sun^ Moon, and Stars ; Terrejirial, are either fimple, as the four Elements, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air ; or mixt, either imperfedlly, as the Meteors, or more perfedly, as Stones, Metals, Minerals, and the like. Animate Bodies are either such as are endued with a Vegetative Soul, as Plants ; or a Senjitive Soul, as the Bodies of Animals, Birds, Beajis, Fijhes, and hije.5ls ; or a Rational Soul, as the Body of Man, and the Vehicles of Angels, if any such there be.

I make ufe of this Divifion to comply with the common and receiv'd Opinion, and for eafier Comprehenfion and Memory ; tho' I do not think it agreeable to Philofophick Verity and Accuracy, but do rather incline to the Atomick Hypothejis : For these Bodies, we call Elements, ate only the Ingredients of mix'd Bodies ; neither are they absolutely fimple themselves, as they do exift in the World, the Sea Water containing a copious Salt manifest to Senfe ; and both Sea and Frefh-water fufficing to nourifli many Species of Fi{h, and consequently containing the various Parts of which their Bodies are compounded. And I believe there are many Species of Bodies which the Peri'pateticks call mix'd, which are as fimple as the Elements themfelyes, as Metals, Salts, and some Sorts of

Stones.

Stones. I should therefore, with Dr. Grew, and others, rather attribute the various Species of inanimate Bodies to the divers Figures of the minute Particles of vs^hich they are made up : And the reason w^hy there is a Set, and constant Number, of them in the World, none deftroy'd, nor any new ones produc'd, I take to be, because the Sum of the Figures of those minute Bodies into which Matter was at first divided, is determinate and iix'd. 2. because those mimute Parts are indivifible, not absolutely, but by any natural Force ; so that there neither is, nor can be, more or fewer of them : For were they divifible into small and diverfly-figur*d Parts by Fire, or any other natural Agent, the Species of Nature must be confounded, some might be loft and deftroy'd, but new ones would certainly be produc'd ; unless we could suppose these new diminutive Particles should again aflemble and marfhal themselves into Corpufcles of such Figures as they compounded before ; which I see no Poffibility for them to do, without some ©«c^ dirh iJinyJia; to dired: them : Not that I think these inanimate Bodies to consist wholly of one Sort o? Atoms, but that4:heir Bulk consists mainly or chiefly of one Sort. But whereas it may be objedled that Metals (which of all others seem to be most fimple) may be tranfmuted one into another, and so the Species doth not depend upon the being compounded of Atoms of one Figure ; I answer, I am not fully satisfied of the Matter of Fad:: But if any such Tranfmutation be, poflibly all Metals may be of one

Species,

Species, and the Diverfity may proceed from the Admixture of difierent Bodies with the Principles of the Metal If it be ask'd, Why may not Atoms of different Species concur to the Compolition of Bodies ? And so, tho' there be but a few ' Sorts of original Principles, may there not be produced infinite Species of compound Bodies, as by the various Difpoiitions and Combinations of Twenty-four Letters innumerable Words may be made up? I answer, hecaufe the Heterogeneous Atoms or Principles are not naturally apt to cohere and ftick together when they are mingled in the same Liquor, as the Homogeneous readily do.

I do not believe that the Species of Principles, or indivifible Particles, are exceeding numerous ; but possibly the immediate component Particles of the Bodies of Plants and Animals may be themselves compounded.

Of the Heavenly Bodies,

Before I come to treat of the Heavenly Bodies in particular, I shall premife in general, that the whole Univerfe is divided into two Sorts of. Bodies, the one very thin and fluid, the other more denfe, folid and confiftent. The thin and fluid is the Ether^ comprehending the Air or atmosphere encompafling the particular Stars 'and Planets. Now, for the Stability and Perpetuity of the whole Univerfe, the Divine wisdom and Providence hath given to the folid and ftable Pares a two-fold Power, one

of

of Gravity, and the other of Circular Motion. By the first they are preferv'd from Diffolution and DifTipation, which the fecond would otherwife infer : For it being by the Confent of Philofophers, an innate Property of every Body mov'd circularly about any Centre, to recede, or endeavour to recede, from that Centre of its Motion, and the more ftrongly the fvvifter it is mov'd, the Stars and Planets being whirl'd about with g^at Velocity, would fuddenly, did nothing inhibit it, at least in a ihort Time, be fhatter'd in Pieces, and fcatter'd every Way thro' the Ether. But now their Gravity unites and binds them up faft, hindring the Difperfion of their Parts. I will not difpute what Gravity is s only I will add, that, for ought I have heard, or read, the Mechanical Philofophers have not as yet given a clear and fatisfadiory Account of it.

The fecond Thing is a circular Motion upon their own AxeSy and in some of them alfo, it's probable, about other Points, if we admit the Hypothefis of every fix'd Stars being a 'Sun or Sun-like Body, and having a Choir of JPlanets in like Manner moving about him. these Revolutions, we have reason to believe, are as exad:ly equal and uniform as the Earth's are ; which could not be, were there any Place for Chance, and did not a Providence continually over-see and fecurc them from all Alteration or Imminuation, which either internal Changes in their own Part, or external Accidents and Occurrences, would at one Time or other nece^arily

induce.

induce. Wldiouc this circular Motion of the Earth, here could be no living : One Hemifphere would be condemned to perpetual Cold and Darknefs, the other continually roafted and parch'd by the Sun- beams. And it is reafonable to think, that this circular Motion is as necessary to most other Planetary Bodies, as it is to the Earth. As for the fix'd Stars, if they be Suft-like Bodies, it is probable alfo each of them moves' circularly upon its own Axis^ as ^e Sun doth : But what necessity there is of such a Motion, for want of understanding the Nature of those Bodies, I must confefs my self not yet to comprehend ; tho' that it is very great, I doubt not, both for themselves, and for the Bodies about them.

first, for the Celeftlal, or Heavenly Bodies, the Equability and Conftancy of their Motions, the Certainly of their Periods and Revolutions, the Conveniency of their Order and Situations, argue them to be ordain'd and govern'd by wisdom and understanding ; yea, so much wisdom as Man cannot eafiiy fathom or comprehend : For we see, by how much the Hypotbejes of Aft.ronomers are more fimple and conformable to reason, by so much do they give a better Account of the Heavenly Motions. It is reported oi Alphonfm King of Arragon^ (I know not whether truly) that when he law and consider'd the many Eccentricks^ Epicycles^ Epicycles upon Epicycles, Lihrations, and Contrariety of Motions, which were requifite in the old Hypothejis to give an Account of the Cele- 1 ^ Jlial

Jlial Phanome7ta, he fhauld prefume blafphemoufly to say, that the Univerfe was a bungling Piece 5 and that if he had been of God's Counfel, he could have diredled him to have made it better. A Speech as ra{h and ignorant, as daring and prophane.

For it w^as nothing but Ignorance of the true process of Nature, that induced the Contrivers of that Hjpothefis to invent such absurd Suppolitiofts, and him to accept them for .true, and attribute them to the great Author of the Heavenly Motions : For in the New Hypothefis of the Modern Aflronomers, we see most of those Abfurdities and Irregularities re<5Vify'd and removed ;. and I doubt , not but they would all vanifh, could we certainly discover the true Method and process of Nature in thbfe Revolutions : For feeing in those Works of Nature which we converfe with, we constantly find those Axioms true, Natiira no?i facit circuituSy Nature doth not fetch a Compafs when it may proceed in a ftraight Line ; and Natura nee abimdat in fuperfluisy nee deficit in neeejfariisy Nature abounds not in what is fuperfluous, neither is deficient in what is necefiTary : We may alfo rationally conclude concerning the Heavenly Bodies, feeing there is so much Exadnefs obferv'd in the Time of their Motions, that they punctually come about in the same Periods to the Hundredth Part of a Minute, as may, beyond Exception, be demonftrated by comparing their Revolutions ; furcly there is alfo us'd the rpoft fimple, facile, and convenient Way for

the

the Performance of them. Among thefc Heavenly Bodies,

first, the Sun^ a vast Globe of Fire, efteem^d by the ancienter and most modeft Computatioa above 160 Times bigger than the Earth; the very Life of this inferior World, without vsrhole falutary and vivifick Beams all Motion^ both Animal, Vital and Natural, would fpeedi- \y ceafe, and nothing be left here below btit Darknefs and Death. All Plants and Animals must needs in a very fliort Time be not only mortified, but, together with the Surface of Land and Water, frozen as hard as a Flint 01 ridamant : So that of all the Creatures of the World, the ancient Heathens had most reason to worfhip him as a Godj tho' no true reason , because he was but a GreaturCj and not God: And we Chriftians do think, that the Service of the Animals that live upon the Earth, and principally Man, was one End of his Creation; feeing without him there could no such Things have been. This Sim, I say, according to the old Hypothefis, whirl'd round aboiit the Earth daily with incredible Celerity, making Night and Day by his rifing and fetting ; Winter and Summer, by his Accefs to the several Tropicks, creating such a grateful Variety of Seafons^ enlightning all Parts of the Earth by his Beams^ and cherifhing them by his Heat, fituate and mov*d so»in refpedt of this fublunary Worlds (and it's likely alfo in refpedt of all the Planets about him) that Art and Council could not have delign'd either to have placed him better,

F ^ or

or mov'd him more conveniently for the Service thereof, as I could eafily make appear by the Inconveniences that v^ould follow upon the Suppofition of any other Situation and Motion, shew forth the great wisdom of him who so difpos'd and mov'd him.

Secondly, The Moon, a Body in all Probability fomewhat Hke the Earth we live upon, by its constant and regular Motion, helps us to divide our Time, reflects the Sun-beams to us, and so by illuminating the Air, takes away in some measure the difconfolate Darknefs of our Winter- Nights; procures, or at least regulates, the Fluxes and Refluxes of the Sea, whereby the Water is kept in constant Motion, and preferv'd from Putrefaction, and so render'd more falutary for the Maintenance of its Breed, and ufeful and ferviceable for Man's Convenience of Fifliing and Navigation ', not to mention the great Influence it is fuppos'd to have upon all moift Bodies, and the Growth and Increafe of Vegetables and Animals : Men generally obferving the Age of the Moon in the planting of all Kinds of Trees, fowing of Grain, grafting and inoculating, ' and pruning of Fruit-Trees, gathering of Fruit, cutting of Corn or Grafs -, and thence alfo making Prognofticks of Weather, because such observations seem to me uncertahi. Did this Lutninavj serve to no other Ends and Ufes, as 1 am^ perfuaded it doth many, especially to maintain the Creatures which in all likelihood breed and inhabit there, for which I refer you to the ingenious Treatifcs written by Bifbop Wilkins, and

Monfieur

Monfieur Fontenelle^ on that Subjed ; yet these were enough to evince it to be the Effed; an4 Produdt of Divine wisdom and Power.

Thirdly, As for the rest of the PlaneU^ befides their particular Ufes, which are to us unknown, or merely conjedlural, their Courfes and Revolutions, their Stations and Retrogradations, obferv'd constantly so many Ages together in most certain and determinate Periods of Time, do fufficiently demonftrate, that their Motions are inftituted and governed by Counfel, wisdom and understanding.

Fourthly, The like may be said of the jixd Stars^ whose Motions are regular, equal and constant : So that we see nothing in the Heavens which argues Chance, Vanity, or Error ; but on the contrary, Rule, Order, and Conftancy ; the EfFefts and Arguments of wisdom: Wherefore, as Cicero excellently concludes, Calejiem ergo admirabilem ordinem^ incredibilemque conjiantianiy ex qua converfatio & falus omnium omnis oritur^ qui vacare mente putat, nee ipji mentis expers habendus ejt : " Wherefore who- " foever thinketh that the admirable Order, and ** incredible Conftancy, of the Heavenly Bodies, ^' and their Motions, whereupon the Preferva*- " tion and Welfare of all Things doth depend, is " not govern d by Mind and understanding, he " himself is to be accounted void thereof.'^ And again, " Shall we (faith he) when we see aa *' Artificial Engine, as a Sphere or Dyal, or " the like, at first ^ight acknowledge, that it is *< a Work of reason and Art ? Cum autcra impe^

F 2 turn

68 77)eWisDouofGOD Parti.

turn cceli^ admirabili cum celeritate moveri ver^ tique videamm conjiantijjime conjicientetn vicijji" tudiiies anniverfarias^ cum fummd Salute & Confervatione rerum omnium^ dubitare quin ea non folum ratione jimit^ Jed excellenti quddam Divindque ratione: " And can we, when we see the Force of the Heavens mov*d and whirled about with admirable Celerity, most constantly finifhing its anniverfary Viciffitudes, to the eminent Welfare and Prefervation of all Things, doubt at all that these Things are performed not only by reason, but by a certain excellent and divine reason ? To these Things I shall add an observation, which I must confefs my self to have borrowed of the honourable Perfon more than once mentioned already, that even the Eclipfes of the Sun and Moon, tho* they be frightful Things to the Superftitious Vulgar, and of ill Influence on Mankind, if we may believe the no less fuperftitious Aftrologers, yet to knowing Men, that can skilfully apply them, they are of great Ufe, and such as common Heads could never have imagined : Since not only they may on divers Occafions, help to fettle Cbro^ nology^ and redifie the Miftakes of Hijiorians that writ many Ages ago; but which is the* a less Wonder, yet of greater Utility, they are (as Things yet stand^ neceifary to define with competent Certainty, the Longitude of Places or Points on the Terraqueous Globe, which is a Thing of very great Moment not only to Geography^ but to the most ufeful and impor- 2 tant

Part T. in the C r e a t i o n. 69

tant Art of Navigation, To which may be added, which I shall hereafter mention, that they serve to demonftrate the fpherical Roundnefs of the Earth : So that I may well conclude with the Pfalmift, Fjal xix. i. T!he Heavens declare the Glory of Gody and the Firmament peweth his Handy-work,

Of Terrejlrial and Inanimate Simple Bodies,

I come now to consider the Terreftrial Bodies. I shall say nothing of the whole Body of the Earth in general, because I referve that as one of the Particulars I Ihall more carefully and curiously examine.

Terreftrial Bodies, according to our Method before propounded, are either ina^iifnatey or ani-- mate ; and the inanimate either fvnple^ or mixt ; Simple, as the four Elements, Fire, Water^ Earth and Air : I call these Elements in Compliance (as I said before) with the vulgarly-receiv'd Opinion ; not that I think them to be the Principles or component Ingredients of all other fublunary Bodies : I might call them the four great Aggregates of Bodies of the same Species, or four Sort of Bodies, of which there are great Aggregates. these, notwithftanding they are endued with contrary Qualities, and are continually encroaching one upon another, yet they are so balanced, and kept in such an. Equilibriiim,^ that neither prevaileth over other, but what one gets in one Place it lofeth in another.

first, Fire cheriflieth and reviveth by its Heat, without which all Things would be tor-

F 3 . pid.

Did, and without Motion, nay, without Fife, no Life, it being the vital Flame refiding in the Blood that keeps the bodily Machine in Motion, and renders it a fit Organ for the Soul tq work by. The Ufes of Fire (I do not here speak of the Peripateticks Elementary Fire in the Concave of the Moon, which is but a mere Figment, but our ordinary Culinary) are in a Manner infinite for dreffing and preparing of Viftuals, bak'd, boil'd and roaft -, for melting and refining of Metals and Minerals -, for the Fufion of Glafs, [a Material whose Ufes are so many, that it is not eafy to enumerate them, it ferving us to make Windows for our houses, Drinking- Veffels, Veffels to diftil and preferve all Sorts of fermented Liquors, diftiU'd Water, Spirits, Oils, Extrads, and other Chymical Preparations, as alfo Veffels to diftil and prepare them in ; for Looking-Glaffes, Spedacles, Microfcopes and Telefcopes, whereby our Sight is not only relieved, but wonderfully affifted to make rare Difcoveries] for making all Sorts of Inftrumcnts for Husbandry, mechanick Arts and Trades, all Sorts of Arms or Weapons of War defenfive and offenfive ; for fulminating Engines; for burning of Lime, baking of Bricks, Tiles, and all Sorts of Potters Veffels, or earthen Ware ; for cafting and forging Metaline Veffels and Utenfils; for Diftillations, and all Chymical Operations hinted before in the Ufe of Glafs ; for affording us Lights for any Work or Exercife in Winter- Nights j for digging in Mines and dark Caverns ; and finally, by its comfortable Warmth

fecu-

fecuring us from the Injuries of Cold, or relieving us when we have been bitten and benum'd with it. A Subjedl or Utenlil of so various and inexplicable Ufe, who could have invented and formed, but an infinitely wife and powerful Efficient?

Secondly, The Air serves us, and all Animals, to breathe in, containing the Fewel of that yital Flame we speak of, without which it would fpeedily languifh and go out 5 so neceifary it is for us, and other Land-Animals, that without the Ufe of it we could live but very few Minutes : Nay, FiQ>es and other Water-Animals cannot abide without the Ufe of it 'y for if you put Fifh into a VelTel of a narrow Mouth full of Water, they will live and swim there, not only Days and Months, but even Years; but if with your Hand, or any other Cover, you flop the Veffel so as wholly to exclude the Air, or interrupt its Communication with the Water, they will fuddenly be fufFocatedj as Rondeletiiis affirms he often experimented. If you fill not the Vefll^l up to the Top, but leave some Space empty for the Air to take up, and then clap your Hand up-r on the Mouth of the VeiTel, the Fiffies will prefently contend which shall get uppermoft in the Water, that so they may enjoy the open Air; which I have alfo obferv'd them to do in a Pool of Water that hath been almofi: dry in the*Summer-Time, because the Air that infinuated it self into the Water did not fuffice them for respiration. Neither is it less ne-

F 4 ccflary

ceffary for InfeGs than it is for other Animalsj, but rather more, these having more Air-Veffels for their Bulk by far than they, there being many Orifices on each Side their Bodies for the Admiflion of Air, which if you flop with Oil or Honey, the Infedl prefently dies, and revives no more. This was an observation of the Ancients, though the reason of it they did not understand j (Oleo illito InJeBa omnia exanimantur. Plin.) which was nothing but the intercluding of the Air ; for tho' you put Oil upon them, if you put it not upon, or obftrucft those Orifices therewith, whereby they draw the Air, they suffer nothing : If you obftrudt only some, and not others, the Parts which are near and.fupplied with Air, from thence are by and by convulfed, and fhortly relaxed and deprived of Motion, the rest that were untouched still retaining it. Nay, more than all this. Plants themselves have a Kind of respiration, being furnifh'd with Plenty of Veffels for the Derivation of Air to all their Parts; as huth been obferv'd, nay, first discover'd, by that great and curious Naturalift Malpighius, Another Ufe of the Air is to fuftain the Flight of Birds and Infefts. Moreover, by its Gravity it raifes the Water in Pumps, Siphons, and other Engines, and performs all those Feats which former Philofophers, through Ignorance of the Efficient cause, attributed to a Final, namely Nature's Abhorrence of a Vacuity or empty Space. The elaftick or expanfive Faculty of the Air, whereby it dilates it self, when comprefTed,

(indeed

(Indeed this lower Region of it, by reason of the Weight of the Superincumbent, is always in a compreffed State) hath, been made Ufe of in the common Weather-Glafles, in Wind-Guns, and in several ingenious Water- Works, and doubtlefs hath a great interest in many natural EfFedts and Operations.

against what we have said of the necessity of tha Air for the Maintenance of the Vital Flame, it may be objeded, That the Foetus in the Womb lives, its Heart pulfes, and its Blood circulates \ and yet it draws in no Air, neither hath the Air any Accefs to it. To which I answer. That it doth receive Air, so much as is fufRcient for it in its present State, from the maternal Blood by the Placenta Uterina^ or the Cotyledons, This Opinion generally propounded, viz. That the respiration of the Dam did serve the Fcetus alfo, or supply sufficient Air to it, I have met with in Books ; but the explicit Notion of it I owe to my Learned and Worthy Friend Dr. Edward Hulfe, which, comparing with -mine own Anatomical observations, I found so confonant to reason, and highly probable, that I could not but yield a firm Aflent to it. I say then, That the chief Ufe of the Circulation of the Blood through the Cotyledons of a Calf in the Womb, (which I have often diffefted) and by Analogy thro' the Placenta Ute^ r/;^^ in an ^u man Fcetus, seems to be the Impregnation of the Blood with Air, for the Y^^Aing of the Fital Flame : For if it were only for Nutrition, what Need of two such great Arteries

ries to convey the Blood thither ? It would (one might rationally think) be more likely, that as in the Abdomen of every Animal, so here, there should have been some ladleal Veins form'd, beginning from the Placenta^ or Cotyledons^ v^hich concurring in one common DuBus^ should at last empty themselves into the Vena Cava, Secondly, I have observed in a Calf, the Umbilical Veffels to terminate in certain Bodies divided into a Multitude of carneous Fapillce^ (as I may so call them) which are receiv'd into so many Sockets of the Cotyledons growing on the Womb ; which carneous Papillca may without Force, or Laceration, be drawn out of those Sockets. Now tliefe Paptllcz do well resemble xh^AriJla^ or Radii ^ of a Fifh's Gills, and very probably have the iame Ufe to take in the Air j so that the maternal Blood which flows to the CotyledonSy and encircles these Papillce^ communicates by them to the Blood of the Fatus^ the Air wherewith it self is impregnate i as the Water flowing about the carneous Radii of the Fifh's Gills doth the Air that is lodg'd therein to them. Thirdly, That the maternal Blood flows moil cofioufly to the Placenta Vterina in Women, is manifefl from the great Hemorrhagy that fucceeds the Separation thereof at the Birth. Fourthly, After the Stomach and Inteftines are form'd^ the E^tus seems to take in its whole Nourilhment by the Mouth, there being always found in the Stomach of a Calf, Plenty of the Liquor contain'd in the Amnios wherein he fwims, -and F^ca in bis Inteftines, and abundance

Part L in /^ C r e at i on. jf

dance of Urine in the Allantoides ; so that the Fcetus in the Womb doth live, as it were, the Life of a Fifh. lastly, Why clfe should there be such an inftant necessity of respiration so foon as ever the Fatus is fallen off from the Womb.

I know that if the Fcetm be taken out of the Womb inclos'd in the Secundines, it will continiji^ to Hve, and the Blood to circulate for a considerable Time, as Dr. Harvey observes. The reason whereof I conceive to be, becaufc the Blood still circulates through the Cotyledons^ or Place72ta^ which are now exposed to the open Air, and so from thence receives fufHcient Supplies thereof, to continue its gentle Motion, arKi feed the vital Flame. But when, upon Exclulion of the Young, the Umbilical Veffels are broken, and no more Air is receiv'd that Way, the Plaftick Nature, to preferve the Life of the Animal, fpeedily raifes the Lungs, and draws into them Air in great abundance, which causes a fudden and mighty Accenfion in the Blood* ^ to the Maintenance whereof a far greater Quantity of Air is requifite, than would fervc to feed the mild and languid Flame before.

This Way we may give a facile and very probable Account of it, to wit, because receiving no more Communications of Air from its Dam, or Mother, it must needs have a fpeedy Supply from without, or elfe extinguifh and die for Want of it j being not able to live longer

without

76 The WisBOM of GOD PartL

without Air at its .first Birth, than it can do afterward.

Upon this Occafion, give me leave to discourse a little concerning the Air's infinuating it self into the Water. I say therefore , That the Air, at least that Part of it which is the Aliment of Fire, and Fewel of the Vital Flame in Animals, eafily penetrates the Body of Water exposed to it, and diffufeth it self through every Part of it. Hence it is that we find Fifli in fubterraneous Rivers, and foffil Fifli in the Earth it self; which can no more live without Air there than in the open Waters : Hence the Miners, when they come once at Water, are out of all Dangers and Damps. You'll say. How gets the Air into the Water in Subterraneous Rivers, and into the Earth to the foffil Fiihes ? I answer. The same Way that tne Water doth : Which I suppose to be by its upper Superficies ; the Water defcending by Pores and PaiTages that there it finds into Chinks and Veins, and by Confluence of many of them by Degrees fwelling into, a Stream, the Air accompanies and follows it by a constant Succeffion. As for foffil Fiflies, some make their Way into the Earth up the Veins of Water, opening into the Banks of Rivers, where they lie till they grow so great that they cannot return: In which Veins they find Air enough to serve their Turn, needing not much by reason that they lie still, and move but little. Others in Times of Floods are left in the Meadows, and with the Water fink into the Earth

at

Parti. Z;^ /i&^ Creation. "jj

at some Holes and Pores that the Water finds, or makes, by which alfo they are fupplied with Air. The reason why the Miners are out of Danger of Damps when they come to Water, I conceive is, because then presently the Air that ftagnated in the Shaft finks into the Water, and frefh Air defcends and fucceeds, and so there is a Circulation ; in the same Manner as by the finking of an Air-Shaft the Air hath Liberty to circulate, and carry out the Steams both of the Miners Breath and the Damps, which would otherwife fi:agnate there. Indeed, though there were no Damps, yet the nitrous Part of the Air being fpent and confum'd by the Breathing of the Miners, the remaining Part should be rendered altogether unfit for respiration, unless new and frefli Air could fucceed.

And here, methinks, appears a necessity of bringing in the Agency of some fuperintendent intelligent Being, be it a Plajiick Nature^ or what you will: For what elfe should put the Diaphragm, and all the muscles ferving to respiration, in Motion all of a fudden so foon as ever the Fcetus is brought forth ? Why could they not have refl:ed as well as they did in the Womb ? What aileth them that they must needs beftir themselves to get in Air to maintain the Creature's Life ? Why could they not patiently fuflfer it to die ? That the Air of it self could not rufli in, is clear j for that, on the contrary, there is requir'd some Force to remove the incumbent Air, and make room for the External to enter. You will say, the Spirits do at this

Time

Time slow to the Organs of respiration, the Diaphragm, and other muscles which concur to that Adion, and move them. But what roufes the Spirits, which were quiefcent during the Continuance of tlje Foetus in the Womb ? Here is no appearing Impellent but the External Air^ the Body fuffering no Change but of Place, out of its close and warm Prifon into the open and cool Air : But how, or why, that should have such an Influence upon the Spirits, as to drive them into those muscles cleftively, I am not fubtil enough to difcern. As for the respiration of the Chick in the Egg, I suppose the Air not only to be included in the White, but alfo to be supply'd through the Shell and Membranes.

Thirdly, Water is one Part, and that not the least of our Suftenance, and that affords the greatest Share of Matter in all Productions; being not (as it exifts in the World) a fimple and unmix'd Body, but containing in it the Principles, or minute component Particles of all Bodies : To speak nothing of those inferiour Ufes of Wafhing and Bathing, drefling and preparing Viftuals. But if we shall consider the great Concepticiila and Congregations of Water, and the Diflnbution of it all over the dry Land ia Springs and Rivers, there will occur abundant Arguments of wisdom and understanding. The Sea, what infinite Variety of Fifhes doth it nourifli ! FfaL civ. 25. In the Verfe next to my Text, T'so Earth is full of thy Riches ; So is this great and wde Sea, wherein are Things

creeping

creeping innumerable^ both [mall and great BeaJiSy

&c. How doth it exa<5]:ly compofe it lelf to a

Level, or equal Superficies, and in the Earth

make up one Spherical Roundnefs? How doth

it constantly observe its Ebbs and Flows, its

Spring and Nepe-tides, and ftiU retains its Saltnefs^ so convenient for the Maintenance of its

Inhabitants, ferving alfo the Ufes of Man for

Navigation, and the Convenience of Carriage ?

That it (hould be confined by Shores, and Strands^

and Limits, I mean at first, when it was natural

to it to overflow and stand above the Earth.

All these Particulars declare abundance of wisdom in their Primitive constitution. This lafl

the Pfalmift takes Notice of in the 6th, 7th,

8th, and 9th Verfes of this Pfalm : Speaking

of the Earth at the first Creation, he faith, Thou

coverdyi it with the Deep as with a Garment^ the

Waters Jiood above the Mount ai?is: At thy Re--

buke they fled^ at the Voice of thy Thunder they

hajied away (the Mountains afcend^ the Valleys

dejcend) unto the Place thou haji prepared for

them. ' Thou haji set a Bound that they may not

pass over: That they turn not again to cover

the Earth, But what Need was there (may some

say) that the Sea should be made so large, that

its Superficies should equal, if not exceed, that of

the dry Land ? Where is the wisdom of the

Creator in making so much ufelefs Sea, and so

little dry Xand, which would have been far

more beneficial and ferviceable to Mankind?

Might not at least half the Sea have been fpar'd,

and added to the Land, for the Entertainment

2 . and

and Maintenance of Men, who by the continual Striving and Fighting to enlarge their Bounds, and encroaching upon one another, seem to be ftraitned for want of Room.

To this Objection against the wisdom of God in thus dividing Sea and Land^ Mn Keill^ in his Examination of Dr, Burnet'j Theory of the Earthy p. 92, 93. thus answers ; "this, as moji other of the Athetfis Argument s^^ proceeds from a deep Ignorance of Natural Philofophy ; for if there were but half the Sea that now is, there would be ^Ifobut half the ^antity of Vapours, and consequently we could have but half so many Rivers as now there are to supply all the dry La?id we have at prefenty and half as much more , for the ^antity of Vapours which are raisd, bears a Proportion to the Surface whence they are raisd, as well as to the Heat which raisd them. The Wife Creator therefore did so prudently order it^ that the Sea should be large enough to supply Vapours sufficient for all the Land, which it would not do if it were less than now it is.

But against this it may be objedted, Why should not all the Vapours which are rais'd out of the Sea fall down again into it by Rain ? Is there not as much reason that the Vapours which are exhaled out of the Earth should be carried down to the Sea, as that those raised out of the Sea be brought up upon the dry Land ? If some by Winds be driven from the Sea up Land, others by the same cause will be blown down from Land to Sea, and so balancing one another, they will in Sum fall

equally

equally upon Sea and Land ; and confequenily the Sea contribute nothing to the Watering of the Earth, or the Maintenance of Rivers.

To which I answer, That as to the Watering of the Earth there needs no Supply from the Sea, there being sufficient Water exhaled out of it self to do that ; there is no more returned upon it by Rain, so as to rest upon it, than an equivalent Quantity to what was rais'd out of it.

But the Rivers must be supply'd other ways. Our Opinion is, that they have their Supply from Rain and Vapours. The Queftion is , Whence thcfe Vapours are brought ^ We answer, From the Sea. But what brings them up from the Sea ? I answer. The Winds ; And so I am arrived at the main Difficulty, Why should not the Winds carry them that are exhaled out of the £^r/A down to the Sea, as well as bring them up upon the Earth, which are rais'd from the Sea ? Or, which is all one, why (hould not the Wind blow inditferently from Sea and Land ? To which I answer, That I must needs acknowledge my self not to comprehend the reason hereof God is truly said, Pja!, cxxxv. j- 'To Sring the Wind out of his T^reajures, But the Matter of Fa6t is moll: certain, viz. That the Winds do bring abundantly more Vapours up from the Sea than they carry down thither. .

first, because otherwife there can no Account be given of Floods. It is clear. That Floods with us proceed from Rain j and it is often a vail Quantity of Water they carry down

G . to

10 thie Sea. Whence come those Vapours which supply all this Water ? I hope thole who bring up Springs and Rivers from the great ^i?y/s, will not bring those Vapours, which unite into Drops, and defcend in Rain from thence too. Should they rife from the dry Land only, they would foon render it dry indeed ; more parch'd than the Defarts of Libya, We should quickly come to an End of Floods, and of Rain too, if nothing were return'd from the Sea again 5 not to mention, that the Sea must needs in such a Cafe overflow its Shores, and enlarge its Bounds.

But this Way there is an eafy Account to be given. It is clear, that the Sun doth exhale Vapours both from Sea and Land; and that the Superficies of Sea and Land is sufficient to yield Vapours for Rain, Rivers and Floods, when heated to such a Degree as the Sun heats it : So that there wants only Wind to bring up so great a Proportion of Vapours from the Sea as may afford Water for the Floods ; that is, so much as is return'd back again to the Sea.

Some may perchance demand, To what purpose serve the Floods? What Ufe is there of tijiem' ? I anfv^er. To return back to the Sea the Surpiufage of Water after the Earth is fated with Rain. It may be further ask'd, What need more Rain be poured upon the Earth than is sufficient to water it? I reply, That the Rain brings down from the Mountains and higher Grounds a great Quantity of Earth, and in Times of Floods fpreads it upon the Meadows and Levels, rendering them thereby so fruitful as to I - fland

stand in need of no Culture, or Manuring. So we see the Land of Egypt owes its great 'Fertility to the annual Overflowing of the River Nilus: And it's likely the Countries bordering upon the River of Ganges may receive the like Benefit by the Overflowing thereof. Moreover all Rain-Water contains in it a copious Sediment of Terreftrial Matter, which by {landing it preq^itates, and is not a fimple Elementary Water. This Terreftrial Matter serves for the Nourifhment of Plants, and net the Water it self, which is but a Vehicle to derive this Nutriment to all the Parts of the Plants: And therefore the more Rain, the more of this Nutricious Matter may be precipitated upon the Earth, and so the Earth rendered more fruitful. Befides all this, it's not unlikely, that the P.ain- Water may be endued with some Vegetating or Prolifick Virtue, derived fromfome Saline or Oleofe Particles it contains: For we see, that Aquatick Plants, which grow in the very Water, do not thrive andflouriili in dry Summers, when they are not alfo water'd with the Dew of Heaven.

Secondly, Another Argument to prove. That the Winds bring up more Vapours from the Sea than they carry down thither, is, because the Winds do more frequently blow from the Sea than to the Sea. This appears from the Trees which grow on and near the .Sea-(hores all along the Weftern Coaft of Eng/and, whose Heads and Bougli^ I have obferv'd to run out far to Landward J but toward the Sea to be so fnub'd by the

G 2 Wind^,

84 neV^isDouof GOD Parti.

Winds, as if their Boughs and Leaves had been pared or fhaven off on that Side.

It is alio obferv'd, that the Weftern Wind, which is the most violent and boifterous of all with us in Englafid, v^hich comes from off the great Atlantick Ocean, is of longeft Continuance. Julius Cajar^ in his 5th Book oi Commentaries de Bello Galileo^ faith of it, Magnam partejiz omnis temporis fn bis locis JJuere cofifuevit -, it is wont to blow in these Quarters a great Part of the whole Year : Which observation holds true at this Day, the Wind lying in that Corner at leafl three Quarters of the Year.

Since this Motion of the Winds is conflant, there is doubtlefs a constant and fettled cause of it, which defer ves to be enquired into, and fearch'd out, by the Study and Endeavours of the most fagaclous Naturalifts. But however the Wind be raised, it may more eafily blow from Sea to Land, than from Land to Sea, because the Superficies of the Sea being even, or level, there is nothing to flop its course 5 but on the Land there are not only Woods, but Mountains to hinder and divert it,

Having my self ittn so much of the Bottom of the Sea round about the Coafts o'i England^ and a great Part of the Low Countries^ of Italy and Sicihs I mull: needs adhere to what I deliver'd, That where the Bottom of the Sea is not Rocky, hut Earth, Owze, or Sand, and that is incomparably the greatest Part of it, it is by the Motion of the Waters, so far as the Reciprocation of the Sea extends to the Bottom, brought

to

to a Level; and if it should be now unequal^ would in Time be level'd again. By Level I do not mean so as to have no Declivity (for the " Reciprocation preferves that, the Flood hindering the conflant carrying down of the Bottom) but only to have an equal and uniform Defcent from the Shores to the Deeps. Now all those Relations of Urinators belong only to those Places where they have dived, which are always rocky;. for there is no reason why they (liould dive where the Bottom is level and fandy. That the Motion of the Water defcends to a good Depth, I prove from those Plants that grow deepeft in the Sea, because they all generally grow flat, in Manner of a Fan, and not with Branches on all Sides like Trees, which is so contrived by the Providence of Nature ; for that the Edges of them do in that Poflure with most Eafe cur the Water flowing to and fro ; and should the flat Side be objeded to the Stream, it would foon be turn'd Edge-wife by the Force of it, because in that Site it doth leafl: refifl: the Motion of the Water : Whereas, did the Branches of these Plants grow round, they would be thrown backward and forward every Tide. Nay, not only the Herbaceous and Woody Submarine Plants, b'Jt alfo the - Lithophytaxhitm- Vams".^' selves, affecS this manner of growing, as I have obrferv'd in various Kinds of Ccrals and Fori, Hence I fufped alL those Relations concerning Trees growing at the Bottom of the Sea, and bringing forth Fruit there: And as for the Mafdiva Nut, till better information, I adliere

G 3 . to

to Garcias's Opinion, which may be seen in Ciu-^ Jjus. Farther, I do believe, that in the great Depths of the Sea, there grow no Plants at all, the Bottom being too remote from the External Air, which though it may pierce the Water so low, yet I doubt whether in Quantity sufficient for the Vegetation of Plants: Nay, we are told. That in those deep and bottomlefs Seas there are BO Fifh at alh yet, not because there are no Plants, or Infeds, to feed them, for that they can live upon Water alone, Rojtdeletiuss Experiment about keeping them in a Glafs doth undeniably prove, but because their Spawn would be loft in those Seas, the Bottom being too cold for it to quicken there, or rather because being lighter than the Water there, it would not fmk to the Bottom, but be buoy'd up by it, and carried away to the Shallows.

Again, The great Ufe and Convenience, the Beauty and Variety of so many Springs and Fountains, so many Brooks and Rivers, so many Lakes and standing Pools of Water, and these so fcatter'd and difpers'd all the Earth over, that BO great Part of it is deftitute of them, without which it must, without a Supply otherways, be defolate and void of Inhabitants, afford abundant Arguments of wisdom and Council: That Springs fnould break forth on the Sides of Mountains most remote from the Sea : That there should Way be made for Rivers thro' Straits and Rocks, and fubterraneous Vaults, so that one would think that Nature had cut a Way on purpose to derive the Water, which elfe

would

would overflow and drown whole Countries : That the Water pafling thro' the Veins of the Earth, should be rendred fre{h and potable, which it cannot be by any Percolations we can make, but the Saline Particles will pass through a tenfold Filtre: That infome Places there should spring forth Metalick and Mineral Waters,* and hot Baths, and these so constant and permanent for many Ages; so convenient for divers Medicinal Intentions and Ufes, the causes of which Things, or the Means and Methods by which they are perform'd, have not been as yet certainly discover'd; only in General, PAV^y's Remark may be true, "l^ales funt aqu/e^ qiialis terra per quam fuunt. Hence they are Cold, Hot, Sweet, Stinking, Purgative, Diuretick, or Ferrugincous, Saline, Petrefying, Bituminofe, Venenofe, ai:d of other Qualities.

lastly, The Earth, which is the Bafis and Support of all Animals and Plants, and affords them the hard and folid Part of their Bodies, yielding us Food and Suftenance, and partly alfo Cloathing ; for I do not think that Water fupplies Man, and other Animals, or even Plants themselves, with their Nouri(hment, but serves chiefly for a Vehicle to the Alimentary Particles, to convey and diftribute them to the several Parts of the Body. Water, as it exifts in the World, is not a fimple unmix'd Body, but contains the Terrellrial component Parts of the Bodies of Animals and Plants : Simple Elementary Water nouriflies iK)t at all. How varioully is the Surface of this G 4' Earth

Earth diftinguifh'd into Hills, and Valleys, and Plains, and high Mountains, affording pleafant Profpedts ? How curiously cloath'd and adorn'd with the grateful Verdure of Herbs and ftately Trees, either difpers'd and fcatter'd fmgly, or as it were affembled in Woods and Groves, and all thefef beautified and illuflrated with Elegant Flowers and Fruits, qiwriim omnium incredibilis tnultitudo^ injatiabili varietate dijlinguitur^ as T«/- ly faith. This alfo shews forth to them that confiderit, both the Power and wisdom of God: So that we may conclude with Solomon^ Prov. iii. 19. *Ihe Lord by Wijdom hath founded the Earthy by Under jlmiding hath he eJiabUpfd the Heavens.

But now, if we pass from Simple to Mix'd Bodies, we (hall still find more Matter of Admiration, and Argument of wisdom. Of these we {hall first consider those they call imperfedly Mix'd, ox Meteors.

0/ Meteors.

As first of all, Rain^ which is nothing elfe but Water, by the Heat of the Sun divided into very small invifible Parts, afccnding in the Air, till encountring the Cold, it be by Degrees condensed into Clouds, and defcends in Drops j this though it be exhaled from the Salt Sea, yet by this Natural Diftillation is render'd frefh and potable, which our Artificial Diftillations have hitherto been hardly able to effed, notwith-? standing the eminent Ufe it would be of to Navigators, and the Rewards promis'd to those that

should

Parti. Z;^ //6^ Cr E ATioN. 89

fhoLild refolve that Problem of diftilling frefh Water out of Salt. That the Clouds should be so carried about by the Winds, as to be almofl equally difperfed and diftributed, no Part of the Earth wanting convenient Showers, unless when it pleafeth God, for the Punifhment of a Nation, to with-hold Rain by a fpecial Interpofition of his Providence; or, if any Land wants Rain, they ha\ie a Supply some other way -, as the Land of Egypfy tho' there feldom falls any Rain there, yet hath abundant Recompence made it by the annual overflowing of the River. This Diftribution of the Clouds and Rain is to me (I say) a great Argument of Providence and divine disposition ; for elfe I do not see but why there might be in some Lands continual fucceflive Droughts for many Years, till they were quite depopulated; in others as lafting Rains, till they were overflown and drown'd 5 and these, if the Clouds mov'd cafually, often happening ; whereas, iincc the ancienteft Records of Hiftory, we do not read or hear of any such Droughts or Liundations,' unless perhaps that of Cyprus, wherein there fell no Rain there for Thirty-fix Years, till the Ifland was almost quite deferted, in the Reign of Co?jJia?itine 5 which doubtlefs fell not out without the wife disposition of Providence, for great and weighty reasons.

Again, If we consider the manner of the Rain's Defcent , . difl:illing down gradually , and by Drops, which is most convenient for the watering of the Earth j whereas if it should fall down • in

in a continual Stream like a River, it would gall the Ground, wafh away Plants by the Roots, overthrow houses, and greatly incommode, if not fufFocate Animals: If, I say, we consider these Things, and many more that might be added, we might in this refped: alfo cry out with the Apoftle, O the Depth of the Riches both of the wisdom and Knowledge of God !

Secondly , Another Meteor is the Wind ; which how many Ufes it doch serve to, is not eafy to enumerate, but many it doth, viz, to ventilate and break the Air, and diffipate noifom and contagious Vapours, which otherwife ftagnating, might occafion many Difeafes in Animals ', and therefore it is an observation concerning our native Country, Anglia ventofa , fi no?t ventofdy venenofa: To transfer the Clouds from Place to Place, for the more commodious watering of the Earth : To temper the Exceffes of the Heat, as they find who in Brafl^ New Spain^ the neighbouring Iflands, and other the like Countries near the Equator, reap the Benefit of the Breezes: To fill the Sails of Ships, and carry them on their Voyages to remote Countries ; which, of what eminent Advantage it is to Mankind, for the procuring and continuing of Trade and mutual Commerce between the most diftant Nations , the illuftrating every Corner of the Earth, and the perfecting Geography and Natural Hiftory, is apparent to every Man. That the Monfoons and Trade- Winds should be so conflant and periodical, even to the 30th Degree of Latitude all round the Globe, and that they

Ihould

Parti. //^ /^^ Cre ATioN. 91.

should lb feldom tranfgrefs or fall short of those Bounds, is a Subjed: worthy of the Thoughts of the greatest Philofophers. To this may be added the driving about of Windmills for grinding of Corn, making of Oil, draining of Pools, raifmg of Water, fawing of Wood, fulling of Cloth, Gf^. That it should feldom or never be so violent and boifterous as to overturn houses, yea, whole Citi^ ; to tear up Trees by the Roots, and proftrate Woods ; to drive the Sea over the lower Countries; as, were it the EfFed: of Chance, or mere natural causes, not moderated by a fuperior Power, it would in all likelihood often do. Hurricanes, Spouts, and Inundations, would be more frequent than they are. All these Things declare the wisdom and goodness of him who bringeth the Wind out of his '\treajures.

Of inanimate mixd Bodies.

I proceed now to such inanimate Bodies as are Qz}\td, perfect e mixta, perfectly mix'd, improperly enough, they being many of them (for ought I know) as fimple as those they call Elements. these are Stones, Metals, Minerals, and Salts.

In Stones, which one would think were a neglefted Genus, what Variety? what Beauty and Elegancy ? what Conftancy in their Temper, and Confiftency in their Figures and Colours ? I (hall speak of fiiA some notable Qualities wherewith some of them are endued: Secondly, The remarkable Ufes they are of to us. The Qualities

liliall

1 shall instance in are: first, Colour^ which in some of them is most lively, fparkling, and beautiful ; the Carbuncle^ or Riibine fhining with Red, the Sapphire with Blue, the Emerald with Green, the Topaz y or Chrjfolite of the Ancients^ with a Yellow, or Gold Colour, the Amethiji as it were tinftur'd with Wine, the Opal varying its Colours like changeable TafFata, as it is diverfly exposed to the Light. Secondly, Hardnefs^ wherein some Stones exceed all other Bodies, and among them the Adamant all other Stones, being exalted to that degree thereof, that Art in vain endeavours to counterfeit it, the fidlitious Stones of Chymifts in Imitation being eafily detefted by an ordinary Lapidift. Thirdly, F/^^/r^ : Many of them fhoot into regular Figures, as Cryjial and Bajiard Diamonds into hexagonal ; others into those that are more elegant and compounded, as those formed in Imitation of the Shells of Teftaceous Filhes of all Sorts , Sharks Teeth and Vertebres, &c, if these be originally Stones, or primary Produdlions of Nature in Imitation of Shells, and Fifhes Bones, and not the Shells and Bones themselves petrify'd, as we have fometimes thought. Some have a kind of Vegetation and resemblance of Plants , as Corals, Fori, and Fimgites , which grow upon the Rocks like Shrubs: To which I might add our ordinary Star-Stones and Trochites^ which I look upon as a Sort of Rock- Plants.

Secondly,

Secondly, For the Ufes ; some serve for Building, and many Sorts of VeiTels and Utenfils ; for Pillars and Statues, and other carv'd Works in relievo^ for the Temples, Ornament of Palaces, Portico's, Piazza's, Conduits, G?r. as Freeftone and Marble -, some to burn into Lime , as Chalk and Lime-stone ; some , with the Mixture of Beriglia or Kelp^ to make Glafs, as that the Venetians call Cuogiilo, and common Flints, which serve alfo to ftrike Fire 5 some to cover houses, as Slates, some for marking, as MorochthuSy and the fore-mention'd Chalk, which is a 7nX6^py\^QVy ferving moreover for manuring Land, and some medicinal Ufes ; some to make VeiTels of which w^ill endure the Fire, as that found in the Country of Chiavenna near Plurs, To these ufeful Stones I might add the Warming-Jlone^ digg'd in Cornwall^ which being once well heated at the Fire, retains its Warmth a great while, and hath been found to give Eafe and Relief in several Pains and Difeafes, particularly in that of the internal Haemorrhoids. I might alfo take notice, that. some Stones are endu'd with an eleSrical or attradical Virtue. " My honoured Friend, " Dr. Tancred Robin/on, in his Manufcript ///- " nerary of Italy ^ relates the many various Fi- *' gures he obferv'd naturally delineated and " drawn on several Sorts of Stones digg'd up in ** the Quarries, Caverns and Rocks about Flo- " rence, and other Parts of Italy , not only repre- " fenting Cities, Mountains, Ruins, Clouds, " oriental Charaftera, Rivers, Woods, Animals,

" but

" but alfo some Plants (as Ivy, MolTes, Maiden- ** hair, Ferns, and such Vegetables as grow in " those Places) so exadlly design'd and imprefs'd " upon several Kinds of Stones, as though some " fkilful Painters or Sculptors had been working " upon them. The DoBor observes alfo the " wonderful Diverfity of Shapes and Colours " that Oars and other Fofiils fhoot into, refem- " bling almost every thing in Nature, for which " it seems very difficult to him to affign any " cause or Principle. In the Pyrites alone he " believes he himself may have seen at Home *' and Abroad above a Hundred Varieties, and " yet he confejflTes he has been but a rude Obfer- " ver of them. In the diaphanous Foffils (as '* Ambers, Cryftals, Agates, &c.) preferv'd in " the Cabinets of the Great Duke of T^ufcany^ ^' Cardinal: Chigi^ Settali ^ Mofcardi^ and other *' Repoiitories or Mufaeums of that curious '' Country, he takes notice of the admirable Di- " verfity of Bodies included and naturally im- " prifon'd within them, as Flies, Spiders, Frogs, " Locufts, Bees, Pifmires, Gnats, Gralhoppers, *' Drops of Liquor, Hair, Leaver, Rufhes, Mofs, " Seeds , and other Herbage ; which seem to *' prove them to have been once in a State of " Fluidity. The Bononia Stone digg'd up in the " Appenines is remarkable for its Ihining Quali- " ty. The Af?iianthus for its Incumbufiibility. " The Oculus Mu7idi for its Motion and Change " of Colour. The Lapis Nephrkiciis^' Calamina- " ris^ OJliocolla, /Etitcs^ &€. for their medicinal " Ufes;' ,

I might

I might fpend much Time in the difcourfing of the most ftrange and unaccountable Nature and Power of the Loadftone, a Subjed: which hath exercised the Wits and Pens of the most acute and ingenious Philofophers ; and yet the Hypothefes which they have invented to give an Account of its admirable Phanomena seem to me lame and unfatisfadory. What can we say of the Subtilty, Adivity, and Penetrancy of its mfluvia^ which no Obftacle can flop or repel, but they will nlake their w^ay thro' all Sorts of Bodies, firm and fluid, denfe and rare, heavy and light, pellucid and opake ? nay, they will pass thro' a Vacuity or empty Space, at leafl devoid of Air and any other sensible Body. Its attractive Power of Iron was known to the Ancients : It& Verticity and Diredion to the Poles of the Earth is of later Invention ; which, of how infinite Advantage it hath been to these two or three kft Ages, the great Improvement of Navigation, and Advancement of Trade and Commerce, by rendring the remotefl Countries eafily acceffible; the noble discovery of a vast Continent or new World, befides a Multitude of unknown Kingdoms and Iflands 3 the refolving experimentally those ancient Problems of the fpherical Roundnefs of the Earth 3 of the Being of Antipodes^ or the Habitablenefs of the Torrid Zone\ and the rendring the whole terraqueous Globe circumnavigable, do abundantly demonflrate : whereas formerly they were w^ont to Coafl it, and creep along the Shores, scarce daring to venture out of

the

96 T6eWisD0M of GOD Parti.

the Ken of Land; when they did,having no other Guide but the Cynofura^ or Pole-Star, and those near it, and in cloudy Weather none at all.

As for Metals^ they are so many ways ufeful to Mankind, and those Ufes so well known to all, that it would be loft Labour to say any thing of them : Without the Ufe of these we could have nothing of Cultule or Civility ; no Tillage or Agriculture ; no Reaping or Mowing ; no Ploughing or Digging ; no Pruning or Lopping, Grafting, or Incifion ; no mec*hanical Arts or Trades 5 no Veflels or Uteniils of Houfhold-ftufF; no convenient houses or Edifices ; no Shipping or Navigation. What a kind of barbarous and fordid Life we must neceflarily have liv'd, the Indians in the northern Part of America are a clear Demonftration. Only it is remarkable, that those which are of most frequent and necessary Ufe, as Iron, Brafs, and Lead, are the most common and plentiful : Others that are more rare, may better be fpar'd, yet are they thereby qualified to be made the common measure and Standard of the Value of all other Commodities, and so serve for Coin or Money, to which Ufe they have been employed by all Civil Nations in all Ages.

' Now of what mighty Importance the Ufe of Money is to Mankind, the learned and ingenious Dr. Cockbiirn (hews us, in the Second Part of his Ejjdy concerning the Nature of Chrijiian Faith, ^.88. Whenever, faith he, the Ufe of Money began , it was an admirable Contrivance for rewarding and encouragnig Induftry,

for

Part L in the Creation. 97

for carrying on Trade and Commerce certainly, eafily, and fpeedily ; for obliging all to employ their various Parts and several Capacities for the common Good, and engaging every one to communicate the Benefit of his. particular Labour, without any Prejudice to himself Covetoufnefs indeed, or an inordinate Love of Money, is vicious, and the Root of much EviJ, and ought to be remedied ; but the Ufe of Money is necelfary, ai^d attended with manifold Advantages. Where Money has not yet taken Place, where the Ufe of it hath not yet been introduc'd, Arts and Sciences are not cultivated, nor any of those Exercifes ply'd, which polite Men's Spirits, and which abate the Uneafmefs of Life. Men there are brutifli and favage, none mind any Thing but Eating and Drinking, and the other Adts of brutal Nature ; their Thoughts afpire no higher than merely to maintain their Life and Breath : Like the beasts they walk abroad ail the Day long, and range about from Place to Place, only to feek their Food. Whatever may be fuppos'd to follow if all were ad:ed with great Generofity and true Charity, yet, according to the prefenc Temper of Mankind, it is absolutely necessary that there be some Method and Means of Commutation, as that of Money, forrenderingall and every one mutually ufeful and ferviceable.

Now Gold and Silver by their Rarity are wonderfully fitted and acconntmodared for this Ufe of Permutation for all Sorts of Commodities, or making Money of: Whereas were they

H as

as common and eafy to come by as Straw or Stubble, Sand or Stones, they would be of no more Ufe for Bartering and Commerce than they.

And here he goes on to ihew the wonderful- Providence of God, in keeping up the Value of Gold and Silver, notwithftanding the vafh Quantities which have been digg'd out of the Earth in all Ages, an^ so continuing them a fit Material to make Money of For which I refer to the Book.

Of these, Gold is rerharkable for its admirable Dudtility and Ponderofity, wherein it excels all other Bodies hitherto known. I shall only add,, concerning Metals, that they do pertinacioufly refift all Tranfmutation -, and tho' one would fometimes think they were turn'd into a different Subftance, yet do they but as it were lurk under a Larva or Vizard, and may be reduced again into their natural Form and Complexions, in Dcfpite of all the Tortures of Vulcaji or corrofive Waters. Note, "That this ivas written above T'hir^ ty Tears fjice^ when I thought I had reason to diftrujl whatever had then been reported or written to ajfirm the Transmutation of Metals one into another,

I shall omit the consideration of other Minerals, and of Salts and Earths, because I have nothing to say of their Ufes, but only such as refer to Man, which I cannot affirm to have been the fole or primary End of the Formation of them. Indeed, to speak in general of these Terreftrial Inanimate Bodies, they having no such Organization of Parts as the Bodies of Ani- 2 mals,.

t^art t. in the Ckeatio n. 99

mals, nor any so intricate Variety of Texture, but that iheir Production may plaufibly be accounted for by an Hypotkcjis of Matter divided into minute Particles or Atoms naturally indivifible, of various but a determinate Number of Figures, and perhaps alfo differing in Magnitudcj and these mov'd, and continually kept in Motion according to certain eftablifli'd Law^ or Rules; we cannot so clearly discover the Ufes for which rfiey were created, but may probably conclude, that among other Ends they were made for those for v/hich they serve us and other Animals 5 as I shall more fully make out hereafter. It is here to be noted, That, according to out Hypothejis^ the Number of the Atoms of each several Kind that is of the same Figure and Magnitude is not nearly equals but there be infinitely more of some Species than of others, as of those that compound those vast Aggregates of ^/r, Water, and Earthy more abundantly than of such as make up Metals and Minerali : The reason whereof may probably be, because those are necessary to the Life and Being of Man and all other Animals, and therefore must be always at Hand^ these only ufeful to Man, and ferving rather his Conveniences than NeceiTities. The reason why I affirm the minute component Particles of Bodies to be nattirally indivifible by any Agent we can employ^ (even Fire it self) which is the only Catholick DiiTolvent, other Menjlruiinn h^m% i2x\\d: Inllrunlents than Efficients in all Solutions, apt by reason of the Figure and Smalinefs of their

H 2 Parts

Parts to cut and divide other Bodies (as Wedges cleave Wood) v^hen actuated by Fire or its Heat> which elfe would have no Efficacy at all (as Wedges have not, unless driven by a Beetle:) The reason, I fliy, I have already given ; I shall now instance in a Body whose minute. Parts appear to be indiffoluble by the Force of Fire, and that is comnQon Water, which diftil, boil, circulate, work upon how you will by Fire, you can only diflblve it into Vapour, which when the Motion ceafes, eafily returns into Water again ; Vapour being nothing elfe but the minute Parts thereof, by Heat agitated and feparated one from another. For another instance, some of the most learned and experienced Chymifts do affirm Quickfilver to be intranfmutable, and therefore call it Liquor at emus. And I am of Opinion, that the same holds of all fimple Bodies, that their component Particles are indiffoluble by any natural Agent.

We may here note the Order and Method that Metals and Minerals observe in their Growth, how regularly they ftioot, ferment, and as it were vegetate and regenerate; Salts in their proper and constant Figures, as our ingenious Countryman Dr. Jordan observes at large in his discourse of Baths and Mineral Waters.

Of Vegetables or Plants,

I have how done with inanimate Bodies both fimple and mix'd. The Animate are,

first,

first, Such as are endued only with a Vegetative Soul, and therefore commonly called Vegetables or Plants ; of which, if we consider either their Stature and Shape, or their Age and Duration, we (hall find it wonderful ; for why (hould some Plants rife up to a great Height, others creep upon the Ground, which perhaps may have equal Seeds ? nay, the leffer Plant many tjmes the greater Seed. Why {hould each Particular so observe its Kind, as conflantly to produce the same Leaf for Confiftency, Figure, Divifion and Edging, and bring forth the same Kind of Flower, and Fruit, and Seed ? and that tho' ycu tranflate it into a Soil which naturally puts forth no such Kind of Plant, so that it is some * A^o^ ainpjuLctriKk^ which p^^^^^J^"^^ doth effedl this, or rather some intelli- virtue. gent plajlick Nature ; as we have before intimated: For what Account can be given of the Determination of the Growth and Magnitude of Plants from Mechanical Principles, of Matter movd without the Prefidency and Guidance of some fuperior Agent ? Why may not Trees grow up as high as the Clouds or Vapours afcend ? Or if you say the Cold of the fuperior Air checks them, Why may they not fpread and extend their lateral Branches so far till their distance from the Centre of Gravity deprefs them to the Earth, be the Tree never so high ? ^ How comes it to pass that tho' by Culture and Manure they may be highly improv'd, and augmented to a double, treble, nay, some a much greater Proportion in Magnitude of all their Parts, yet is this Ad-

H 3 vance

vance reftrain'd within certain Limits ? There is maximum quod fic which they cannot exceed. You can by no Culture or Art extend a Fennel-Stalk to the Stature and Bignefs of an Oak: Then why iliould fonie be very long-liv'd, others only Annua! or Biennial ? How can we imagine that any Laws of Motion can determine the Situation of the Leaves^ to come forth by Pairs, or alternately, or circling the Stalk ; xht Flowers to grow fingly, or in Company and Tufts, to come forth the Bofoms of the Leaves and Branches, or on the Tops of Branches and Stalks ; the Figure of the Leaves, that they should be divided into so many Jags or Efcallops, and cBrioully indented round the Edges ; as alfo of the Flower>leaves, their Number and Site, the Figure and Number of the Stamina and their Jpices^ the Figure of the Stile and Seed-Veffel, and the Number of Cells into which it is divided? That all this be done, and all these Parts duly proportioned one to another, there seems to be necelTary some intelligent plajiick Nature^ which may understand and regulate the whole Oeconomy of the Plants : For this cannot be the Vegetative Soul, because that is material and divifible together with the Body ; which appears, in that a Branch cut off of a Plant will take Root, and grow, and become a perfe£t Plant it self, as we have already obferv'd. I had almost forgotten the Complication of the Seed-leaves of some Plants in the Seed, which is so ftrange, that one cannot believe it to be done by Matter, however mov'd by any Laws or Rules imaginable. Some of them being so

close-

Parti. in the Creation. 103

close-plaited, and ftraitly folded up and thruft together within the Membranes of the Seed, that it would puzzle a Man to imitate it, and yet none of the Folds flicking or growing together; so that they may eafily be taken out of their Cafes, and fprcad and extended even with one's Fingers.

Secondly, If we consider each particular Part of a Plant, we shall find it not without its End or Ufe ; the Root^ for its Stability and drawing Nourifliment from the Earth; th^ Fibres ^ to contain and convey the Sap ; befides which, there is a large Sort of VefTels to contain the proper and fpecifick Juice of the Plant, and others to carry Air for such a Kind of respiration as it needeth; of which we have already spoken. The outer and inner Bark in Trees serve to defend the trunk and Boughs from the ExcefTes of Heat and Cold, and Drought, and to convey the Sap for the annual Augmentation of the Tree ; for in Truth, every Tree may in some Senfe be said to be an annual Plant, both Leaf, Flower and Fruit proceeding from the Coat that was fuperinduced over the Wood the lafl Year, which Coat alfo never beareth any more, but together with the old Wood serves as a Form or Block to fullain the fucceeding annual Coat. The Leaves before the Gemma or Bud be explicated to embrace and defend the Flower and Fruit, .which is even then perfedly form'd 3 afterwards to preferve the Branches, Flowers and Fruit from the Injuries of the. Summer-Sun, which would

H 4 too

too much parch and dry them, if they lay open and expos'd to its Beams without any Shelter : The Leaves, I lay, qualify and contemper the Heat, aiidferve aifo to hinder- the too hafty Evaporation of the Moifture about the Root : But the principal Ufe of the Leaves (as we learn of Signior Malpbigii^ Monfieur Perault^ and Mon-. fieur Mariotte) is to con cod: and prepare the Sap for the INouriihment of the Fruit, and the whole Plants not only that which afcends from the Root, but what they take in from without, from the Dew, moift Air and Rain. This they prove, because many Trees, if defpoil'd of their Leaves, will die ; as it happens fometimes in Mulberry- Trees^ when they are pluck'd off to feed Silk- *worms. And because if in Summer-Time you denude a Vine-Branch of its Leaves, the Grapes will never come to Maturity : But tho' you expofe the Grapes to the Sun-Beams, if you pluck not off the Leaves, they will ripen notwithilanding. That there is a Regrefs of the Sap in Plants, from above downwards, and that this defcendent Juice is that which principally nouri{heth both Fruit and Plant, is clearly prov'd by the Experiments of Signior Malp^higii^ and those

late ones of an Ingenious Country- * Phnofop. Man of our own, ^ "Thomas Brother^ Num.\87. '^^^^ Efquire, of which I (hall mention

only one, that is, If you cut off a Ring of Bark from the Trunk of any Tree, that Part of the Tree above the Barked Ring shall grow and increafe in Bignefs, but not that beneath.

But

But whether there be such a constant Circulation of the Sap in Plants as there is of the Blood in Animals, as they would from hence infer, there is some reason to doubt. I might add hereto the pleafant and deledable cooling and refrefhing Shade they afford in the Summer-Time ; which was very much efleem'd by the Inhabitants of hot Countries, who always took great Delight and pleasure to fit in the (?pen Air, under iliady Trees. Hence that ExpreiTion so often repeated in Scripture, of every Man's Jitting under his own Vijie^ a?id under his own Fig-'T'ree^ where alfo they us'd to eat ; as appears by Abrahams entertaining the Angels under a Tree, and {landing by them when they did eat, Gen. xviii. 8. Moreover, the Leaves of Plants are very beautiful and ornamental. That there is great Pulchritude and Comelinefs of Proportion in the Leaves, Flowers and Fruits of Plants, is attefted by the general Verdid: of Mankind, as Dr. Moore and others well observe. The adorning and beautifying the Temples and Buildings in all Ages, is an evident and undeniable Teftimony of this; for what is more ordinary with ArchitcBs than the taking in Leaves and Flowers and Fruitage for the garnifliing of their Work ; as the Roman the Leaves oi Achanthiis fat, and the y^ic^z/Z? of Palm-1'rees and Pomegranats? And these.more frequently than any of the five regular Solids, as being rhore comely and pleafant to behold. If any Man (hall obje(5t, that Comelinefs of Proportion

tion and Beauty is but a mere Conceit, and that all Things are alike handfome to some Men who have as good Eyes as others ^ and that this appears by the Variation of Fafhions, which doth so alter Men's Fancies, and what e're-while fcem'd very handfome and comely, when it is once worn out of fafhion appears very absurd, uncouth and ridiculous. To this I answer, That Cuftom and Ufe doth much in those Things where little of Proportion and Symmetry {hew themselves, or which are alike comely and beautiful, to difpararge the one, and commend the

other : But there are Degrees of * Antidote Things ; for (that I may ufe ^ Dr. Sm,/t Af'^^^'s Vv^ords) I dare appeal to any €. 5. Man that is not funk into so forlorn a

Pitch of Degeneracy, that he is as ftupid to these Things as the bafeft beasts, whe-^ ther, for Example, . a rightly-cut Tetraedromy Cube or Icofaedrom have no more Pulchritude in them than any rude broken Stone lying in the Field or High- ways ; or, * to name other folid Figures, which tho' they be not regular, properly so caird, yet have a fettled Idea and Nature, as a Co7ie^ Sphere or Cy Under ^ whether the Sight of those do not more gratify the Minds of Men, and pretend to more Elegancy of Shape, than those rude Cuttings or Chippings of Free-ilone that fall from the Mafon's Hands, and serve for nothing but to fill up the Middle of the Wall, as fit to be hid from the Eyes of Men for their Uglinefs ? And therefore it is obfervable, that if Nature shape any Thing but near to this Geometrical

Parti. ^';^ //^^ Creation. 107

rnetrical Accuracy^ that we take Notice of it with much Content and Plealure, and greedily gather and treafure it up. As if it be but exad:ly round, as those fpherical Stones found in Cubdy and some ahb in our own Land ; or have but its Sides parallel, as those rhomboideal Sele^ nites found near St. Ives in Huntingtonpire^ and many other Places in England, Whereas ordinary Stones of rude and uncertain Figures we pass By, and take no notice of at all. But tho* the Figures of these Bodies be pleafing and agreeable to our Minds, yet (as we have already obferv'd) those of the Leaves, Flowers and Fruits of Trees, more. And it is remarkable, that in the Circumfcription and Complication of many Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, and Seeds, Nature affeds a regular Figure. Of a Pentagonal or Quincunial disposition. Sir T'homas' Brown oi Norwich produces several Examples in his discourse about the .%/- cunx. And doubtlefs Inftanccs might be given in other regular Figures, were Men but obfervant.

The Flowers serve to cheriih and defend the first and tender Rudiments of the Fruit ; I might alfo add the mafculine or prolifick Seed contained in the Chives or Apices of the Stamina, these, befides the Elegancy of their Figures, are many of them endued with fplendid and lovely Colours, * and likewife most grateful and fragrant Odours. Indeed such is the Beauty and Luftre of some Flowers, that our Saviour faith of the Lillies'of the Fields (which some, not without reason, suppose to have been 'T'ulips) that Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of

theje..

* ^^-^^ tbefe. And it is obferv'd by * Spi^ 7iam. ^^ ^ geliiis. That the Art of the most skilful Painter cannot io mingle and temper his Colours, as exactly to imitate or counterfeit the native ones of the Flowers of Vegetables.

As, for the Seeds oiPlmits^ \ Dr. f Antidote More efteems it an evident Sign of ^^m^L 2. r. 2. Divine Providence, that every Kind hath its Seed: For it being no necessary result of the Motion of the Matter, fas the whole Contrivance of the Plant indeed is not) and it being of so great consequence that they have Seed for the Continuance and Propagation of their own Species, and alfo for the gratifying Man's Art, Induftry and Neceffities, (for much of Husbandry and Gardening lies in this) it cannot but be an hOt of Counfcl to furnifli the several Kinds of Plants with their Seeds.

Now the Seed being so necessary for the Maintenance and Increafe of the several Species^ it is worthy the observation, what Care is taken to fecure and preferve it, being in some doubly and trebly defended. As for Inflance, in the Walnut^ Almond, and Plumbs of all Sorts ; we have first a thick pulpy Covering, then a hard Shell, within which is the Seed enclosed in a double Membrane. In the Nutmeg another Tegument is added befides all these, viz, the Mace between the green Pericarpium and the hard Shell, immediately inclofing the Kernel. Neither yet doth the exterior Pulp of the Fruit or Pericavhium serve only for the Defence and

Secu-

Security of the Seed whilft it hangs upon the Plant, but after it is mature and fallen upon the Earth, for the Stercoration of the Soil and Promotion of the Growth, tho' not the firfl Germination of the feminal Plant. Hence (as * Petrus de Crefcentiis tells us) * ^s^^^- ^- 2- Hufbandmen, to make their Vines bear, manure them with Vine Leaves, or the Hulks of expreffed Grapes 5 and they observe fhofe to be most fruitful which are so manured with their own ^ which observation holds true alfo in all other Trees and Plerbs. But befides this Ufe of the Pulp or Pericarphim for the Guard and Benefit of the Seed, it serves alfo by a fecondary Intention of Nature in many Fruits for the Food and Suftenance of Man and other Animals.

Another thing worthy the noting in Seeds, and argumentative of Providence and design, is that papofe Plumage growing upon the Tops of some of them, whereby they are capable of being wafted with the Wind, and by that means fcattered and diffeminated far and wide.

Furthermore, most Seeds having in them a ferhinal Plant perfedly form'd, as the Young is in the Womb of Animals, the elegant Complication thereof in some Species is a very pleafant and admirable Spedacle ; so that no Man that hath a Soul in him can imagine or believe it was so form'd and folded up without Wifdorn and Providence. But of this I have spoken already.

lastly,

lastly, the immenfe Smallnefs of some Sceds^ not to be seen by the naked Eye, so that the Number of Seeds produced at once in some one Plant, as for Example, Reedmace [Tipba Palu^ Jiris] Hartjlongiiey and many Sorts of Ferns, may amount to a Million, is a convincing Argument of the infinite understanding and Art of the Former of them.

And it is remarkable that such Moffes as grow upon Walls, the Roofs of houses, and other high Places, have Seeds so exceffively small, that when fliaken out of their Veffels they appear like Vapour or Smoke, so that they may either afcend of themselves, or by an eafy Impulfe of the Wind be rais'd up to the Tops of houses, Walls or Rocks ; and we need not wonder how the Moffes got thither, or imagine they fprung up fponta-^ neoufly there.

I might aifo take notice of many other Particulars concerning Vegetables, as, first, that because they are design'd for the Food of Animals,, therefore Nature hath taken more extraordinary Care, and made more abundant Provifion for their Propagation and Increafe ; so that they are multiplied and propagated not only by the Seed, but many alfo by the Root, producing OfF-fets, or creeping under Ground; many by Strings or Wyres running above Ground, as Strawberry^ and the like, some by Slips or Cut^ tings, and some by several of these ways. And for the Security of such Species as are produc'd only by Seed, it hath endu'd all Seed with a last^ ing Vitality, that so if by reason of exceffive

Cold

Cold or Drought, or any other Accident, it happen not to germinate the first Year, it will continue its Foecundity^ I do not say two or three, nor fix or feven, but even twenty or thirty Years; and when the Impediment is removed, the Earth in fit Gafe, and the Seafon proper, spring up, bear Fruit, and continue its Species. Hence it is that Plants are fometimgs loft for a while in Places where they formerly abounded, and again after f6me Years appear new ; loft, either because the Springs were not proper for their Germination, or because the Land was fallow'd, or because plenty of Weeds or other Herbs prevented their coming up, and the like, and appearing again when these Impediments are remov'd. Secondly, That some Sorts of Plants, as Vines^ all Sorts of Fiilfe^ HopSy Briony, all pomiferous Herbs, Pumpio?2Sy MelonSy Gourds, Cucumbers y and divers other SpecieSy that are weak and unable to raise or fupport themselves, are either endu'd with a Faculty of twining about others that are near, or elfe furnifh'd with Clafpers and Tendrils, whereby, as it were with Hands,^ they catch hold of them, and so ramping upon Trees, Shrubs, Hedges or Poles, they mount up to a great height, and fecure themselves and their Fruit. Thirdly, that others are arm'd with Prickles and Thorns, to fecure them from the browfmg of beasts, as alfo to ftielter others that grow under them y moreover, they are hereby render'd very ufeful to Man, as if design*d by Nature to make both quick and dead Hedges and Fences. The.

great

112 TI)e Wisdom of GO D Parti.

great Naturalift Pliny hath given an ingenious Account of the Providence and Deiign of Nature in thus arming and fencing them in these Words : Ijide (fpeaking of Nature) excogitavit aliquas aJpeBu hifpidas^ taBu truces^ ut tantum mn vocem ipjius Naturce fingenth illas^ rationemque reddentis exaudtre videamur^ nefe depafcat avida quadrupeSy 7je procaces manus rapiant^ n» negleBa vejitgia obterant y ne i?ijidens ales ififringat ; his 7nuniendo aciileis telifque armandoy remediis ut Jdha ac tut a fint, Ita hoc qiioqiie quod in iis odimus hominum causa excogitatum est.

It is worthy the noting, . that Wheats which is the best Sort of Grain, of which the purefl:, most favoury and wholfome Bread is made, is patient of both Extremes, Heat and Cold, growing and bringing its Seed to Maturity not only in temperate Countries, but alfo on one hand in the cold and northern, viz. Scotland ^ Denmark ^ &c. on the other, in the hotteft and most foutherly, as Egypt y Barhary y Mauritania ^ the Eajl-hzdies^ Guiney, Madagafcar , &c. scarce refufing any Climate.

Nor is it less obfervable, and not-to be commemorated without Acknowledgment of the divine Benignity to us, that (as Fliny rightly notes) nothing is more fruitful than Wheat ^ ^od ei natura (faith he) \t^e5lius nature Farens\ tribuit ^ quid eo maxime ko?ninem alit^ utpote cim e modio^ fi & aptum folum, quale in By-- zacio Africa campo centcni quinquaginta modit reddentur. Mifit ex eo loco Divo Augujlo procurator

Parti. in the C^EATioH. 113

rator ejus ex uno grano (vix credibile diBu) 400 paucis 77iinus germina : Mifit & Neroni fimiliter 360 Jiipidas ex uno grano, " Which Fertility *' Nature, (he fliou'd have said, ^ the Author of " Nature) hath conferred upon it, because it " feeds Man chiefly with it. One Bufhel, if *' fown in a fit and proper Soil, such as is Byza- *' dim, a Field of Ajricdy yielding 150 of anl' nual lucreaie. Augujlus^^ Procurator fent him " from that Place 400 within a few Blades "" fpringing from the same Grain : And to Ne^ *' ro were fent thence 360." If PU?iy, a Heathen, could make this Fertility of Wheat argumentative of the Bounty of Godto Man, making such plentiful Provifion for him of that which is of mod pleafant Tafte and wholefome Nourifliment, furely it ought not to be palTed •over by us Qhrijliam without Notice taking and Thankfgiving,

As for the Signatures of Plants, or the Notes impre/Ted upon them, as Lidices of their Virtues, though ^" some lay * ^^- ^'^^^ great Strefs upon them, accounting c. 6. them strong Arguments to prove, that some under standing Principle is the highefl: Ori^ ginal of the Works of Nature, as indeed they were, could it certainly be made appear, that there were such Marks defignedly set upon them ; because all that I find mention'd and colJedted by Authors, seem to me to be rather fancied by Men, than design'd by Nature to fignify or point out any such Virtues or Qualities as they would make us believp. I have elfewhere, Inhink

. I V upon

upon good Grounds, rejefted them : and finding no reason, as yet, to alter my Opinion, I (hall not further infift on them : Howbeit, I will not deny, but that.the noxious and malignant Plants do many of them discover fomething of their Nature by the fad and melancholick Vifage of their Leaves, Flowers and Fruit. And that I may not leave that Head wholly untouched, one observation I (hall add relating to the Virtues of Plants, in which I think there is fomething of Truth 5 that is, that there are, by the wife disposition of Providence, such Species of Plants produc'd in every Country, as are most proper and convenient for the Meat and Medicine of the Men and Animals that are bred and inhabit there : Infomuch that Sole?2ander writes, that from the Frequency of the Plants that fprung up naturally in any Region, he could eafily gather what Endemial Difcafes the Inhabitants thereof were fubjedl to : So in Denmark, Friezland^ and Holland, where the Scurvy ufually reigns, the proper Remedy thereof, Scurvy-Grafs, doth plentifully grow.

Of Bodies endued with a fenfttive Soul, or Animals.

I proceed now to the consideration of Animate Bodies endu'd with a fenfitive Soul, call'd Animals, Of these I {hall only make some general observations, not curiously consider the Parts of each particular Species, fave only as they serve for instances or Examples.

I first

Firil of alj, because it is the great design of Providence to maintain and continue every Species, I shall take Notice of the great Care and abundant Provifion that is made for the fecuring this End. ^aiita ad earn rem vis, ut injuo quceque ge?2ere perrnaneat'i Gc, Why can we imagine all Creatures should be made Male and Female but to this purpose ? Why should there be ^implanted in each Sex such a vehement and inexpugnable Appetite of Copulation ? Why in viviparous Animals, in the Time of Geftation, should the Nourishment be carried to the Emhryon in the Womb, which at other Times goeth not that Way ? When the Young is brought forth, how comes all the Nourilliment then to be transferr'd from the Womb to the Breafh or Paps, leaving its former Chanel, the Dam at such Time being for the most Part lean and ill-favour'-d ? To all this I might add, as a great Proof and Infiance of the Care that is taken, and Provifion made for the Prefervation and Continuance of the S:pecies, the lafting Foecundity of the Animal Seed or Egg in the Females of Man, beasts and Birds. I say, the Animal Seed, because it is t?) me highly probable, that the Females, as wdl of Bealls as Birds, have in them from their first Formation the Seeds of all the Young they will afterwards bring forth, which when they are all fpent and exhauiled by what Meansfoever, the Animal becomes barren and effete. these Seeds in some Species of Animals continue Fruitful, and apt to take Life by the Admixture of* the Male-feed fifty Years or more, and in Tome

I 2 ^ Birds

Birds fourfcore or an hundred. I^re I cannot omit one very remarkable observation I find in Cicero : Ataue ut intelligamiis (faith he) nihil horum ejfe fortiiitum^ fed h(zc omnia provida Jblert ifque naturce^ qua multiplices fcetm procreant^ ut fues^ ut canes^ his mammarum data est multitudOy quas eafdem paucas hahent ece befiice qu£ pauca gignunt, That we may underfiand that none of these Things (he had been fpeaking of) is fortuitous^ but that all are the EjfeBs of provident and fagacious Nature -, multiparous ^adrupeds^ as Swine ^ and Dogs ^ are furnijloed with a Multitude of Paps: Whereas those Beafis which bring forth feWy have but a few*

That flying Creatures of the greater Sort, that is, Birdsy should all lay Eggs, and none bring forth live Young, is a manifest Argument of Divine Providence, defigning thereby their Pfefervation and Security, that there might be the more Plenty of them ; and that neither the Birds of Prey, the Serpent, nor the Fov/ler/ should ftraiten their Generation too much: For if they had been viviparous, the Burden of their Womb, if they had brought forth any competent Number at a time, had been so gr^at and heavy, that their Wings would have fail%4:hem, and they become an eafy Prey to their Enemies : Or, if they had brought but one or two at a time, they would have been troubled all the Year long with feeding their Young, or bearing them in their Womb. Dr. More Antid, Atheifm, I 2.

This

Parti. Z;^ //6^ Creation. 117

This Mention of feeding their Young puts me in mind of two or three considerable observations referring thereto.

first, feeing it would be for many reasons inconvenient for Birds to give fuck, and yet no less inconvenient, if not deftrudtive, to the Chicken upon Exclufion, all of a fudden, to make so great a Change in its Diet, as to pass ^from liquid to hard Food, before the Stomach be gradually confolidated, and by Ufe ftrengthen'd and habituated to grind and concodt it, and its tender and pappy Flefli fitted to be nouriih'd by such strong and folid Diet, and before the Bird be by little and little accuftom'd to ufe its Bill, and gather it up, which at first it doth but very flowly and imperfectly ; therefore Nature hath provided a large Yolk in every Egg, a great Part whereof remaineth after the Chicken is hatch'd, and is taken up and enclos'd in its Belly, and by a Chanel made on purpose, receiv'd by degrees into the Guts, and serves instead of Milk to nourifh the Chick for a considerable time 5 which neverthelefs mean while feeds it self by the Mouth a little at a time, and gradually more and more, as it gets a perfeder Ability and Habit of. gathering up its Meat, and its Stomach is ftrengthen'd to macerate and concod it, and its Flefli harden'd and fitted to be nourifli'd by it.

Secondly, That Birds which feed their Young in the Neft, tho' in all likelihood they have no Ability of counting the Number of them, should yet (tho' they bring but one Morfel of Meat at a time, and have not fewer (it may be)

I 3 ^ than

1 1 8 rhe\N ui>oM of GOD Part L

than feven or eight Young in the Neft together, which at the Return of their Dams, do all at once with equal Greedinels, hold up their Heads and gape) not omit or forget one of them, but feed them all ; which, unless they did carefully observe and retain in Memory which they had fed, which not, were impoffible to be done : This, I say, seems to me most ft range and admirable,, and beyond the Poffibiliry of a mere Machine to perform.

Another Experiment I shall add, to prove, that tho' Birds have not an exadl Power of numbring, yet have they of diftinguifliing many from few, and knowing when they come near to a certain Number : And that is, that when they have laid such a Number- of £g-^j, as they can conveniently cover and hatch, they give over and begin to lit ; not because they are necessarily determined to such a Number ; for that they are not, as is clear, because they are in Ability to go on and lay more at their pleasure., Hens, for Example, if you let their Eggs alone, when they have laid fourteen or fifteen, will give over and begin to fit j whereas, if you daily withdraw their Eggs^ they will go on to lay five Times that Number : [Yetfome of them are so cunning, that if you leave them but one Egg^ they will not lay to it, but forfake their Neft,] This holds not only in domeftick and manfuete Birds, for then it might bethought the Effed of Cicuration or Inftitution, but alfo in the wild ; for my honour'd Friend Dr. Martin Lijier inform'd me,

that

that of his owu Knowledge one and the same Swallow, by the fubftrading daily of her Eggs proceeded to lay nineteen fucceflively, and then gave over ; as I have * elfevvhere noted. Now that I am upon this ^J Pj^face to Subject of the Number of £^^i, give ^y^ ornfthoi. . me leave to add a remarkable observation referring thereto, viz. That Birds, and such oviparous Creatures, as are long-liv'd, have *Eggs enough at first conceived in them to serve them for many Years laying, probably for as many as they are to live, allowing such a Proportion for every Year, as will serve for one or two Incubations -, whereas Infed:s, which are to breed but once, lay all their Eggs at once, have they never so many. Now, had these Things been govern'd by Chance, I see no reason why it should constantly fall out so.

Thirdly, The marvellous fpeedy Growth of / Birds that are hatch'd in Nefts, and fed by the Old ones there, 'till they are fledg'd, and come almost to their full Bignefs, at which Perfedion they arrive within the short Term of about one Fortnight, seems to me an Argument of Providence, defigning thereby their Prefervation, that they might not lie long in a Condition exposed to the Ravine of any Vermine that may find them, being utterly unable to efcape or fliift for themselves.

Another and no less efFedlual Argument may be taken from the Care and Providence us*d for the Hatching and Rearing their Young : And fixft, they fearch out a fecret and quiet Place

I 4 where

where they may be fecure and undifturb'd in their Incubation ; then they make themselves Nefts every one after his Kind, that io their Eggs and I^oung may he soft and warm, and their Exclufion and Growth be promoted. these Nefts are some of them (o elegant and artificial, that it is hard for Man to imitate them and make the like. I have seen Nefts of an hidian Bird so artificially composed of the Fibres, I think, of some Roots, so curiously interwoven and platted together, as is admirable to behold: Which Nefts they hang on the Ends of the Twigs of Trees over the Water, to fecure their Eggs and Young from the Ravage of Apes and Monkeys^ and other beasts, that might elfe prey upon them. After they have laid their Eggs^ how diligently and patiently do they fit upon them 'till they be hatch'd, scarce affording themselves time to go off" to get them Meat ? Nay, with such an ardent and impetuous Defire of fitting are they infpired, that if you take away all their Eggs:,- they will fit upon an empty Neft : And yet one would think that fitting were none of the most pleafant Works. After their Young are hatch'd, for some time they do almost constantly brood them under their Wings, left the Cold and fometimes perhaps the Heat ftiouid harm them. All this while alfo they labour hard to get them Food, fparing it out of their own Bellies, and pining themselves almost to Death rather than they Ihould want. Moreover, it is admirable to observe with what Courage they are at that time infpir'd, that they wull even venture their own

Lives

Parti. in ibe Creation. 121

Lives in Defence of them. The most timorous, as Hens and Geefe, become then so couragious, as to dare to fly in the Face of a Man that shall moleft or difquiet their Young, which would never do so much in their own Defence. these things being contrary to any Motions of Senfe, or Inftin6l of Self-prefervation, and so eminent pieces of Self-denial, mud needs be the Works of Providence, for the Continuation of the Species, and upholding of the World : especially if we consider that all these Pains is beftow'd upon a Thing which takes no Notice of it, will render them no Thanks for it, nor make them any Requital, or Amends ; as alfo, that after the Tou77g is come to some Growth, and able to (hist for it self, the old One retains no such crop^J) to it, takes no further Care of it, but will fall upon it, and beat it indifferently with others. To these I shall add three observations more relating to this Head. The first borrow'd of Dr. Ciidworth, Syftem, pag. 69. One thing necessary to the Confervation of the Species of Animals, that is, the keeping up constantly in the World a due numerical Proportion between the Sexes of Male and Female, doth necelTarily infer a fuperintending Providence. For did this depend only upon mechanism, it cannot well be conceived, but that in some Ages or other there {hou'd happen to be all MaleSy or all Fe^ males J ^ and so the Species fail. Nay, it cannot well be thought otherwife, but that there is in thijs a Providence, fuperior to that of the Pla-

Jlick

122 "The Wisdom of COD Parti.

Jiick or Spermatick Nature^ which hath not so much of Knowledge and Difcretion allowed to it, as whereby to be able to govern this Affair.

• The Second of Mr. Boyle in his Treatife of the high Veneration Man's IntelleB owes to Gody p. 32. that is, the Conveniency of the Seafon (or Time of Year) of the Produ&on of Animals, when there is proper Food and Entertainment ready for them. So we see^ thaty according to the ufual Coiirfe of Nature^ Lamhs, Kids^, and many other living Creatures^ are brought into the World at the Spring of the Tear ; when tender GrafSy and other Nutritive Plants^ are provided for their Food, And the like may be obfervd in the FroduBion of Silk-worms^ (yea, all other Eruca s, and many Infeds more) whose Eggs^ accordi?ig to Nature s Injiitiition^ are hatched when Mulberry-Threes begin to bud^ and put forth those Leaves y whereon those precious InfeBs are to feed% the Aliments being tender y whiljl the Worms themr Jelves arefoy and growing more jirong and fubftan-^ tialy as the InfeBs increafe in Vigor and Bulk, To these I {hall add another instance, that is, of the Wafpy whose Breeding is deferr'd till after the Summer-Solftice, few of them appearing before July : Whereas one would be apt to think the vigorous and quickning Heat of the Sun in the Youth of the Year (hould provoke them to generate much fooner : [Provoke them, I say, because every Wafp's-Neft is begun by one great Mother-Wafp, which over-lives the Winter, lying

ing hid in feme hollow Tree or other Latibu- /urn-,] because then, and not till then, Pears, Plumbs, and other Fruit, design'd principally for their Food, begin to ripen.

The Third is mine own, That all Infedts which do not themselves feed their Young, nor treafure up Provifion in Store for their Suftenance, lay their Eggs in such Places as are most convenient for their Exclufion, and where, when hatch'd, their proper Food is ready for them: So, for Example, we see two Sorts of white Butterfies - faftening their Eggs to Cabbage- Leaves, because they are fit Aliment for the Catterpillers that come of them ; whereas should they affix them to the Leaves of a Plant improper for their Food, such Catterpillers mull needs be loft, they chuling rather to die than to tafte of such Plants ; for that Kind of Infc6l (I mean Catterpillers) hath a nice and delicate Palate, some of them feeding only upon one particular Species of Plant, others on divers indeed, but those of the same Nature and Quality ; utterly refufing them of a contrary. Like instances might be produced in the other Tribes of Infed:s y it being perpetual in all, if not hindered or imprifon'd, eledlively to lay their Eggs in Places where they are feldom loft or mifcarry, and where they have a Supply of Nourifhment for their Young so foon as they are hatch'd, and need it : Whereas should they fcatter them carelefly and indifferently in any Place, the greatcft Part of the Young would in all likelihood perifli

foon

foon after their Exclufion for want of Food, and so their Numbers continually decreafing, the whole Species ina few Years would be in Danger to be loit : Whereas no such thing, I dare say, hath happened since the first Creation.

It is here very remarkable, that those Infeds, for whose Young Nature hath not made Provivilion of sufficient Suftenance, do themselves gather and lay up in ftore for them. So for Example: The Bee, the proper Food of whose * Eulas is Honey, or perchance £r/- ^» Bee-Mag- ^j^^^^^ ^^j^j^j^ we englifh B^^-£r^^^)

neither of which Viands being any where to be found amafs'd by Nature in Quantity sufficient for their Maintenance, doth herself with unwearied Diligence and Induftry, flying from Flower to Flower, colled: and treafure them up.

To these I shall now add an observation of Mr. Lewenhoeck's, concerning the fudden Growth of some sorts of Infeds, and the reason of it. -

It is (faith he) a wonderful Thing, and worthy the observation, in Flefh-Flies, that a Fly- Maggot, in five Days space after it is hatch'd, arrives at its full Growth and perfed Magnitude. For if to the perfeding of it there were required, suppose a Month's time or more, (as in some other Maggots is needful) it is impoffible that about the Summer-Solftice any such Flies fhou'd be produced, because the Fly-Maggots have no Ability to fearch out any other Food than that wherein they are placed by their Dams. Now this Food, suppose it be Flefh;, Fifli,

or

or the Entrails of Beads, lying in the Fields, exposed to the hot Sun-beams, can last but a few- Days in Cafe and Condition to be a fit Aliment for these Creatures, but will foon be quite parch'd and dry'd up, and therefore the moil: wife Creator hath given such a Nature and Temperament to them, that within a very few Days they attain to their juft Growth and Magnitude; whereas Cifi the contrary, other Maggots, who are in no such danger of being flraiten'd for Food, continue a whole Month or more before they give over to eat and ceafe to grow. He proceeds further to tell us, that feme of these Fly-maggots which he fed daily with frefh Meat, he brought to Perfedlion in four Days time ; so that he conceives that in the Heat of Summer the Eggs of a Fly, or the Maggots contained in them, may in less than a Month's Space run through all their Changes, and come to perfedl Flies, which may themselves lay Eggs again.

Secondly, I fhali take notice of the various ftrange Inftinds of Animals, which will necessarily demonftrate that they are direfted to Ends unknown to them by a wife Superintendent : As I. That all Creatures should know how to defend themselves and offend their Enemies, where their natural Weapons are fituate, and how to make ufe of them. A Ccilf will so manage his Head as tho* he would pulh with his Horns even before ihey (hoot. A Boar knows the Ufe of his Tuflies; a Dog of his Teeth; a Horje of his Hoofs ; a Ccck of his Spurs ; a Bee of her Stin-^ ; a Rai?i w ill butt with his Head, yea tho' he be

brought

126 TieWisDOM of GOD Parti.

brought up tame, and never faw that manner of lighting. Now, why another Animal which hath no Horns should not make a (hew of puiliing, or no Spurs, of ftriking with his Legs, and the Hke, I know not, but that every Kind is providentially direded to the Ufe of its proper and natural Weapons. 2. That those Animals that are weak, and have neither Weapons nor Courage to fight, are for the most part created fwift of Foot or Wing, and so being naturally timorous, are both willing and able to fave themselves by Flight. 3. That Poultry, Partridge, and other Birds, ihould at the fiift fight know Birds of Prey, and make fign of it by a peculiar Note of their Voice to their Young, who prefently thereupon hide themselves s that the Lamb (hould acknowledge the IFolf its Enemy, tho' it had never seen one before, as is taken for granted by most Naturalifts, and may for ought I know be true, argues the Providence of Nature, or more truly the Gqd of Nature, who for their Prefervation hath put such an Infl:inft into them. 4. That young Animals as foon as they are brought forth Ihould know their Food j as for Example, such as are nourifh'd with Milk prefently find their way to the Paps, and fuck at them; whereas none of those that are not design'd for that Nourifhment ever offer to fuck, or feek out any such Food. Again, 5. That such Creatures as are whole-footed or Fin-toed, viz. feme Birds, and Quadrupeds, are naturally direded to go into the Water, andfwim there^ as we iee DucklingSy

tho*

tho' hatched and led by a Hen, if she brings them to the Brink of a River or Pond of Water, they prefently leave her, and in they go, though they never faw any such thing done before, and tho' the Hen clucks and calls, and doth what Ihe can to keep them out. This Pliny takes notice of, Hijt, Nat, lib, 10. cap, 55. in these Words, fpeaking of Hens : Super omnia est Anatum Ovis fub^ d'ltis atqiie exclufis admiratio^ pri?no no7i plane agnofcentis fcetum : mox iucertos incubitus Jbllicite ^onvocantis : Pojlremo I amenta circa pifcince Jlagna^ mergentibiis fe ptdlis naturd duce. So that we see every Part in Animals is fitted to its Ufe, and the Knowledge of this Ufe put into them : For neither do any Sort of Web-footed Fowls live confl:antly upon the Land, or fear to enter the Water, nor any Land-Fowl so much as attempt to swim there. 6. Birds of the same Kind make their Nefts of the same Material, laid in the same Order, and exadty of the same Figure ; so that by the fight of the Neft one may certainly know what Bird it belongs to -, and this they do tho'- living in diftant Countries, and though they never faw nor could see any Neft made, that is, though taken out of the Neft and brought up by Hand ; neither were any of the same Kind ever obferv'd to make a different Neft, either for Matter or Fafhion : This, together with the curious and artificial Contexture of such Nefts, and their Fitnefs and Conveniencie for the Reception, hatching and cherifhing the E^^i and Toufig oi their refpedive Builders (which we have before

taken

taken notice of) is a great Argument of a fuperior Author of their and other Natures, who hath endu'd them with these Inftind^s, whereby they are as it were adted and driven to brmg about Ends which themselves aim not at (so far as we can difcern) but are directed to; for (as Arijiotle observes) m-n -nym^ cvtz ^yiTkKjyjV-nz, ovrz iSorjhd^o-Dl/jucvct TTDiS, they a^ not by Art^ neither do they enquire^ neither do they deliberate about what they do. And therefore, as Dr. Cudworth faith well, they are not Mafters of that wisdom according to which they adl, but only paffive to the Inftinds and Imprefles thereof upon them. And indeed to affirm that brute Animals do all these things by a Knowledge of their own, and which themselves are Mafters of, and that without Deliberation and Confu^tation, were to make them to be endu'd with a most perfed Intelleft, far tranfcending that of human reason ; whereas it is plain enough that Brutes are not above Confultation, but below it, and that these Inftinds of Nature in them are nothing but a kind of Fate upon them.

The Migration of Birds from an hotter to a colder Country, or a colder to an hotter, according to the Seafons of the Year, as their Nature is, 1 know not how to give an Aqcount of, it is so ftrange and admirable. What moves them to fbift their Quarters ? You will say, the Difagreeablenefs of the Temper of the Air to the constitution of their Bodies, or want of F^od.

But

Parti. /;^ /i6^ Creation. 129

But how come they to be dire(fled to the same Place yearly, tho' fometimes but a little Iiland,as the Soland-Goofe to the Baffe of Edinburgh-Frith^ which they could not poflibly see, and so it could have no Influence upon them that way ? The Cold or the Heat might poflibly drive them in a right Line from either 5 but that they should impel Land-Birds to venture over a wide Ocean, of which they can see no End, is fl:range and unaccountable 5 one would think that the Sight of so much Water, and present Fear of drowning, should overcome the Senfe of Hunger, or Difagreeablenefs of the Temper of the Air. Befides, how come they to fleer their course aright to their fcveral Quarters, which before the Compafs was invented was hard for a Man himself to do, they being not able, as I noted before, to see them at that distance? Think we that the ^ails, for instance, could see quite crofs the Mediterranean-Sea? and yet it is clear they fly out of Itzily into Jfrick^ lighting many times on. Ships in the midft of the Sea, to rest themselves whe'n tir'd and fpent with flying. That they (hould thus fliift Places, is very convenient for them, and accordingly we see they do it y which seems to be impofllble they should, unless themselves were endu'd with reason, or direded and afted by a fuperior intelligent cause.

The like may be said of the Migration of divers Sorts of Fiflies: As for Example 5 the SaU motiy which from the Sea yearly afcends up a Rivier fometimes 406 or 500 Miles, only to cast

K their

their Spawn, and fecure it in Banks of Sand, for the Prefervation of it till the Young be hatched or excluded, and then return to Sea again. How these Creatures when they have been wandring a long time in the wide Ocean, should again find out and repair to the Mouths of the same Rivers, seems to me very ftrange, and hardly accountable, without recourfe to Inftinft and the Diredlion of a fuperior cause. That Birds, feeing they have no Teeth for the Maftication and Preparation of their Food, {hould for the more convenient Comminution of it in their Stomachs or Gizzards, fwallow down little Pebble-stones , or other hard Bodies ; and because all are not fit or proper for that Ufe, (hould first try them in their Bills, to feel whether they be rough or angular, for their Turns, which if they find them not to be, they rejefl: them ; when these by the working of the Stomach are worn fmooth, or too small for their Ufe, they avoid them by Siege, and pick up others; that these are of great Uie to them for the grinding of their Meat, thei;e is no doubt: And I have obferv'd in Birds that have been kept up in houses, where they could get no Pebbles, the very Yolks of their Eggs have changed Colour, and become a great deal paler than theirs who have their liberty to go abroad.

Befides, I have obferv'd in many Birds, the

Gullet, before its entrance into the Gizzard, tO

be much dilated, and thick set, or as it were

granulated, with a multitude of Glandules, each

I w^hereof

Parti. Z;^ /;5^ Creation. 131

whereof was provided with its excretory VefTel, out of which, by an eafy PrcfTure, you might fqueeze a Juice or Pap, which served for the same Ufe which the Saliva doth in Quadrupeds, that is, for the macerating and diflblution of the Meat into a Chyle 5 for that the Saliva^ notwithftanding its Infipidnefs, hath a notable Virtue of macerating and difTolving Bodies, appears by the Effefts it hath in killing of Quickfilver, fermenting of Dough like Leaven or Yeaft , taking away Warts, and curing other cutaneous Diftempers; fometimcs exulcerating the Jaws, and rotting the Teeth.

Give me leave to add one Particular more concerning Birds, which some may perchance think too homely and indecent to be mentioned in such a discourse as this; yet because it is not belov^ the Providence of Nature, and design'd for Cleanlinefs, and some great Men have thought it worth the obferving, I need not to be afham'd to take notice of it; that is, that in young Birds that are fed in the Neft, the Excrement that is voided at one time is so vifcid, that it hangs together in a great Lump, as if it were inclofed in a Film, so that it may eafily be taken up and carried away by the old Bird in her Bill; befides, by a ftrange Inftinfl: the young Bird elevates her hinder Parts so high, for the most part, that (he feldom fails to cast what comes from her elear over the side of the Neft ; so we see here is a double Provifion made to keep the Neft: clean J v/hich, if it were defiled with Ordure,

K 2 the

the young Ones must necessarily be utterly marr'd and ruin'd. y. The Bee^ a Creature of the loweft Forms of Animals, so that no Man can fufpeft it to have any considerable measure of understanding , or to have Knov^ledge of, much less to aim at any End, yet makes her Combs and Cells with that geometrical Accuracy, that she must needs be ad:ed by an Inftincft implanted in her by the wife Author of Nature ; for first she plants them in a perpendicular posture, and so close together as with Conveniency they may, beginning at the top and working downwards, that so no room may be loft in the Hive, and that she may have eafy Accefs to all the Combs and Cells ; befides, the Combs being wrought double, that is, with Cells on each side, a common Bottom or partition Wall could not in any other Site have so conveniently, if at all, received or contain'd the Honey; then (he makes the particular Cells most geometrically and artificially, as the famous Mathematician Pappus demonftrates in the Preface to his third Book of Mathematical ColleBiohs. first of all (faith he, fpeaking of the Cells) it is convenient that they be of such Figures as may cohere one to another, and have common Sides, elfe there would be empty Spaces left between them to no Ufe, but to the weakening and fpoiling of the Work, if any thing ihould get in there ; and therefore, tho' a round Figure be most capacious for the Honey, and most convenient for the Bee to creep into, yet did ftie not make choice of that, be- I cause

Parti. in />6^ Cre ation. 133

cause then there must have been triangular Spaces left void. Now there are only three redilineous and ordinate Figures which can serve to this Purpofej and inordinate, or unlike ones, must have been not oiily less elegant and beautiful, but unequal. [Ordinate Figures are such as have all their Sides and all their Angles equal.] The three ordinate Figures are, "Triangles, Squares^ and Hexagons *y for the Space about any Point ifiay be fiU'd up either by fix equilateral Tria?:^ gles^ or four Squares^ or three Hexagons ; whereas three Pentagons are too little, and three Heptagons too much. Of these three, the Bee makes ufe of the Hexagon, both because it is more capacious than either of the other, provided they be of equal compafs, and so equal Matter fpent in the Conftruftion of each ; and fecondly, because it is most commodious for the Bee to creep into; and lastly, because in the other Figures more Angles and Sides must have met together at the same Point, and so the Work could not have been so firm and ftrongj moreover, the Combs being double, the Cells on each side the Partition are so ordered, that the Angles on one side infift upon the Centers of the Bottoms of the Cells on the other side, and not Angle upon or against Angle, which alfo must needs contribute to the Strength and Firmnefs of the Work ; these Cells flie fills with Honey for her Winter Provifion, and curiously clofes them up 'with Covers of Wax, that keep the included Liquor from fpilling, and from external Injuries, as

K 3 Mr.

Mr. Boyle truly observes, Treatife of final causes^ f, 169. Another Sort of Bee I have obferv'dj may be called the Tree-Bee^ whose Induftry is admirable in making Provifion for her Young. first, she digs round Vaults or Burrows [Cwiiculos] in a rotten or decayed Tree, of a great length, in them {he builds or forms her cylindrical Nefls or Cafes, resembling Cartridges, or a very narrow Thimble, only in proportion longer, of pieces of Rofe, or other Leaves, which she fhears off with her Mouth, and plats and joins close together by some glutinous Subflance ; these Cafes she fills with a red Pap, of a thinner Confiftence than an Eleduary, of no pleafant Tafte, which where she gathers I know not -, and which is most remarkable, she forms these Cafes and flores them with this Provifion before she hath any young One hatch'd, or so much as an Egg laid ; for on the top of the Pap she lays one Egg, and then clofes up the VefTel with a Cover of Leaves : the inclos'd Egg foon becomes an Eula, or Maggot, which feeding upon the Pap till it comes to its full Growth, changes to a Nympha, and after comes out a Bee, Another Infedt noted for her feeming Prudence, in making Provifion for the Winter, propofed by Solomo?i for our Imitation, is the Ant, which (as all Naturalifls agree) hoard up Grains of Corn againfl the Winter for her Suflenance, * ^o^' ^" "* and is reported by some to * bite off

the Germen of them, lefl they should fprout by the Moifture of the Earth, which I

look

look upon as a mere Fiftion ; neither should 1 be forward to credit the former Relation, were it not for the Authority of the Scriptu7^e^ because I could never observe any such ftoring of Grain by our Country Ants.

Yet there is a Quadruped taken notice of even by the Vulgar, for laying up in ftore Provifion for the Winter; that is, the Squirrel^ whose Hoards of Nuts are frequently found, and pillaged by rfiem.

The Beaver is by credible Perfons, Eye-Witneffes, affirmed to build him houses for Shelter and Security in Winter-time. See Mr, Boyle of final CauJeSy p, 173.

Befides these I have mentioned, an Hundred others may be found in Books relating especially to Phyfick: as, that Dogs when they are fick, {hould vomit thcmfelves by eating Grafs; that Swine should refufe Meat so foon as they feel themselves ill, and so recover by Abftinence; that the Bird Ibis should teach Men the way of adminiftring Clyfters, Plin. lib, 8. cap, 27. the wild Goats of Dictamus for drawing out of Darts and healing Wounds; the Swallow the Ufe of Celandine for repairing the Sight, &c, ibid. Of the Truth of which, because I am not fully satisfied, I shall make no Inference from them.

nirdly^ I shall remark the Care that is taken for the Prefervation of the Weak, and such as are -exposed to the Injuries, and preventing the Increafe of such as are noifome and hurtful ; for

K 4 as

as it is a Demonftration of the divine Power and Magnificence to create such Variety of Animals, not only great but small, not only strong and courageous, but alfo weak and timorous ; so is it no less Argument of his wisdom to give to these Means, and the Power and Skill of ufing them, to preferve themselves from the Violence and Injures of those. That of the Weak, some fhouid dig Vaults and Holes in the Earth, as Rabbets^ to fecure themselves and their Young ; others should be arm'd with hard Shells ; others with Prickles ; the rest that have no such Armature, fhouid be endu'd with great Swiftnefs or Pernicity ; and not only so , but some alfo have their Eyes stand so prominent, as the Hare^ that they can see as well behind as before them, that so they may have their Enemy alway m their Eye^ and long, hollow, moveable Ears, to receive and convey the least Sound, or that which comes from far, that they be not fuddenly furprized or taken ( as they say ) napping. Moreover, it is remarkable, that in this Animal, and in the Rabbet^ the muscles of the Loins and hind Legs are extraordinarily large in proportion to the rest of the Body, or those of other Animals, as if made on purpose for Swiftnefs, that they may be able to efcape the Teeth of so many Enemies as continually purfue and chafe them ; ^dd hereto the Length of their hind Legs, which is no small Advantage to them, as is noted by 'Pgimt Julan Barm in an ancient Dialogue in Verfe betyveen the Huntfman and his Mail ; The Man

there

there asks his Matter, What is the reason, why the Hare when she is near fpent makes up a Hill ? The Matter answers, That Nature hath made the hinder-legs of the Hare longer than the Fore-legs 5 by which Means (lie climbs the Hill with much more Eafe than the Dogs, whose Legs are of equal Length, and so leaves the Dogs behind her, and many Times efcapes away clear, and faves her Life. This last observation, I mutt confefs my self to have borrowed out of the Papers of my honoured Friend Mr. John Aubrey^ which he was pleafed to give me a Sight of.

I might here ardd much concerning the Wiles and Rufes, which these timid Creatures make ufe of to fave themselves, and efcape their Perfecutors, but that I am fomewhat diffident of the Truth of those Stories and Relations. I shall only aver what my self have fometimes obferv*d of a Duck, when closely purfued by a Water-Dog ; she not only dives to fave herself, (which yet (he never does but when driven to an exigent, and jutt ready to be caught, because it is painful and difficult to her) but when she comes up again, brings not her whole Body above Water, but only her Bill, and Part of her Head, holding the rest underneath, that so the Dog, who the mean time turns round and looks about him, may not efpy her, 'till she have recovered Breath.

As for Sheep ^ which have no natural Weapons* or Means to defend or fecure themselves, i;either Heels to run, nor Claws to dig ^ they are

delivered

delivered into the Hand, and committed to the Care and Tuition of Man ; and ferving him for divers Ufes, are nourished andprotefted by him; and so enjoying their Beings for a Time, by this Means propagate and continue their Species : So that there are none deftitute of some Means to preferve themselves, and their Kind ; and these Means so effedual, that notwithftanding all the Endeavours and Contrivances of Man and Beafl: Co deftroy them, there is not to this Day one Species loft of such as are mentioned in Hiftories, and consequently and undoubtedly neither of such as w^ere at first created.

Then for Birds of Prey, and rapacious Animals, it is remarkable wrhat Arifiotle observes. That they are all folitary, and go not in Flocks, llaL^'\mv')(jtiv ov^h dyehaiovy no Birds of Prey are gregarious. Again, that such Creatures do not greatly multiply, rm yctfjL^o^vtl^oov oAiyorojccc Trdv ra. They for the most Part breeding and bringing forth but one or two, or at least, a few Young Ones at once : Whereas they that are see-' ble and timorous are generally multiparous ; or, if they bring forth but a few at once, as Pigeojts^ they compenfate that by their often breeding, viz. every Month but two throughout the Year; by this Means providing for the Continuation of their Kind. But for the Security of these rapacious Birds, it is worthy the noting, that because a Prey is not always ready, but perhaps they may fail of one some Days, Nature hath made them patient of a long inedia^ and belides,

when

when they light upon one, they gorge themselves so therewith, as to fufRce for their Nourifliment for a considerable Time.

Fourthly y I shall note the exadt Fitnefs of the Parts of the Bodies of Animals to every one's Nature and Manner of Living. A notable instance of which we have in the Swine, a Creature well known, and therefore what I shall observe of it is obvious to every Man. His proper and natural Food being chiefly the Roots of Plants, he is provided with a long and strong Snout 5 long, that he might thruft it to a sufficient Depth into the Ground without Offence to his ^Eyes ; strong and conveniently formed for the rooting and turning up the Ground. And befides, he is endued with a notable Sagacity of Scent, for the finding out such Roots as are fit for his Food. Hence in Italy, the ufual Method for finding and gathering of Trufes, or fubterraneous Mufhromes, (called by the Italians Tartiifali, and in Latin I^ubera terra) is, by tying a Cord to the Hind- leg of a Pig, and driving him before them into such Paflures as ufually produce that Kind of Mufhrome, and obferving where he ftops and begins to root, and there digging, they are fure to find a T'rufle ; which when they have taken up, they drive away the Pig to fearch for more. So I have my self observed, that in Paflures where there are Earth-nuts to be found up and down in several Patthes, tho' the Roots lie deep in the Ground, and the Stalks be dead long before and quite

gone,

gone, the Swine will by their Scent eafily find Siem out, and root only in those Places where they grow.

This rooting of the Hog in the Earth, calls to mind another instance of like Nature, that is the Porpejfe^ which, as his Englijh Name Por-

• S i efifli ^^' ^*^* * Pore pefce^ imports, re- ^^^^" * fembles the Hog, both in the Strength of his Snout, and alfo in the Manner of getting his Food by rooting ; for we found the Stomach of one we differed full of Sand-Eels^ or LaunceSy which for the most Part lie deep in the Sand, and cannot be gotten but by rooting or digging there. We have seen the Country-People in Cornwall^ when the Tide was out, to fetch them out of the Sand with Iron- Hooks thruft down under them, made for that purpose.

Furthermore, that very Adlion for which the Swine is abominated, and look'd upon as an unclean and impure Creature, namely wallowing in the Mire, is design'd by Nature for a very good End and Ufe, 'viz. not only to cool his Body, for the fair Water would have done that as well, nay, better, for commonly the Mud and Mire in Summer-time is warm \ but alfo to fufFocate and deftroy Lice, Fleas, and other noifom and importunate Infefts, that are troublefome and noxious to him. For the same reason do all the Poultry-kind, and divers other Birds, bask themselves in the Duft in Summertime

time and hot Weather, as is obvious to every one to observe.

2. A fecond and no less remarkable instance, I shall produce, out of Dr. More's Antidote againji Atheijm, lib. 2. cap. 10. in a poor and contemptible Quadruped, the Mole,

first of all (faith he) her Dwelling being under Ground, where nothing is to be seen, Na- *ture hath so obfcurely fitted her with Eyes, that Naturalifts can scarcely agree, whether (he hath any Sight at all or no. [In our observation, Moles have perfeft Eyes, and Holes for them through the Skin, so that they are outwardly to be seen by any that shall diligently fearch for them ; tho' indeed they are exceeding small, not much bigger than a great Pin's Head.] But for Amends, what (he is capable of for her Defence and Warning of Danger, (he has very eminently conferred upon her; for she is very quick of hearing, [doubtlefs her fubterraneous Vaults are lik Trunks to convey any Sound a great Way.] And then her short Tail and short Legs, but broad Fore- feet armed with sharp Claws, we see by the Event to what purpose they are, flie so fwiftly working herself under Ground, and making her Way so faft in the Earth, as they that behold it cannot but admire it. Her Legs therefore are fliort, that flie need dig no more than will serve the mere Thicknefs of her Body: And her fore- feet are broad, that (he may fcoup away rnuch Earth at a Time : And (he has little or no Tail, because (he courfes it not on the Ground like a i?^/ or Monfe, but lives under the

Earth,

142 TAeWisDOM of GOD Parti. Earth, and is fain to dig herself a Dwelling there ; and {he making her Way thro' so thick an Element, which will not eafily yield as the Water and Air do, it had been dangerous to draw so long a Train behind her; for her Enemy might fall upon her Rear, and fetch her out before she had perfed:ed and got full possession of her Works : Which being so, what more palpable Argument of Providence than (he?

Another instance in Quadrupeds might be the Tamandua ox Aftt-Bear^ defcrib'd by Marcgrave and PifOy who faith of them, that they are Night-walkers, and feek their Food by Night. Being Jcept tame, they are fed with Fleiih, but it must be minced small, becai^fe they have not only a flender and sharp Head and Snout, but alfo a narrow and toothlcfs Mouth j their Tongue is like a great Lute-firing (as big as a Goofe-quill) round, and in the greater Kind (for there are two Species) more than two Foot long, and therefore lies doubled in a Chanel between the lower Parts of the Cheeks. This when hungry they thruft forth, being well moiftned, and lay upon the Trunk of Trees, and when it is covered with Ants^ fuddenly draw it back into their Mouths ; if the Ants lie so deep that they cannot come at them, they dig up the Earth with their long and strong Claws, wherewith for that purpose their Fore- feet are armed. So we see how their Parts are fitted for this Kind of Diet, and no other j for the catching of it, and for the eating of it, it requiring

Parti. /?> if^^ Creation. 143

quiring no Comminution by the Tectji, as appears alfo in the Chamcelion^ which is another Qnadruped that imitates the Tamandua in this Property of darting out the Tongue to a great Length, with wonderful Celerity ; and for the same purpose too of catching of Jnfefts.

Befides these Quadrupeds, there are a whole Genus of Birds^ called Pici Marcii^ or Wood- .'Peckers^ that in like Manner have a Tongue which they can £hoot forth to a very great Length, ending in a sharp ftiff bony Rib, dented on each Side ; and at pleasure thruft it deep into the Holes, Clefts, and Crannies of Trees, to ftab and draw out CoJJj, or any other insects lurking there, as alfo into Ant-hiUs, to ftrike and fetch out the Ants and their Eggs, Moreover, they have ihort, but very strong Legs, and their Toes stand two forwards, two backwards, which Diipofition (as Aldrovandiis well notes) Nature, or rather the wisdom of the Creator, hath granted to Woodpeckers^ because it is very coavenieut for the climbing of Trees, to which alfo conduces' the Stiffnefs of the Feathers of their Tails, and their bending downward, whereby they are fitted to serve as a Prop for them to lean upon, and bear up their Bodies. As for the Chamtelion, he imitates the Woodfpite, not only in the Make, Motion, and Ufe of his Tongue for ftriking Ants^ Flies, and other insects \ but alfo in rhe Site of his Toes, whereby he is wonderfully qualified to run upon Trees, which he

doth

14+ 77)eWisDoM of GOD Parti.

does with that Swiftnefs, that one would think he flew, whereas upon the Ground he walks very clumfily and ridiculoufly. A full description of the outward and inward Parts of this Animal, may be seen at the End of Penarolus's Obfervat. It is to be noted, that the Chamcelion^ tho' he hath Teeth, ufes them not for chev/ing his Prey, but fwallows it immediately.

I shall add two instances more in Birds, and those are,

I. TheSwalloWy whose proper Food is small Beetles, and other Infedls flying about in the Air ; as we have found by diflTeding the Stomachs both of old Ones and Nefl:lings : Which is wonderfully fitted for the catching of these Animalcules J for she hath long Wings, and a forked Tail, and small Feet, whereby {he is as it were made for fwift Flight, and enabled to continue long upon the Wing, and to turn nimbly in the Air : And (he hath alfo an extraordinary wide Mouth, so that it's very hard for any Infedt, that comes in her Way to efcape her. It is thought to be a Sign of Rain, when this Bird flies low near to the Ground -, in which there may be some Truth ; because the Infedls which ftie hunts may at such Times, when the fuperior Air is charged with Vapours, have a Senfe of it, and defcend near the Earth. Hence, when there are no more Infefts in the Air, as in Wintertime, those Birds do either abscond, or betake themselves into hot Countries.

2. The

Part L in the GK'^kTio n. i 45

2. The Colymbi, ox Doicchers^ or Loo?2S, whose Bodies are admirably fitted and conformed for diving under Water, being cover'd with a verythick Plumage, and the Super/ides of their Feathers so fmooth and flippery, that the Water cannot penetrate, or moiften them ; whereby their Bodies are defended from the Cold, the Water being kept at a distance, and so poifed^ jhat by a light Impulfe they may eafily afcend in it. Then their Feet are fituate in the hindmoft Part of their Body, whereby they are enabled, fliooting their Feet backwards^ and ftriking the Water upwards, to plunge themselves down into it with great Facility, and likewife to move forwards therein. Then their Legs are made flat and broad, and their Feet cloven into Toes with appendant Membranes on each Sidej by which Configuration they eafily cut the Water, and are drawn forward, and so take their Stroke backwards -, and befides> I conceive, that by means of this Figure, their Feet being mov'd to the Right and Left-hand, serve them as a Rudder to enable them to turn under Water: For some conceive, that they swim eafier under Water than they do above it. How they raise themselves up again^ whether their Bodies emerge of themselves by their Lightnefs^ or whether by ftriking against the Bottom, in Manner of a Leap, or by some peculiar Motion of their Legs, I cannot determine. That they dive to the Bottom is clear ; for that in the Stomachs both of the greater and lesser Kinds we found Grafs and other Weeds, and in the lef-

L . ■ fer

146 The'Wisj>ou ef GOD Part L

fer kind nothing elfe ; though both prey upon Fifh. Their Bills alfo are made ftreight and sharp for the eafier cutting of the Water, and ftriking their Prey. Could we see the Motions G)f their Legs and Feet in the Water, then we jfhould better comprehend how they afcend, defcend, and move to and fro ; and difcern, how wufely and artificially their Membecs are formed and adapted to those Ufes.

II. In Birds^ all the Members are most exactly fitted for the Ufe of Flying. first, The muscles, which serve to move the Wings, are the greatest and strongest, because much Force is required to the Agitation of them ^ the underfide of them is alfo made Concave, and the upper Convex, that they may be eafily lifted up, and more ftrongly beat the Air, which by this Means doth more refill the Defcent of their Body downwards. Then the Trunk of their Body doth fomewhat resemble the Hull of a Shipjthe Head, the Prow, which is for the most part small, that it may the more eafily cut the Air, and make v/ay for their Bodies ; the Train serves to fteer, govern, and dired; their Flight ; and however it may be held ered in their {landing, or walking, yet is direfted to lie almost in the same Plain with their Backs, or rather a little inclining when they fly. That the Train serves to fleer and direft their Flight, and turn their Bodies like the Rudder of a Ship, is evident in the Kite, who, by a light turning of his Train,

moves

Parti. in the Creation, 147

moves his Body which Way he pleafes. lidem indenfur artem guhernandi docuijfe caiida fexibus^ in Cf^lo 7nonfirante natiira quod opus ejfet in profundo, Plin. Lib. 10. c. 10. I'hey Jeem to have taught Men the Art of fleering a Ship by the Flexures of their T'ails > Nature JJjewing in the Air "what was yieedful to he done in the Deep, And it's notable that Arijlotle truly observes, that whole-footed Birds, and those that have long Legs, have for the most part (hort Tails ; and therefore whilft they fly, do not, as others, draw them up to their Bellies, but ftretch them at length backvvards, that they may serve to fteer and guide them instead of Tails. Neither doth the Tail serve only to diredl and govern the Flight, but alfo partly to fupport the Body, and keep it even j wherefore, when fpread, it lies parallel to the Horizon, and stands not perpendicular to it, as Fiihes do. Hence Birds that^ have no Tails, as some Sorts of Colymbi^ or Duckers, fly very inconveniently with their Bodies almost ered.

. To this I (hall add further, That the Bodies of Birds are small in Comparifon of Quadrupeds, that they may more eafily be fupported in the Air during their Flight ; which is a great Argument of wisdom and design: Elfe why lliould not we see Species of Pegafi, or Flying- horses, of Grijfins, of Harpies, and an Huu* dj*ed more, which might make a Shift to liye well enough, notwithftanding they could make no Ufe of their Wings : Befides, their Bodies . are not only small, but of a broad Figure, that

. L 2 ^ the

148 7%eWisDouof GOD Parti.

the Air may more reiift their Defcents , they are alfo hollow and light ; nay, their very Bones are light : For though those of tjie Legs and Wings are folid and firm, yet have they ample Cavities, by which Means they become more rigid and ftifF) it being demonftrable, that a hollow Body is more ft iff and inflexible than a folid one of equal Subftance and Matter. Then the Feathers alfo are very light, yet their Shafts • hard and ftiff, as being either empty, or filled with a light and fpungy Subftance, and their Webs are not made of continued Membranes ; for then, had a Rupture by any Accident been made in them, it could not have been confolidated, but of two Series of numerous Pumulcey or contiguous Filaments, furniflied all along with Hooks on each side, whereby catching hold on one another, they ftick faft together 5 so that when they are ruffled, or difcompofed, the Bird with her Bill can eafily preen them, and reduce them to their due Pofition again. And for their firmer Cohasfion, the wife and bountiful Author of Nature hath provided and placed on the Rump two Glandules, having their excretory Veffels, round which grow Feathers in Form of a Pencil, to which the Bird turning her Head, catches hold upon them with her Bill, and a little comprefling the Glandules, fqueezes out and brings away therewith an oily Pap, or Liniment, most fit and proper for the Inundtion of the Feathers, and caufing their Filaments more ftrongly t,o cohere. And is not this ftrange and admirable,

Parti. in the Creation. 149

ble, and argumentative of Providence, that there should be such an Unguent, or Pap, prepared, such an open Veflel to excern it into, to receive and retain it ; that the Bird fl^^ould know where it is fituate, and how, and to what purposes to ufe it ? And because the Bird is to live many Years, and the Feathers in time would, and mufl necessarily be worn and fhatter'd, Nature hath made Provifion for the cafting and renewing of them Yearly. Moreover, those large Bladders, or Membranes, extending to the Bot^ toms of the Bellies of Birds, inro which the Breath is received, conduce much to the alleviating of the Body, and facilitating the Flight : For the Air received into these Bladders, is by the Heat of the Body extended into twice, or thrice, the Dimenfions of the External, and so must needs add a Lightnefs to the Body. And the Bird when (lie would defcend, may either comprefs this Air by the muscles of the Abdomen, or expire as much of it as may enable her to defcend fwifter, or (lower, as (lie pleafes. I niight add the Ufe of the Feathers in cheri(hing and keeping the Body warm ; which, the Creature being of small Bulk, mull needs (land in great Stead against the Rigour of the Cold. And for this reason we see, that Water-Fowls, which were to swim, and fit long upon the cold Water, have their Feathers very thick (et upon their Breafts and Bellies, and befides a plentiful Down there growing, to fence against the Cold of the Water, and to keep oft' its immediate Contad.

L c; ^ Thac

1^0 The Wis-Dou of GOD Parti.

Thiat the Tails of all Birds in general do not conduce to their turning to the Right and Left, ucccrding to the common Opinion, but rather for their Alcent and Defcent, some modern Philofophers have obferv'd and prov'd by Experiment ; for that if you pluck off, for Inltance, a Pigeon's Tail, she will neverthelels, with equal Facility, turn to and fro : Which upon fecond Thoughts, and further consideration, I grant to be true, in Birds whose Tails are pointed, and end in aright Line : But in those that have forked Tails, Autopfy convinceth us that it hath this Ufe ; and therefore they pronounce too boldly of all in general. For it is manifest to Sight, that the fork'd-tail Kite, by turning her Train fideways, elevating one Horn, and depreffing the other, turns her whole Body. And doubtlefs the Tail hath the same ufe in Swallows, who make the most fudden Turns in the Air of any Birds, and have all of them forked Tails.

III. As for Flfhes, their Bodies are long and {lender, or elfe thin, for the most Part, for their more eafy fwimming, and dividing the Water. The Wind-bladder, wherewith most of them are furnifhed, serves to poife their Bodies, and keep them equiponderant to the Water, which elfe wou'd fink to the Bottom, and lie groveling there, as hath, by breaking the Bladder, been experimentally found. By the Contradtion and Dilatation of this Bladder, they are able to taife, or fink themselves at pleasure, and continue in what Depth of Water they lift. 2 The

The Fins, madeofgriftly Spokes, or Rays, conneded by Membranes, lb that they may be' contraded, or extended iike Womens Fans, and furniflied with muscles for Motion, serve partly for Progreffion, but chiefly to hold the Body upright; which appears in that when they are cut off, it wavers to and fro, and so foon as the Fifh . dies, the Belly turns upwards. The great Strength by which Fifhes dart themselves for- * ward with incredible Celerity, like an Arrow out of a Bow, lies in their Tails, their Fins, mean time, left they (hould retard their Motion, being held close to their Bodies. And therefore almost the whole Mufculous Fleih of the Body is beftow'd upon the Tail and Back, and serves for the Vibration of the Tail, the Heavlnefs and Corpulency of the Water requiring a great Force to divide it.

In Cetaceous Fiflies, or, as the Latim call them, * Sea-beasts, the Tail hath a dif- ^ ferent Pofition from what it hath in all MarL^^ other Fifties ; for whereas in these it is ereded perpendicular to the Horizon, in them it lies parallel thereto, partly to supply the Ufeof the hinder Pair of Fins which these Creatures lack, and partly to raise and deprefs the Body at pleasure. For it being necelTary that these Fifties ihould frequently afcend to the Top of the Water to breathe, or take in and let out the Air, it was fitting and convenient that they ftiould be provided with an Organ to facilitate their Afcent and Defcent as they had Occafion. And as for their turning of their Bodies m the Water, they

L 4 must

must perform that as Birds do, by the Motion of one of their Fins, while the other is quiefcent. It is no less remarkable in them, that their whole Body is incompafied round with a copious Fat, which our Fifhermen call the Bhibber, of a great Thicknefs ; which serves partly to poife their Bodies, and render them equiponderant to the Water y partly to keep off the Water at some distance from the Blood, the immediate Contadt whereof would be apt to chill it ; and partly alfo for the same Ufe that Clothes serve us, to keep the Fi(h warm, by refleding the hot Steams of the Body, and so redoubling the Heat, as we have before-noted. For we see, by Experience, that fat Bodies are nothing near so sensible of the Impreffions of Cold as lean. And I have observed fat Hogs to have lain abroad in the open Air, upon the cold Ground, in Winter Nights ; whereas the lean Ones have been glad to creep into their Cotes, and lie upon Heaps to keep themselves warm.

I might here take Notice of those Amphibious Creatures, which w^e may call Aquatic Quadrupeds (though one of them there is that hath but two Feet, viz. the Maimti, or Sea-Cow) the Beaver^ the Otter ^ the Phoca^ or Sea-Calf, the Water-Rat^ and the F;7?g*, the Toes of whose Feet are joined by Membranes, as in Water- Fowls, for fwirnming 5 and who have very small Ears, and Ear-holes, as rhe Cetaceous Fifhes have, for hearing in the Water.

To this Head belongs the adapting of the

Parts that miniiter to Generation in the Sexes

2 one

Part L in the C r e at i o n. 153

one to another ; and in Creatures that nourifli their Young with Milk, the Nipples of the Breaft to the Mouth and Organs of Sudion ; which he must needs be wilfully blind and void of Senfe, that either difcerns not, or denies to be intended and made one for the other. That the Nipples should be made fpungy, and with such Perforations, as to admit passage to the Milk when drawn, otherwife to retain it j and * the Teeth of the Young either not fprung, or so soft and tender, as not to hurt the Nipples of the Dam, are Effeds and Arguments of Providence and design.

A more full description of the Breafts and Nipples I meet with, in a Book of that ingenious Anatomift and Phyfician, Antonhts Niick^ entitled, Ademgrafhia Curiofa^ cap. 2. He makes the Breafts to be nothing but Glandules of that Sort they call Conglomerated^ made up of an infinite Number of little Knots, or Kernels, each whereof has its excretory Veffel, or Lactiferous Dudt \ three, or four, or five of these prefently meet, and join into one small Trunk, in like' Manner do the adjacent Glandules meet and unite ; several of these leflfer Trunks, or Branches, concurring, make up an excretory Veffel of a notable Bignefs, like to that of the Pajtcreas^ but not so long, yet fufficiently large, to receive and retain a good Quantity of Milk ; whjch before it enters the Nipple, is again contracted, and ftraitned to that Degree, that it will scarce admit a small Bridle. Who nov/ can be so impudent as to deny, that all this was contrived and

defigncd

designed purpofely to retain the Milk, that it should not slow out of it self, but eafily be drawn out by PrelTure and Sudion ; or to affirm that this fell out accidentally, than which there could not have been a more ingenious Contrivance for the Ufe to which it is employed, invented by the Wit of Man?

To this Head of the Fitnefs of the Parts of the Body to the Creature's Nature, and Manner of Living, belongs that observation oi Arijiotle^ i:Sov opviQoev QdoL /Lch yji}Ji-\(jcvo')^aL aatpKOCpxyx ircivra. Such Birds as have" crooked Beaks and Talons, are all Carnivorous; and so of Quadrupeds, aap^ccpo^ovTct, Caniivora omnia. All that have Serrate Teeth, are Carnivorous, This Obferva-. tion holds true concerning all European Birds ; but I know not but that Parrots may be an Exception to it. Yet it is remarkable, that such Birds as are Carnivorous have no Gizzard, or Mufculous, but a Membranous Stomach, , that Kind of Food needing no such Grinding, or Comminution as Seeds do, but being torn into Strings, orfmall Flakes, by the Beak, may be eafily concoded by a Membranous Stomach.

To the Fitnefs of all the Parts and Members of Animals, to their refpedive Ufes, may alfo be referred another observation of the same Arijiotle^ Udvra. rd ?««, apriai; i^n TrS'a;. All Animals have even Feet, not more on one Side than another; which, if they had, would either hinder their walking, or hang by not only ufelefs, but alfo burthenfome. For though a Creature might make a limping Shift to hop,

suppose

suppose with three Feet, yet nothing so conveniently or fteddily to walk or run, or indeed to stand ; so that we see Nature hath made choice of what is most fit, proper, and ufeful : They have alfo not only an even Number of Feet, anfwering by Pairs one to another, which is as well decent as convenient, but those too of an equal Length, I mean, the several Pairs ; whereas were those on one side longer than they on the other, ?t would have caus'd an inconvenient halting or limping in their going.

I iliall mention but one more observation of Ariftotle^ that is, Xitrwlv fjJ^vov bcS^V, there is no Creature only volatile, or no flying Animal, but hath Feet as well as Wings, a Power of walking or creeping upon the Earth, because there is no Food, or at least not sufficient Food for them to be had always in the Air ; or if in hot Countries we may suppose there is, the Air being never without Store of Infefts flying about in it, yet could such Birds take no rest, for having no Feet they could not pearch upon Trees 5 and if they fl^ould alight upon the Ground, they could by no means raise themselves any more, as w^e see those Birds which have but short Feet, as the S^wift and Martinet ^ with difficulty do ; befides, they would want means of breeding, having no where to lay their Eggs, to fit, hatch, or brood their Young. As for the Story of the Manucodi^ ata^ or Bird of Paradijiy which in the former Age's was generally receiv'd and accepted for true, even by the Learned, it is now discover'd

to

to be a Fable, and rejedted and exploded by all Men, those Birds being well krtown to have Legs and Feet as well as others, and those not (hort, small, nor feeble ones, but fufficiently great and strong, and ann'd with crooked Talons, as being the Members of Birds of Prey.

It is alfo very remarkable, that all flying Infedls Ihould be cover'd with flielly Scales, like Armour, partly to fecure them from external Violence, from Injuries by Blows and Preflures; partly to defend their tender muscles from the Heat of the Sun-beams, which would be apt to parch and dry them up, being of small Bulk; partly alfo to reftrain the Spirits, and to prevent their Evaporation.

I shall now add another Inflance of the wisdom of Nature, or rather the God of Nature, in adapting the Parts of the same Animal one to another, and that is, the proportioning the Length of the Neck to that of the Legs. For feeing terreflrial Animals, as well Birds as Quadrupeds, are endu'd with Legs, upon which they stand, and wherewith they transfer themselves from Place to Place to gather their Food, and for other Conveniences of Life, and so the Trunk of their Body must needs be elevated above the Superficies of the Earth, so that they could not conveniently either gather their Food or Drink if they wanted a Neck, therefore Nature hath not only furnifli'd them therewith, but with such an one as is commenfurable to their Legs, except here the Elephant, which hath indeed a fliorc

Neck,

Part L in the Ckv, ATio-^. 157

Neck, for the exceflive Weight of his Head and Teeth, which to a long Neck would have been infupportable, but is provided with a Trunk, wherewith, as with a Hand, he takes up his Food and Drink, and brings it to his Mouth. I lay, the Necks of Birds and Quadrupeds are commenfurate to their Legs, so that they which have 'long Legs have long Necks, and they that have (liort Legs, short ones, as is seen in the Crocodile^ and all Lizards ; and those that have no Legs, as they do not want Necks, so neither have they any, as Pipes, This Equality between the Length of the Legs and Neck, is especially ktn in beasts that feed constantly upon Grafs, whose Necks and Legs are always very near equal ; very near, I say, because the Neck must neceflarily have some Advantage, in that it cannot hang perpendicularly down, but must incline a little; moreover, because this Sort of Creatures must needs hold their Heads down in an inclining posture for a considerable time together, which would be very laborious and painful for the muscles, therefore on each side the Ridge of the Vertebres of the Neck Nature hath placed an STcy^'p^jnc, or nervous Ligament, of a great thicknefs and strength, apt to ftretch, and (brink again, as need rec^ires, and void of Senfe, extending from the Head ( to which, and the next Vertebres of the Neck, it is faften'd at that end) to the middle Vertebres of the Back (to which it is knit at the other) to aflift them to fupport the Head in that posture ; which Apmeurojis is taken notice of by

the

158 7/jeWisi>oM of GOD Parti.

the Vulgar by the Name of Fixfax^ or Pack-wax^ or White-leather. It is alfo very obfervable in Fowls that wade in the Water, which having long Legs, have alfo Necks anfwerably long 5 only in these too there is an Exception, exceeding worthy to be noted 3 for some Water-Fowl, which are Palmipeds^ or whole-footed, have very long Necks, and yet but fliort Legs, as Swans and GeeJ'e^ and some Indian Birds; wherein we may obfeTve the admirable Providence of Nature. For such Birds as were to fearch and gather their Food, whether Herbs or Infedls, in the bottom of Pools and deep Waters, have long Necks for that purpose, though their Legs, as is moil; convenient for fwimming, be but short; whereas there are no Land- Fowl to be iztxi with short Legs and long Necks, but ail have their Necks in Length commenfurate to their Legs. This instance is the more considerable, because the Atheirts ufual Flam will not here help them out \ for (say they) there were many Animals of difproportionate Parts and of absurd and uncouth Shapes produced at iirft, in the Infancy of the World, but because they could not gather th.eir Food, or perform other Fundions necessary to maintain Life, they foon perifh'd, and were loft again. For these Birds we see can gather their Food upon Land conveniently enough notwithftanding the Length of their Necks. For Example, Geefe graze upon Comm^ons, and can feed themselves fat upon Land ; yet is there not one Land Bird which hath its Neck thus difproportionate to its LegSj nor one Water one neither,

but

but such as are deftin'd by Nature in such manner as we have mention'd to fearch and gather their Food ; for Nature makes not a long Neck to no purpose.

Lajilyy Another Argument of Providence and Council relating to Animals, is the various Kinds of Voices the same Animal ufes on divers Occaiions, and to different purposes. Hen Birds, for ^Example, have a peculiar sort of Voice when they would call the Male 3 which is so eminent in ^ailsy that it is taken notice of by Men, who by counterfeitbig tnis Voice with a Quail-Pipe, eafily draw the Cocks into their Snares. The common Hen, all the while flie is broody, fits, and leads her Chickens , ufes a Voice which we call Clockings another ilie employs v/hen she calls her Chickens to partake of any Food (he hath found for them, upon hearing whereof they fpee« dily run to her ; another when upon fight of a Bird of Prey, or Apprehenfion of any Danger, {he would fcare them, bidding them as it were to {hist for themselves, whereupon they fpeedily run away, and feek Shelter among Bufhes, or in the thick Grafs, or elfewhere difperfmg themselves far and wide. these Adions do indeed necessarily infer Knowledge and Intention of, and Diredion to the Ends and Ufes to which they serve, not in the Birds themselves, but in a fuperior Agent, who hath put an Inftindt in them of ufing such a Voice upon such an Occafion ; and in the Young, of doing that upon hearing of it, which by Providence was^ intended. Other Voices llie hath when angry, when (he hath laid an Egg,

whca

i6o T/jeWisT>ou of GOD Parti when in Pain or great Fear, all fignificant; which may more eafily be accounted for, as being EfFedts of the several Paffions of Anger, Grief, Fear, Joy ; which yet are all argumentative of Providence, intending their several Significations and Ufes.

I might alfd instance in Quadrupeds, some of which have as great a Diverfity of Voices as Hens themselves, and all of them fignificant ; for Example, that common domeftick Animal the Caty as is obvious to every one to observe, and therefore I (hall not fpend Time to mention Particulars.

ObjeB, But against the Ufes of several Bodies I have inftanc^d in that refer to Man, it may be objedVed, that these Ufes were not design'd by Nature in the Formation of the Things, but that the Things were by the Wit of Man accommodated to those Ufes.

To which I answer, with Dr. More^ in the Appendix to his Antidote agaijiji Atheifm^ that the several ufeful Dependencies of this Kind, (viz, of St07ies, 'timber y and Metals^ for building of houses or Ships, the Magnet for. Navigation, &c. Fire for melting of Metals, and forging of Inftruments for the purposes mentioned) we only find, not make them. For whether we think of it or no, it is, for Example, manifest, that Fuel is good to continue Fire, and Fire to melt Metals, and Metals to make Inftruments to build Ships and houses, and so on. Wherefore it being true, that there is

such

such a fubordinate Ufefulnefs in the Things themselves that are made to our Hand, it is but reason in us to impute it to such a cause, as was aware of the Ufefulnefs and Serviceablenefs of its own Works. To which I (hall add, that since we find Materials so fit to serve all the Neceflities and Conveniencies, and to exerc.ife and employ the Wit and Induftry of an intelligent and adive Being ; and since there is such an one * created that is endued with Skill and Ability to ufc them, and which by their Help is enabled to rule over and fubdue all inferior Creatures, but without them had been left necefTitous, helplefs, and obnoxious to Injuries above any other; and since the Omnifcient Creator could not but know all the Ufes, to which they might and would be employed by Man, to them that acknowledge the Being of a Deity ; it is little less than a Demonftration, that they were created intentionally, I do not say only, for those Ufes.

Methinks, by all this Provifion for the Ufe and Service of Man, the Almighty interpretatively speaks to him in this Manner: 1 have now placed thee in a fpacious and well-furnifh'd World ; I have endued thee with an Ability of understanding what is beautiful and proportionable, and have made that which is so, agreeable and delightful to thee; I have provided thee with Materials whereon to exercife and employ thy Art and Strength ; I have given thee an excellent Jnftrument, the Hand, accommodated to make ufe of them all ; I have

diftinguiflied the Earth into Hills and Vallies^ and Plains, and Meadows, and Woods ; all these Parts, capable of Culture and Improvement by thy Induftry ; I have committed to thee for thy Affiftance in thy Labours of Plowing, and Carrying, and Drawing, ' and Travel, the laborious Ox, the patient Afs^ and the strong and ferviceable horse ; I have created a Multitude of Seeds for thee to make Choice out of them, of what is most pleafant to thy Tafte, and of most whokfome and plentiful Nourifhment ; I have alfo made great Variety of Trees, bearing Fruit both for Food and Phyfick, those too capable of being meliorated and improved by Tranfplantation, Stercoration, Incifion, Pruning, Watering, and other Arts and Devices. Till and manure thy Fields, fow them with thy Seeds ; extirpate noxious and unprofitable Herbs ; guard them from thelnvafion and Spoil of beasts; clear and fence in thy Meadows and Paftures ; drefs and prune thy Vines, and so rank and difpofe them as is most fuitable to the Climate ; plant thee Orchards , with all Sorts of Fruit-Trees, in such Order as may be most beautiful to the Eye, and most comprehenfive of Plants ; Gardens for culinary Herbs, and all Kinds of Salleting 5 for delectable Flov^ers, to gratify the Eye with their agreeable Colours and Figures, and thy Scent with their fragrant Odours ; for Odoriferous and Ever-greert Shrubs and Suffrutices ; for Exotick and Medicinal Plants of all Sorts j and difpofe them in that comely Order, as may be both pleafant to behold, and commodious for I Accefs*

Parti. in //6^ Creation. 163

Accefs. I have furnifhed thee with all Materials for Building, as Stone, and Timber, and Slate, and Linne, and Clay, and Earth, whereof to make Bricks and Tiles 5 deck and befpangle the Country with houses and Villages convenient for thy Habitation, provided with Outhoufes and Stables for the harbouring and fhelter of thy Cattle, with Barns and Granaries for the Reception, and Cuftody, and ftoring up thy * Corn and Fruits. I have made thee a fociablc Creature, Zci'oi' 7ro^m?tci/, for the Improvement of thy understanding by Conference, and Communication of observations and Experiments; for mutual Help, and Afliftance, and Defence ; build thee large Towns and Cities with ftreight and well-pav'd Streets, and elegant Rows of houses, adorn'd with magnificent Temples for my Honour and Worship, with beautiful Palaces for thy Princes and Grandees, with jftately Halls for publick Meetings of the Citizens and their several Companies, and the Seffions of the Court of Judicature ; befides publick Portico's and Aqu^dufts. I have implanted in thy Nature a Defire of feeing ftrange and foreign, and finding out unknown Countries, for the Improvement, and Advance of thy Knowledge in Geography^ by obferving the Bays, and Creeks, and Havens, and Promontories, the Out-lets of Rivers, the Situation of the Maritime Towns and Cities, the Longitude and Latitude, ^c. of'those Places: In Politicks^ by noting their Government, their Manners, Laws, and Cuftoms, their Diet and Medicines, their Trades

M 2 . and

164 7%eWisDouof GOD Parti. and Manufaftures, their houses and Buildings, their Exercifes and Sports, &c. In Phyfiology^ or Natural Hiftory, by fearching out their Natural Rarities, the Produdlions both of Land and Water; what Species of Animals, Plants, and Minerals, of Fruits and Drugs are to be found here, what Commodities for Bartering and PermutatioUj whereby thou mayeft be enabled to make large Additions to Natural Hiftory, to advance those other Sciences, and to benefit and enrich thy Country by Increafe of its Trade and Merchandize. I have given thee Timber and Iron to build the Hulls of Ships, tall Trees for Mafts, Flax and Hemp for Sails, Cables, and Cordage, for Rigging. I have armed thee with Courage and Hardinefs to attempt the Seas, and traverfe the fpacious Plains of that liquid Element. I have affifted thee with a Compafs, to direft thy course when thou {halt be out of all Ken of Land, and have nothing in View but Sky and Water. Go thither for the purposes before-- mentioned, and bring Home what may be ufeful and beneficial to thy Country in general, or thy self in particular.

I perfuade my self, that the bountiful and gracious Author of Man's Being and Faculties, and all Things elfe, delights in the Beauty of his Creation, and is well pleafed with the Induftry of Man, in adorning the Earth with beautiful Cities and Caftles ; with pleafant Villages and Country-houses ; with regular Gardens and Orchards, and Plantations of all Sorts of Shrubs, I and

Parti. in the Creation. 165

and Herbs, and Fruits, for Meat, Medicine, or moderate Delight ; with (hady Woods and Groves, and Walks set with Rows of elegant Trees ; with Pa/lures ckathed with Flocks, and Valleys cover d with Corn, and Meadows burthened with Grafs, and whatever elfe differenceth a civil and well-cultivated Region, from, a barren and defolate Wildernefs. , If a Country thus planted and adorn'd, thus polifhed and civilized, thus improved to the Height by all Manner of Culture for the Support and Suftenance, and convenient Entertainment of innumerable Multitudes of People, be not to be preferred before a barbarous and inhofpitable Scythia, without houses, without Plantations, without Corn-fields or Vineyards, where the roving Hords of the favage and truculent Inhabitants transfer themselves from Place to Place in Waggons, as they can find Pafture and Forage for their Cattle, and live upon Milk, and Flefli roafted in the Sun, at thePomels of their Saddles ; or a rude and unpoliflied America, peopled with flothful and naked Indians, instead of welU built houses, living in pitiful Huts and Cabbins, made of Poles set end- ways ; then fu rely the brute Beafls Condition, and Manner of Living, to which, what we have mentioned doth nearly approach, is to be efteem^d better than Man's, and Wit and reason was ir> vain beftowed on him.

M 3 Laflk,

i66 neWisDOM of GOD Part L

lastly, I might draw an Argument of the admirable Art and Skill of the Creator and Compofer of them, from the incredible Smalnefs of some of those natural and enlivened Machines, the Body of Animals.

Any Work of Art of extraordinary Finenefs and Subtlety, be it but a small Engine or Movement, or a curious carved or turned Work of Ivory or Metals, such as those Cups turned of Ivory by O/walJiis Nerlinger of Suevia, mention'd by Joa??, Faber^ in his Expofitions of Rec-- chus his Mexican Animals, which all had the perfecft Form of Cups, and were gilt with a Golden Border about the Brim, of that wonderful Smalnefs, that F^^^r himself put a thoufand of them into an excavated Pepper-corn ; and when he was weary of the Work, and yet had not filled the Veflel, his Friend, John Carlm Schad^ that {hewed them him, put in four hundred more. Any such Work, I say, is beheld with Admiration, and purchafed at a great Rate, and treafured up as a fmgular Rarity in the MuJ'ceiim$ and Cabinets of the Curious, and as such is one of the first Things fhewed to T^ravellen and Strangers. But what are these for their Finenefs and Parvity (for which alone, and their Figure, they are considerable) to those minute Machines endued with Life and Motion, I mean, the Bodies of those A?iimalcida^ not long since discovered in Pepper-water, by Mr. Leuenboek, of Delft in Holland, (whose observations were confirmed and improved by our Learned and Worthy

Country-

Part L in /)6^ C r e a t i o n. 1 67

Country-man, Dr. Robert Hook) who tells us, That some of his Friends (whose Teftimonials he defired), did affirm. That they had seen loooo, others 30000, others 45000 little living Creatures, in a Quantity of Water no bigger than a Grain of Millet ; and yet he made it his Requeft to them, that they would only juftify (that they might be within compiafs) half ♦ the Number that they believed each of them faw in the Water. From the greatest of these Numbers he infers, that there will be 8280000 of these living Creatures seen in one Drop of Water j which Number (faith he) I can with Truth affirm, I have difcerned. This (proceeds he) doth exceed Belief: But I do affirm, if a large Grain of Sand were broken into 8000000 of equal Parts, one of these would not exceed the Bignefs of one of those Creatures. Dr. Hook tells us, That after he had discovered vast Multitudes of those exceeding small Creatures which Mn Lmenhoek had described, upon making ufe of other Lights and GlaiTes, he not only magnified those he had discovered to a very great Big^ nefs, but discovered many other sorts very much smaller than them he first faw, and some of them so exceeding small, that Millions of MillioriJ^ might be contained in one Drop of Water. If Fliny, confidering such Infeds as were known to him, and those were none but what Wjbre visible to the naked Eye, was moved to cry our, That the Artifice of Nature was no where more confpicuous than in these. And again, In hii,

M 4 tarn

tarn parvis at que tarn nullis qua ratio, quanta vis, quam inextricabilis perfeBio ? And again, Rerum natura niifquam magis quam in miiiirnis tota eji, hist. Nat. 1. 1 1, c. I. What would he have said, if he had seen Animals of so ftupendous Smallnefs, as I have mentioned ? How would he have been rapt into an Extafie of Aftonifhment and Admiration ?

Again : If confidering the Body of a Gnat, (which by his own Confeffion is none of the least of Infefts) he could make so many admiring Queries, Where hath Nature difpofed so many Se77fe.s in a Gnat ? TJhi vijum prcetendit ? Vbi gujiatum applicavit ? Ubi odoratum injeruit ? Vbi *vero truculent am ill am & portione maxim am vocem ingeneravit? ^id fubtilitate pennas adnexuitf Fralongavit pedum crura ? Difpofuit jejunam ca-- veam uti ahum ? Avidam fanguinis & potijjimum humani Jitim accendit? T'elum verb perfodiendo tergori quo fpiculavit ingenio ? Atque ut in capaci, cum cerni non pojjit exilitas, it a reciproca geminavit arte, ut fodiendo acuminatum pariter forbendoque fifulofum effet. Which Words should I tranfla;te, would lofe of their Emphafis and Elegancy; if, I say, he could make such Queries about the Members of a Gnat, what may we make, and what would he in all likelihood have made, had he seen these incredibly small living Creatures ? How would he have admired the immenfe Subtilty (as he phrafes it) of their Parts ? For to ufe Dr. Hook's Words in his Mi^ crpfcopium, p. 103. If these Creatures be foex-^

feeding

Parti. in iheCKEATiQ}^. 169

ceeding small, what must we think of their muscles and other Parts ? Certain it is, that the mechanism by which Nature performs the Mufcular Motion, is exceeding small and curious, and to the Performance of every Mufcular Motion, in greater Animals at least, there are not fewer diftindt Parts concerned than many Millions of Millions, and these visible through a Microfcope.

Ufe. Let us then consider the Works of God, and observe the Operations of his Hands: Let us take notice of, and admire his infinite wisdom and goodness in the Formation of them : No Creature in this fublunary World is capable of so doing, befides Man, and yet we are deficient herein : We content ourselves with the Knowledge of the Tongues, or a little Skill in Philology, or Hiflory perhaps, and Antiquity, and negled that which to me seems more material, I mean, Natural Hiftory, and the Works of the Creation : I do not difcommend or derogate from those other Studies : I should betray mine own Ignorance and Weaknefs should I do so ; I only wifh they might not altogether juflle out, and exclude this. I wifh that this might be brought in Fafhion among us j I wifli Men would be so equal and civil, as not to difparage, deride, and vilifie those Studies which themselves skill not of, or are not converfant in ; no Knowrledge can be more pleafant than this, none that doth so fatisfie and feed the Soul ^ in Comparifon

parifon whereto that of Words and Phrafes seem to me infipid and jejune. That Learning (faith a wife and obfervant Prelate) which consists only in the Form and Pedagogy of Arts, or the critical Notions upon Words and Phrafes, hath in it this intrinfical Imperfection, that it is only so far to be efteemed, as it conduceth to the Knowledge of Things, being in it self but a kind of Pe(kntry, apt to infed: a Man with such odd Humours of Pride, and Affediation, and Curiofity, as will render him unfit for any great Employment. Words being but the Images and Matter, to be wholly given up to the Study of these, what is it but Pygmaliori^ Frenzy, to fall in Love with a Pidure or Image ? As for Oratory^ which is the best Skill about Words, that hath by some wife Men been efteem'd, but a voluntary Art, like to Cookery, which fpoils wholefome Meats, and helps unwhojefome, by the Variety of Sauces, ferving more to the pleasure of Tafte, than the Health of the Body.

It may be (for ought I know, and as some Divines have thought) part of our business and Employment in Eternity, to contemplate the Works of God, and to give him the Glory of his wisdom, Power, and Goodn.efs, manifefted in the Creation of them. I am fure it is part of the Bufxnefs of a Sabbath-day, and the Sabbath is a Type of that Eternal rest ; for the Sabbath seems to have been first inftituted for a Commemoration of the Works of

the

the Creation, from which God is said to have refted upon the Seventh Day.

It is not likely that Eternal Life (hall be a torpid and unadlive State, or that it shall consist only in an uninterrupted and endlefs Ad: of Love; the other Faculties ihall be employed as w^ell as the Will in Adions fuitable to and perfedive of tjaeir Natures; especially the understanding, the fupreme Faculty of the Soul, which chiefly differenceth us from brute beasts, and makes us capable of Virtue' and Vice, of Rewards and Puniihments, shall be bufy'd and employed in contemplating the V^orks of God, and obferving the divine Art and wisdom, manifefted in the Structure and Compofition of them, and refledling upon their great Architect the praise and Glory due to him ; then shall we clearly see, to our great Satisfaction and Admiration, the Ends and Ufes of these things, which here were either too fubtle for us to penetrate and discover, or too remote and unacceiTible for us to come to any 'diflindl View of, viz, the Planets and fixed Stars, those illuflrious Bodies, whose Contents and Inhabitants, whose Stores and Furniture, we have here so longing a Delire to know, as alfo their mutual Subferviency to each other. Now the Mind of Man being not capable at once to advert to more than one thing, a particular View and Examination of such an innumerable Number of vast Bodies, and the great Multitude of Species, both of animate and inanimate Beings,

which

which each of them contains, will afford Matter enough to exercife and employ our Minds, I do not say to all Eternity, but to many Ages, ftiould we do nothing elfe.

Let it not fuffice us to be Book-learn'd, to read what others have written, and to take upon Truft more Falfhood than Truth ; but let us our selves examine Things as we have Opportunity, and converfe with Nature as well as Books. Let us endeavour to promote and increafe this Knowledge, and make new Difcoveries, not so much diftrufting our own Parts, or defpairing of our own Abilities, as to think that our Induftry can add nothing to the Invention of our Anceftors, or correft any of their Miftakes. Let us not think that the Bounds of Science are fixed, like Hercules's Pillars, and infcrib'd with a A^^ plus ultra ; let us not think we have done when we have learn'd what they have delivered to us -, the Treafures of Nature are inexhauftible ; here is Employment enough for the vafteft Parts, the most indefatigable Induftries, the happieft Op^ portunities, the most prolix and undiilurb'd Vacancies. Multa 'venientis cevi populus ignota nobis fciet : Multa jkculis tunc futuris^ cum memaria nojiri exoleverit rejervanlur, Pufilla res mundus ejl^ nifi in eo quod qucerat omnis mu7idus habeat. Seneca Nat. Quaeft. Lib. 7. Cap. 3 1. T^he People of the next Age jh all know many things unknown to us : Many are refervdfor Ages then to come^ when we shall be quite forgotten^ no Memory ofm remain-^

ing.

i?7g. The World would be a pitiful small thing indeedy if it did not contain enough for the Enquiries of the ii;hole W^orld. Yet, and again, Epijl, 64. Multum adhuc rejlat Operis, multimque rejlabit^ nee ulli nato poji milk fcecula pracludetur occafo aliquid adhuc adjiciendi. Much Work fill re^ tnains^ and much will remain 5 neither to him that fall be born after a thoifand Ages^ will Matter be wanting for neiv Additiofis to what hath already been invented. Much might be done would we but endeavour, and nothing is infuperable to Paiiis and Patience. I know that a new Study at first seems very vast, intricate, and difficult ; but after a little Refolution and progress, after a Man becomes a little acquainted, as I may so say, with it, his understanding is wonderfully cleared up and enlarged, the Difficulties vanifh, and the thing grows eafy and familiar. And for our Encouragement in this Study, observe what the Pfalmift faith, Ffal cxi. 2. T& Works of the Lord are great ^ fought out of all them that have pleasure therein. Which tho' it be principally spoken of the Works of Providence, yet may as well be verify'd of the Works of the Creation. I am forry to see so little Account made of real experimental Philofophy in this * Univerfity, and that those ingeni- ^^helT^hffuous Sciences of the Mathematicks thor liv'd at are so much negleded by us j and the firji ^wHtherefore do earneilly exhort those ^^"^'^J^^^^- that are young, especially Gentlemen, to set upon these Studies j ^ they may possibly invent

fomething

174 TieWisDoM of GOD Parti.

fomething of eminent Ufe and Advantage to the World 'y and one such discovery would abundantly compenfate the Expence and Travel of one Man's v^hole Life. Hov^ever, it is enough to maintain and continue what is already invented ; neither do I see what more ingenious and manly Employment they can purfue, tending more to the Satisfadion of their own Minds, and the lUuftration of the Glory of God, for he is wonderful in all his Works.

But I would not have any Man crofs his natural Genius or Inclinations, or undertake such Methods of Study as his Parts arc not fitted to, or not serve those Ends to which his Friends, upon mature Deliberation, have design'd him; but those who do abound with Leifure, or who have a natural Propenfion and Genius inclining them thereto ; or those who by reason of the Strength and Greatnefs of their Parts, are able to compafs and comprehend the whole Latitude of Learning.

Neither yet need those who are design'd to Divinity it self fear to look into these Studies, or think they will engrofs their whole Time, and that no considerable progress can be made therein, unless Men lay afide and negled: their ordinary Callings and necessary Employments. No such Matter. Our Life is long enough, and we might find Time enough did we hufband it well : Vitam non accepimns brevem^ fed

fccimuSy

Parti. in the CR^ATio't^. 175

JecimuSy nee mopes ejus, fed frodigi fiimm^ as *S^- neca faith, We have not received a fbort Life^ but have made it Jo -, neither do we want Time^ but are prodigal of it. And did bui young Men fill up that Time with these Studies, which lies upoa their Hands, which they are incumbered with, and troubled how to pass away, much might be done even so. I do not see but the Study of true Phyfiology may be juftly accounted a proper, or ifpoTmi^ix Preparative to Divinity. But to leave that, it is a generally receiv'd Opinion, that all this visible World was created for Man ; that Man is the End of the Creation ; as if there were no other End of any Creature, but some way or other to be ferviceable to Man. This Opinion is as old as Tully ; for, faith he, in his Second Book, De Nat, Deorum, Principio ipfe Mundus Deorum hominumque caufd fa^us eji : quceque in eo funt omnia ea parata ad fruBum hominum & inventa funt. But tho' this be vulgarly receiv'd, yet wife Men now-a-days think otherwife. Dr. More affirms, * That Creatures are made to enjoy themlelves * Antidot. as well as to Jerve us ; ana that tt ts a ^ „ grofs piece of Ignorance and Rujiicity to think otherwife. And in another Place: This comes only out of Pride and Ignorance^ or a haughty Prefhnption \ because we are encouraged to believe that in some Senfe all Things are made for Man^ therefore to think that they are not at all made for themselves. But he that pro?iounceth this^ is igfiorani of the Nature of Man^ and the Knowledge of

Things :

176 TieWisboM of GOD Parti.

Things : For if a good Man be merciful to his Beafiy then furely a good God is bountiful and benign^ and takes pleasure that all his Creatures enjoy themfeheSy that have Life and Senfe^ and are capable of Enjoyment.

those Philofophers indeed who hold Man to be the only Creature in this fublunary World endu'd with Senfe and Perception, and that all other Animals are mere Machines or Puppets, have some reason to think that all Things here below were made for Man. But this Opinion seems to me too mean, and unworthy the Majefty, wisdom, and Power of God ; nor can it well consist with his Veracity, instead of a Multitude of noble Creatures, endu'd with Life and Senfe, and spontaneous Motion, as all Mankind till of late Years believ'd, and none ever doubted of (so that it seems we are naturally made to think so) to have ftock'd the Earth with divers Sets of Automata^ without all Senfe and Perception, being wholly afted from without, by the Impulfe of external Objedts.

But be this so, there are infinite other Creatures without this Earth, which no confiderate Man can think were made only for Man, and have no other Ufe. For my part, I cannot believe that all Things in the World were so made for Man, that they have no other Ufe.

For

For it seems to me highly absurd and unreafonable, to think that Bodies of such vast Magnitude as the fix'd Stars, were only made to twinkle to us, nay, a Multitude of them there are, that do not so much as twinkle, being either by reason of their distance, or of their Smalnefs, altogether invifible to the naked Eye, and only difcoverable by a Telefcope ; and it is likely, perfeder Telefcopes than we yet have, ■jnay bring to light many more; and who knows, how many lie out of the Ken of the best Telefcope that can possibly be made ? And, I* believe, there are many Species in Nature, even in this fublunary World, which were never yet taken Notice of by Man, and consequently of no Ufe to him, which yet we are not to think were created in vain ; but may be found out by, and of Ufe to, those who shall live after us in future Ages. But though in this Senfe it be not true, th^t all Things were made for Man 5 yet, thus far it is that all the Creatures in the V/orld may be some way or other Ufeful to us, at least to Qxercife our Wits and Underftandings, in con-r fidering and contemplating of them, and so afford us Subjed: of adjniring and glorifying their and our Maker. Seeing then, we do believe, and alTert, that all Things were in some Senfe made for us, we are thereby oblig'd to make ufe of them for those purposes for which.they serve us, elfe we fruftrate this End of their Creation. Now fom.e of them serve only to exercife our Minds ,: Many others there be, which

N might

might probably serve us to good purpose, whose Ufes are not discovered, nor are they ever like to be, without Pains and Induftry. True it is, many of the greatest Inventions have been accidentally ftumbled upon ; but not by Men fupine and carelefs, but bufy and inquifitive. Some Reproach methinks it is to learned Men, that there should be so many Animals in the World, vsrhofe outv^ard Shape is not yet taken Notice of, or defcrib'd, muchlefs their Way of Generation, Food, Manners, Ufes, observed.

The Scripture, Tfal, 148. calls upon the SiiUy Mooriy and Stars ^ Fire and Hail^ Snow and Vafour^ Jlormy Winds and Tempejis^ Mount aiiis and all Hilhy fruitful 'TreeSy and all Cedars^ Beajis and all Cattle y creeping Tubings and flying Fowly &c. to praise the Lord. How can that be ? Can fenfelefs and inanimate Things praise God ? such as are the Sun, and Moon, and Stars. And although beasts be advanced higher to some Degree of Senfe and Perception ; yet being void of reason and Underllanding, they know nothing of the causes of Things, or of the Author and Maker of themselves, and other Creatures. All that they are capable of doing, in reference to the praifing of God, is (as I said before^ by affording Matter, or Subjed, of praifmg him, to rational and intelligent Beings. So the Pfalmift, P/al.xix. I. jTfo Heavens declare the ^ Glory of Ggdy a?id the Firmament Jheweth his Handy-work. And therefore the Pfalnufty when he calls upon I Sun,

Parti. in the Creation. 179

Sun, and Moon, and Stars, to praise God, doth in effedt call upon Men and Angels, and other rational Beings, to consider those great EfFeds of the divine rower and wisdom, their vast Dimenfions, their regular Motions and Periods, their admirable disposition and Order, their eminent Ends and Ufes in illuminating and enlivening the Planets, and other Bodies about them, .and their Inhabitants, by their comfortable and cherifhing Light, Heat, and Influences, and to give God the Glory of his Power, in making such great and illuftrious Bodies, and of his wisdom and goodness in so placing and difpofing of them, so moving them regularly and constantly, without clafhing, or interfering, one with another, and enduing them with such excellent Virtues and Properties, as to render them so ferviceable and beneficial to Man, and all other Creatures about them.

The like may be said of Fire, Hail, Snow, and other Elements and Meteors, of Trees, and ether Vegetables, of Beafls, Birds, Infeds, and all Animals, when they are commanded to praise God, which they cannot do by themselves ; Man is commanded to consider them particularly, to obfefve and take notice of their curious Strudure, Ends, and Ufes, and give God the praise of his wisdom, and other Attributes dierein manifefted.

^ N 2 And

i8o 77)eWisDouof GOD Part L

And therefore those who have Leifure, Opportunity, and Abilities, to contemplate and consider any of these Creatures, if they do it not, do as it were rob God of some Part of his Glory, in negleding or flighting so eminent a Subjed of it, and wherein they might have discovered so much Art, wisdom, and Contrivance.

And it is particularly remarkable, that the Divine Author of this P/hlm, amongft other Creatures, calls upon Infeds alfo to praise God; which is as much as to say, Ye Sons of Men, negled none of his Works, those which seem most vile and contemptible : there is praise belongs to him for them. Think not that any Thing he hath vouchfafed to create, is unworthy thy Cognizance, to be flighted by thee. It is Pride and Arrogance, or Ignorance and Folly, in thee so to think. There is a greater Depth" of Art and Skill in the Structure of the meaneft Infed, than thou art able for to fathom, or comprehend.

The wisdom, Art, and Power of Almighty God, fliines forth as vifibly in the Strudlure of the Body of the minuted Infed, as in that of a horse, or Elephant : Therefore God is said to be, Maximiis in ^ninimis.. We Men efteem , it a more difficult Matter, and of greater Art and Curioiwvy to frame a small Watch, than a large Clock : I And

And no Man blames him who fpent his whole Time in the consideration of the Nature and Works of a Bee, or thinks his Subjed was too narrow. Let us not then efteem any Thing contemptible, or inconfiderable, or below our notice taking 5 for this is to derogate from the wisdom and Art of the Creator, and to confefs ourselves unworthy of thcfe Endowments of Knowledge and Underflanding which he hath beftowfed on us. Do we praise D^dalus, and Architas^ and Hero, and Callicrates, and Albertus MagnuSy and many others which I might mention, for their Cunning in inventing, and Dexterity in framing. and compofing a few dead Engines, or Movements, and {hall we not admire and magnify the Great A/i/zi^p^o^ K3o-//«, Former of the World, who hath made so many, yea, 1 may say, innumerable, rare Pieces, and those too not dead Ones, such as ceafe prcfently to move so foon as the Spring is down ; but all living, and themselves performing their own Motions, and those so intricate and various, and requiring such a Multitude of Parts and fubordinate Machines, that it is incomprehenfible what Art and Skill, and Induftry, mull be employed in the framing of one of them ?

I have already noted out of Dv, Hook, that to the Performance of every Mufcular Motion, at least in greater Animals, there are not fewer dLftinft Parts concerned, than many Millions of Millions.

N 3 Further,

Further, from the Conlideration of our own Smallnefs and Inconfiderablenefs, in refped: of the Greatnefs and Splendor of those glorious heavenly Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to which our Bodies bear no Proportion at all either in Magnitude, or Luftre ; let us with the Holy Pfalmiji raise up our Hearts to magnify the goodness of God towards us in taking such Notice of us, and making such Provifion for us, and advancing us so highly above all his Works, jy^/.viii. 3. When I conjider the Heavens^ the Work of thy Fingers^ the Moon and the Stars which thou haft ordained. What is Man that thou art mindful of him ^ and the Son of Man that thou vi- Jitef him ? For thou haji made him a little lower than the Angels^ and haJi crowned him with Glory and Honour^ &c.

But it may be objedledj that God Almightywas not so felfilh and defirous of Glory, as to, make the World, and all the Creatures therein, only for his own Honour, and to be praifed by Man. To affert this, wxre, in Des Cartes' s> Opinion, an absurd and childifh Thing, and a resembling of God to a proud Man. It is more worthy the Deity, to attribute the Creation of the World, to the Exundation and Overflowing of his tranfcendent and infinite goodness, which is of its own Nature, and in the very Notion of it, most free, difFufive, and communicative.

To

Parti. in //^^ Cre ation. 183

To this I {hall answer in two Words ; first, The Teftimony of Scripture makes God in all his Ad:ions to intend and design his own Glory mainly, Prov, xvi. 4. God made all Tubings for himself. How ! for himself ? He hath no Need of them : He hath no Ufe of them. No, he made them for the manifeftation of his Power, wisdom, and goodness, and' that he might re- *ceive from the Creatures that were able to take Notice thereof, his Tribute of praise, PfaLX, 14. Offer unto God Thankfghijig. And in the next Verfe, I will deliver thee^ and thou Jloalt glorify me. And again in the la ft Verfe, Whofo offer eth Praije^ glorijieth me. So praise is called a Sacrifice, and the Calves of the Lips, Plof xiv. 2. Ifa. xlii. 8. I am the Lord^ that is my Name, a?id my Glory will I not give to another, Ifa. xlviii. 1 1. And I will not give my Glory to another. The Scripture calls upon the Heavens, the Earth, and Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and all other Creatures, to praise the Lord ; that is, by the Mouth of Man, (as I (hewed before) who is hereby required to take notice of all these Creatures, and to admire and praise the Power, wisdom, and goodness of God, manifefted in the Creation and Defignations of them.

Secondly, It is most reafonable that God Almighty (hould intend his own Glory : For he being infinite in all Excellencies and Perfections, and independent upon any other Being;

N 4 nothing

nothing canbefaid or thought of him too Great, and which he may not juftly challenge as his due ; nay, he cannot think tdo highly of himself, his other Attributes being adequate to his understanding 5 so that, though his understanding be infinite, yet he underftands no more than his Pov/er can effeft, because that is infinite alfo. And therefore it is fit and reafonable, that he fhouldown and accept the Creatures Acknowledgments and Celebrations of those Virtues and Perfedions, which he hath not received of any other, but pofleffeth eternally and originally of himself And indeed, (with Reverence be it spoken) what elfe can we imagine the ever-bleffed Deity to delight and take Complacency in for ever, but his own infinite Excellencies and Perfeftions, and the Manifeflations and Effeds of them, the Works of the Creation, and the Sacrifices of praise and Thanks offered up by such of his Creatures as are capable of confidering those Works, and difcerning the Traces and- Footfteps of his Power and wisdom appearing in the Formation of them ; and moreover, whose bounden Duty it is so to do ? The reason why Man ought not to admire himself, or feek his own Glory, i», because he is a Dependent Creature, and hath nothing but what he hath received ; and not only dependent, but imperfed:; yea, weak and impotent : And yet I do not take Humility in Man to consist in difowning, or denying any Gift or Ability that is in him, but in a juft Valuation of such Gifts and Endowliients, yet rather thinking too meanly . than too

highly

Parti. //^ /i6^ Creation. 185

highly of them 5 because human Nature is so apt to err in running into the other Extreme, to flatter it self, and to accept those Praifes that ' are not due to it ; Pride being an Elation of Spirit upon falfe Grounds, or a Defire and Acceptance of undue Honour. Otherwife, I do not see why a Man may not admit, and accept the Teflimonies of others, concerning any Per-*. ftd:ion, Accomplifhment, or Skill, that he is really pofTefTed of, yet can he not think of himself to deferve any praise or Honour for it, because both the Power and the Habit are the Gift of God: And confidering that one Virtue is counter-balanced by many Vices, and one Skill or Perfeftion with much Ignorance and Infirmity.

The End of the Firji Part.

^\!/// ^M.^\l///^\l///.^\Il/^^Mm/i5^\^M

The SECONDPARTofthe

WISDOMofGOD

Manifefted in the

Particularly in the

I. Whole Body of the E a r t h. II. Bodies of Man, And other Animals.

•m/m^mhmfWhm/m

itQMki5SMkJSS\dk£iMkiQMkiSi\

■^jmtmmMm^mt

^mmm

THE

WISDOM of G O D

Manifefted in the

riiMiiMirji^gsi^MiriiMirggMiriiy^isisi

P A R T 11.

I Proceed now to feleft some particular Pieces of the Creation, and to consider them more dillinftly. They shall be only two.

I. The whole Body of the Earth.

II. The Body of Man.

Firjl, The Body of the Earth ; and therein I {hall take notice of, i. Its Figure. 2. Its Motion. 3. The Conflitution of its Parts,

. ■ By

By Earth I here understand not the dry Land> c^r the Earth contradiftinguifh'd to Water, or the Earth consider*d as an Element, but the whole terraqueous Globe, ' compofed of Earth and Water.

I. For the Figure^ I could eafily demonftrate it to be fpherical. That the Water, which by reason of its Fluidity should, one would think, compofe it self to a Level, yet doth not so, but hath a gibbofe Superficies^ may to the Eye be demonftrated upon the Sea. For when two Ships failing contrary ways lofe the fight one of another, first the Keel and Hull difappear, afterwards the Sails; and if when upon the Deck you have perfedlly loft fight of all, you get up to the top of the Main-Maft, you may defcry it again. Now what should take away the fight of these Ships from each other but the Gibbofity of the interjacent Water? The Roundnefs of the Earth from North to South is demonftrated from the appearance of northern Stars above the Horizon, and lofs of the fouthern to them that travel northward ; and on the contrary, the lofs of the northern, and appearance of the fouthern to them that travel fouthward. For were the Earth a Plain, we should see exad:ly the same Stars wherever we were placed on that Plain. The Roundnefs from Eaft to Weft is demonftrated from EcUpfes of either of the great Luminaries, For why the same Eclipje^ fuppole of the Swi^ which is seen to them that live more eafter:^ ly, when the Sun is elevated fix Degrees above

the

the Horizon, should be seen to them that live one degree more wefterly, when the Sun is but five Degrees above the Horizon, and so lower and lower proportionably to them that live more and more wefterly, till at last it appear not at all, no Account can be -given but the Globofity of the Earth. For were the Earth a perfedt Plain, the Sun would appear eclips'd to all that live upon that Plain, if not exadlly in the same Elevation, yet pretty near it ; but to be fure it would never appear to some, the Sun being elevated high above the Horizon; and not at all to others. It being clear then that the Figure of the Earth is fpherical, let us consider the Conveniences of this Figure.

1. No Figure is so capacious as this, and consequently whose Parts are so well compa6i:ed and united, and lie so near one to another for mutual Strength. Now the Earth, which is the Bafis of all Animals, and, as some think, of the whole Creation, ought to be firm, and ftable, and folid, and as much as is poflible fecur'd from all Ruins and Concuflions.

2. This Figure is most confonant and agreeable to the natural Nutus^ or Tendency of all heavy Bodies. Now the Earth being such a one, and all itj Parts having an equal PropenfioA or Connivency to the Center, they mull needs be in greatest rest, and most immoveable, when they are all equidiftant from it; whereas were it an

angular

192 ThWisDOM of GOD PartIL

angular Body, all the Angles would be vast and fteep Mountains, bearing a considerable Proportion to the whole Bulk, and therefore those Parts being extremely more remote from the Center than those about the middle of the Plains, would consequently prefs very ftrongly thitherward, and unless the Earth were made of Adamant or Marble, in time the other Parts would give way, till all were levell'd.

3. Were the Earth an angular Body, and not round, all the whole Earth would be nothing elfe but vast Mountains, and so incommodious for Animals to live upon, for the middle Point of every Side would be nearer the Center than any other, and consequently from that Point, which way foever one travell'd, would be up-hill, the Tendency of all heavy Bodies being perpendicularly to the Center 5 befides, how much this would obftruft Commerce, is eafily seen ; for not only the Declivity of all Places would render them very difficult to be travelled over, but likewife the midft of every Side being loweft and neareft the Center, if there were any Rain, or any Rivers, must needs be fiU'd with a Lake of Water, there being no way to difcharge it, and possibly the Water would rife so high as to overflow the whole Latus, But, furely, there would be much more Danger of the Inundation of whole Countries than now there is, all the Waters falling upon the Earth, by reason of its Declivity every way, eafily defcending ipwn to

the

the common Receptacle the Sea. And these Lakes of Water being far diftantone from ano^ ther, there could be no Commerce between far remote Countries, but by Land.

4. A Spherical Figure is mod commodious for Dinetial Motion, or Revolution, upon its ov/n Axis; for in that, neither can the Medium ^t all refift the Motion of the Body, because it stands not in its way, no Part coming into any Space but what the Precedent left, neither doth one Part of the Superficies move fafter than another: Whereas were it Angular, the Parts about the Angles would find strong resistance from the Air, and those Parts alfo about the Angles would move much fafter than those about the Middle of the Planes, being remoter from the Center than they. It remains therefore that this Figure is the most commodious for Motion. •

Here I cannot but take Notice of the Folly and Stupidity of the Epicurea?2Sy who fancied the Earth to be flat and contiguous to the Heavens- on all Sides, that it defcended a great way with long Roots 5 and that the Sun was new made every Morning, and not much bigger than it seems to the Eye, and of a flat Figure, and many other such grofs Abfurdities as Children among us would be afliamed of.

Sesondly.y I come now to fpcak of the Motion of the Jiarth, That the E^rth (fpeaking aci:Q.rding to Philofophical Accuratenefs) doth

O move

move both upon its own Poles, and in the Ecliptick, is now the received Opinion of the moil learned and skilful Mathematicians, To prove the Diurnal Motion of it upon its Poles, I need produce no other Argument than, Firji, The vast Difproportion in refped: of Magnitude, that is between the Earth and the Heavens, and the great Unlikelihood that such an infinite Number of vast Bodies {hould move about so inconfiderable a Spot as the Earth, which in Comparrifon with them, by the concurrent Suffrages of Mathematicians of both Perfwafions, is a mere Point, that is, next to nothing. Secondly^ The immenfe and incredible Celerity of the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies in the ancient Hypothejis, thirdly ^ Of its Annual Motion in the Ecliptick, the Stations and Retrogradations of the fuperior Planets are a convincing Argument, there being a clear and facile Account thereof to be given from the mere Motion of the Earth in the Ecliptick J whereas in the old Hypothefis no Account can be given, but by the unreafonable Fiction of Epicycles, and contrary Motions ; add hereto, the great Unlikelihood of such an enormous Epicycle as Ve?2iis must describe about the Sun, not under the Sun, as the old Aflronomers fancied. About the Sun, I say, as appears by its being hid or eclipfed by it, and by its several Phafes, like the Moon. So that whofoever doth tlearly understand both Hypothefcs, cannot, I perfwade my self, adhere to the Old, and reject

the

the New, without doing some Violence to his Faculties.

against this Opinion lie two Objedions, Ftrjt^ That it is contrary to Senfe, and the common Opinion and Belief of Mankind. Seco?2dlyy That it feemeth contrary to some Expreffions in Scripture, To the first I answer, That our Senfes are fometimes miftaken, and what appears to j:hem is not always in reality so as it appears. For Example : The Sun, or Moon, appear no bigger, at most, than a Cart-wheel, and of a flat Figure. The Earth seems to be plain : The Heavens to cover it like a Canopy, and to be contiguous to it round about : A Fire-brand nimbly moved round, appears like a Circle of Fire ; and to give a parallel instance, a Boat lying still at Anchor in a River, to him that Sails and Rows by it, seems to move apace ; and when the Clouds pass nimbly under the Moon, the Moon it self seems to move the contrary way. And there have been whole Books written in Confutation of vulgar Errors. aS*^- condly\ As to the Scripture^ when fpeaking of these Things, it accommodates it self to ths common and received Opinions, and employs the ufual Phrafes and Forms of Speech (as all wife Men alfo do, though, in Stridtnefs, they be of a different or contrary Opinion) without Intention of delivering any thing Doftrinally concerning these Points, or confuting the contrary : And yet by thofethat maintain the Opinion of the Earth's Motion; there might a convenient

O 2 Inter-

196 T/^eWisDouof GOD Part If. Interpretation be given of such Places as seem to contradid: it. Hovvbeit, because feme pious Perfons may be offended at such an Opinion, as favouring of Novelty, thinking it inconfiftent with Divine Revelation, I shall not pofitively affert it, only propofe it as an Hypothefn not altogether improbable. Suppofing then, that the Earth doth move about upon its ov^n Poles, and in the Ecliptick about the Sun, I shall shew hov^ admirably its Situation and Motion are contrived for the Conveniency of Man, and other Animals : Which I cannot do more fully and clearly than Dr. More hath already done in his Aiitidote againji Atheijm^ whose Words therefore I shall borrov^.

first, Speaking of the Varalleltjm of the Axis of the Earthy he faith, I demand w^hether it be better to have the Axis of the Earth fteady and perpetually parallel to it self, or to have it carelefly tumble this way and that way as it happens, or at least very varioufly and intricately ? Andyou cannot but answer me, it is better to have it fteady and parallel \ for in this lies the necessary Foundation of the Art of Navigation and Dialling. For that fteady Stream of Particles, which is supposed to keep the Axis of the Earth parallel to it self, affords the Mariner both his Cymjura^ and his Compafs. The Load-Jlone and the Load-Jlar depend both upon this. The Load- Jione^ as I could demonftrate, were it not too great a Digreffion 5 and the Load-Jlar., because that which keeps the Axis parallel to it self, I makes

makes each of the Fole^ constantly refpeftfuch a Point in the Heavens; as for Example, the North-Pole to point almoll diredly to that which we call the Pole-Jlar. And befides, JD/- alling could not be at all without this Steadinefs of the Axis. But both these Arts are pleafant, and one especially of mighty Importance to Mankind. For thus there is an orderly Meafuring of our Time for Affairs at home, and an Opportunity of Traffick abroad, with the most remote Nations of the World, and so there is a mutual Supply of the several Commodities of all Countries, befides the enlarging our Underflandings by so ample Experience we get both of Men and Things. Wherefore if we were rationally to confult, whether the Axis of the Earth were better be held fteady and parallel to it self, or left at random, we would conclude it ought to be fteady, and so we find it de FaBOj though the Earth move floating in the Liquid Heavens, So that appealing to our own Faculties we are to affirm. That the conflant Di-' redtion of the Axis of the Earth was eilabliflied by a Principle of wisdom and Council.

Again, There being several Poflures of this fteady Diredion of the Axis of the Earthy viz. either perpendicular to a Plane, going through the Center of the Sun, or Co-incident, or Inclining, I demand which of all these Reafoji and Knowledge would make choice of? Not of a perpendicular posture ; for so both the pleafant Variety, and great Convenience of Summer and

O 3 Wnitcr,

198 The WisBOM of GOD Part 11.

Winter, Spring and Autumn, would be loft, and for want of Acceffion of the Sun, these Parts of the Earth, which nov/ bring forth Fruits, and are Habitable, would be in an Incapacity of ever bringing forth any ; fith then, the Heat could never be greater than now it is at our loth of March, or the nth oi September, and therefore not sufficient to bring their Fruits and Grain to Maturity, and consequently could entertain no Inhabitants^ and those Parts that the full Heat of the Sun could reach, he plying them always alike without any annual Receffion, or Intermiffion, would at last grow tired, or exhaufled, or be wholly dried up, and want Moifture, the Sun diffipating and cafting off the Clouds Northwards and Southwards. Befides, we obfervethat an orderly Viciffitude of Things, doth much more gratifie the Contemplative Property in Man.

And now in the fecond Place, neither would reason make choice of a co-incident Pofition^ For if the Axis thus lay in a Plane that goeth through the Center of the Sun, the Ecliptick would, like a Colure, or one of the Meridians^ pass through the Foles of the Earth, which would put the Inhabitants of the World into a pitiful Condition. For they that efcape best in the Temperate Zone, would be accloyed with long Nights very tedious, no less than forty Days, and those that now never have their Night above twenty-four Hours, as Friejland^ ' Iceland-^

Iceland^ the furthest Parts of Riiffia and Norway y would be deprived of the Sun, above an Hundred and Thirty Days together. Our selves in England, and the rest of the same CHme, would be closed up in Darknefs no less than a Hundred, or Eighty Days -, and so proportionably of the rest, both in and out of the Temperate Zones. And as for Summer and Winter, though those Viciflitudes would be, yet it could not but taufe raging Difeafes, to have the Sun ftay so long, defcnbing his little Circles so near the Poles, and lying so hot on the Inhabitants, that had been in so long Extremity of Darknefs and Cold before.

It remains therefore, that the posture of the Axis of the Earth be inclining, not perpendicular, not co-incident to the fore-mention'd Plane. And verily, it is not only inclining, but in so fit a Proportion, and there can be no £tter imagined to make it, to the utmoft Capacity, as well pleafant as habitable. For though the course of the Sun be curbed between the Tropicks, yet are not those Parts diredly fubjedi: to his perpendicular Beams, either Unhabitable, or extremely Hot, as the Ancients fancied : By the Teftimony of Travellers, and particularly Sir Walter Raleigh, the Parts under and near the Line, being as fruitful and pleafant, and fit to make a Paradife of, as any in the World. And that they are as. fultable to the Nature of Man, and as 'convenient to live in, appears from the

O 4 Longai-

Longsevity of the Natives ; as for instance, the lEtkiopes^ called by the Ancients MaxpJ/Swi ; but especially in the Brafilians in America^ the ordinary Term of whose Life is a Hundred Years, as is set down by P//^, a Learned Phyfician of Holland^ who travelled thither on purpose to augment Natural Knowledge, but especially what related to Phyfick. And reafonable it is that this should be so ; for neither doth the Sun lie long upon them, their Day being but Twelve Hours, and their Night as long, to cool and refrefli them: And befides, they have frequent Showers, and constant Breezes, or fre(h Gales of Wind from the Eafl, It was the Opinion of AfdepiadeSy as Plutarch reports, that generally the Inhabitants of Cold Countries are longer liv'd than those of Hot, because the Cold keeps in the Natural Heat, as it were locking up the Pores to prevent its Evaporation; whereas in Hot Regions the Heat is eafily diffipated, the Pores being large and open to give it way. Which , Opinion, because I find some Learned Men ft ill to adhere to, I (hall produce some further instances out of Monfieur Rocbeforfs Hiftory of the Antilles Illands, to confirm the contrary, and to (hew how often and eafily we may be deceived, if we trufi: to our own Ratiocinations, how plaufible foever, and confult not Experience.

The ordinary Life (faith he) of our Caribbemis is an Hundred and Fifty Years long, and fometimes more. There were some among them not long since living, who remembred to have

feea

seen the first Spaniards that boarded America, who we may thence conclude, liv'd to beat least 160 Years old.

The Hollanders who traffick in the Molucca Iflands, affure us, that the ordinary term of Life of the Natives there is one hundred and thirty Years.

Vincent le Blanc tells us, that in Sumatra, Java, and the neighbouring Iflands, the Life of t?he Inhabitants is extended to 140 Years, and that in the Realm of Cajfuby it reaches 150. Francis Pirara promotes the Life of the Brajj- Hans beyond the Term we have set it, v. g, to 160 Years or more, and says that in Florida and Jucatan there are Men found who pass that Age. And it is said, that the French in Laudoniors Voyage into Florida, Anno 1564. faw a certain old Man, who affirmed himself to be three hundred Years old, and the Father of five Generations j And well he might be of double that number,

LafHy, Mapheous reports, that a certain Be?!- galife vaunted himself to be 335 Years old. So far Monfieur Rochejort, Indeed these two last instances, being perchance Angular and extraordinary, do not prove the Point 3 for even among us, where the ordinary term of Life is about threefcore and ten, or fourfcore, there occur some rare instances of Perfons, who have lived 130, 140, 150 Years and more. But the other Teftimonies being general, prove it beyond contradidtion 5 neither yet is the thing in it self

impro-

improbable •, for there being not so great Inequality of Weather in those hot Countries, as there is in cold, the Body is kept in a more equal Temper, and not having such frequent Shocks, as are occalion'd by such Air, and often Changes, and that from one Extreme to another, holds out much longer. So we see infirm and crazy Perfons, when they come to be so weak as to be fixed to their Beds, hold out many Years, some I have heard of, that have laid bed-rid 20 Years: because in the Bed they are always kept in an almost equal Temper of Heat, who, had they been expofed to the Exceffes of Heat and Cold, would not probaby have furvived one.

Seeing then, this bed posture which our reason could make choice of, we see really eftabliflied in Nature, we cannot but acknowledge it to be the iffue of wisdom, Counfel, and Providence. Moreover, a further Argument to evince this is, That though it cannot but be acknowledged, that if the Axis of the Earth were perpendicular to the Plane of the Ecliptick, her Motion would be more eafy and natural, yet notwithftanding, for the Conveniences forementioned, we see it is made in an inclining posture.

Another very considerable, and heretofore unobferv'd Convenience of this inclination of the Earth's Axisy Mr. Keill aifords us in his Examination of Dr. Burnet'^ 'theory of the Earthy p. 69.

There

There is (faith he) one more [befides what he had mentioned before] considerable Advantage, which we reap by the present Pofition of the Earth, which 1 will here infert, because I do not know that it is taken notice of by any ; and it is, that by the present Inclination of the Earth's Axis to the Plane of the Ecliptick^ we who live beyond 45 Degrees of Latitude, and stand most in need of it, have more of the Sun's Heat throughcfut the Year than if he had fhin'd always in the Equator j that is, if we take the Sum of the Sun's Actions upon us both in Summer and Winter, they are greater than its Heat would be if he moved always in the Equator-, or which is the same thing, the Aggregate of the Sun's Heat upon us while he defcribes any two oppofite Parallels, is greater than it would be if in those two Days he defcrib'd the Equator -, whereas in the Torrid Zone^ and even in the Temperate, almost as far as 45 Degrees of Latitude, the Sum of the Sun's Heat in Summer and Winter is less than it would be, were the Axis of the Earth perpendicular to the Plane of the Ecliptick ; for the Demonftration of which I refer the Reader to the Book it self.

I think (proceeds he) this consideration cannot but lead us into a tranfcendent Admiration of the divine Wijdom^ which hath placed the Earth in such a posture, as brings with it several Conveniences beyond what we can eafily discover without Study and Application ; and I make no queftion, but if the rest of the Works of Nature were

well

well obferv^d, we (hould find several Advantages which accrue to us by their present constitution, which are far beyond the Ufes of them that are yet discover'd 5 by which it will plainly appear, that God hath chofen better for us than we could have done for our selves.

If any Man should objedl and say, it would be more convenient for the Inhabitants of the Earth if the Tropicks flood at a greater distance, and the Sun mov'd further northward and fouthward, for so the North and South Parts would be relieved, and not expos'd to so extreme Cold, and thereby rendered uninhabitable, as now they are:

To this I answer, That this would be more inconvenient to the Inhabitants of the Earth in general, and yet would afford the North and Houth Parts but little more Comfort ; for then as much as the distances between the Tropicks were enlarged, so much would alfo the Artick and Antartick Circles be enlarg'd too; and so we here in Englandy and so on northerly, should not have that grateful and ufeful Succeflion of Day and Night, but proportionably to the Sun's coming towards us, so would our Days be of more than Twenty-four Hours Length \ and according to his recefs in Winter, our Nights proportionable ; which how great an Inconvenience it would be, is eafily seen ; whereas now the whole Latitude of the Earth, which hath at any time above twenty-four Hours Day and twenty-four Hours Night, is little and inconfiderable in comparifon

of

of the whole Bulk, as lying neir the Poles ; and yet neither is that Part altogether unufeful, for in the Waters there live Fifhes, which other where are not obvious; so we know the chief Whale-ffttJig is in Greenland -.y yea, not only Fifli, but great Variety of Water-Fowl, both whole and cloven-footed, frequent the Waters, and feed there, breeding alfo on the Cliffs by the Seafide, as they do with us ; the Figures and Defcriptions of a great many whereof are given us by Martin in his Voyage to Spitzberg^ or Gree?7hmdy and on the Land Bears, and Foxes, and Deer, in the most northerly Country that was ever yet touched ; and doubtlefs, if we shall discover further to the very Nortb Pole, we {hall find all that Trad not to be vain, ufelefs, or unoccupy'd.

thirdly, The third and last thing I proposed was, the constitution and Confiftency of the Parts of the Earth. And first, admirable it is that the Waters fcould be gathered together into fuck great Conceptacula, and the dry Land appear ; and tho' we had not been affur'd thereof by divine Revelation, we could not in reason but have thought such a Divifion and Separation to have been the 'Work of Omnipotency, and infinite wisdom and goodness ; for in this Condition the Water nourifhes and maintains innumerable Multitudes of various Kinds of Fiflies, and the dry Land fupports and feeds as great Variety of Plants and Animals, which have their firm

Footing

2o6 T:he Wi s D oM of GOD Part IL

Footing and Habitation j whereas had all been 'Earthy all the Species of Fijhes had been loft, and all those Commodities which the Water affords us ; or all Water^ there had been no living for Plants, or terreftrial Animals, or Man himself, and all the Beauty, Glory and Variety of this inferior World had been gone, nothing being to be seen, but one uniform dark Body of Water ; or had all been mix d and made up of Water and Earth into one Body of Mud or Mire, as one would think should be most natural ^ for why such a Separation as at present we find {hould be made, no Account can be given but Providence ; I say, had all this Globe been Mire or Mud, then could there have been no Poffibility for any Ani^ mals at all to have liv'd, excepting some few, and those very dull and inferior ones too. That therefore the Earth should be made thus, and not only so, but with so great Variety of Parts, as Mountains, Plains, Vallies, Sand, Gravel, Lime, Stone, Clay, Marble, Argilla, &c, which are so deledable and pleafant, and likewife so ufeful and convenient for the breeding and living of various Plants and Animals, some affecting Mountains, some Plains, some Vallies, some watery Places, some Shade, some Sun, some Clay, some Sand, some Gravel, ^c. That the Earth should be so figured as to have Mountains in the mid-land Parts, abounding with Springs of Water, pouring down Streams and Rivers for the NecelTities and Conveniences of the Inhabitants

of

of the lower Countries, and that the Levels and Plains should be form'd with so eafy a Declivity as to cast off the Water, and yet not render Travelling or Tillage very difficult or laborious; these things, I say, mull needs be the result of Counfel, wisdom, and design ; especially when (as I said before) not that w^ay which seems more facil and obvious to Chance is chofen, but that virhich is more difficult and hard to be trac'd, when it is most convenient and proper for those nobler Ends and designs which were intended by its wife Creator and Governor. Add to all this, that the whole dry Land is, for the most part, cover'd over v/ith a lovdy Carpet of green Grafs, and other Herbs, of a Colour not only most grateful and agreeable, but most ufeful and falutary to the Eye ; and this alfo decked and adorn'd with great Variety of Flowers of beautiful Colours and Figures, and of most pleafant and fragrant Odours, for the Refr^fhment of our Spirits and our innocent Delight ; as alfo ^with beautiful Shrubs and ftately Trees, affording us npt only pleafant and nouriihing Fruits, many Liquors, Drugs, and good Medicines, but Timber, and Utenfils for all Sorts of Trades and the Conveniences of Man ; out of many Thoufands of which we will only juft name a few, left wc should be tedious and too bulky.

Fir/?, The Coco, or Coker-Nut Tree, that fupplies the Lidiafu with almost whatever they ft and

I in

in need of, as Bread, Water, Wine, Vinegar, Brandy, Milk, Oil, Honey, Sugar, Needles, Thread, Linnen, Clothes, Cups, Spoons, Beefoms, Bafkets, Paper, Mafts for Ships, Sails, Cordage, Nails, Coverings for their houses, ^c. which may be seen at large in the many printed Relations of Voyages and Travels to the E^- IfidieSy but most faithfully in the Hortiis Malabaricus, publifh'd by that immortal Patron of natural Learning, He7iry Van Reede Van Draakenjiein^ who has had great Commands and Employs in the Dutch Colonies.

Secondly^ ThQ J^loe Muricafa^ vel Aculeata ^ which yields the Americans every thing their Neceffities require, as Fences and houses, Darts, Weapons, and other Arms, Shoes, Linnen, and Clothes, Needles and Thread, Wine and Honey, beiides many Utcnfils ; for all which Hernandes^ Garcililafo de la Vega, and Margrave, may be confvilted.

l^hirdlyy The Bandiira Cmgalenfium, called by some the Priapus Vegetabilis, at the end of whose Leaves hang long Sacks or Bags, containing a pure limpicT Water, of great Ufe to the Natives when they want Rain for Eight or Ten Months together.

A parallel instance to this of the. Bandiira, my learned and worthy Friend Dotlor Sloane affords

fords us in a Plant by him observed in the Ifland of Jamaica, and delcribed by the Title of ViJ^ cum Caryophiikides Maximum flore tripetalo paU tide luteo, Jhnine filamentojo, which is commonly caird, in that 'ifland, Wild Pine, Philofopb. "TrajifaB, N° 251. Page 114. I shall not tranfcribe the whole description, bat only that Pare of it which relates to this ParticuUir : " From '' the Root (wliich he had described before) arife " Leaves on every side, after the manner of '' Leeks, or Ananas y whence the Name of '* Wild' Pine, or Aloes, being folded or inclofed " one within another, each of which is two '' Foot and an half long, and from a three Inch " Breadth at Beginning, or Bafe, ends in a " Point, having a very hollow or concave in- *^ ward Side, and a round or convex outward *-' one : So that by all their hollow Sides is made " within a very large Prefervatory Ciftern or Ba- *' fin, (it to contain a pretty Quantity of Water, ^ which in the ruiny Seafon ialls upon the ut- " moil Parts of the fpreading Leaves, which have " -Chanels in them, conveying it down to the " Ciftern where it is kept, as in a Bottle, the " Leaves, after they are fvvelled out like a bul- ** bous Root to make the-Bottle, bending inward " or coming again close to the Stalk, by that " means hindring the Evaporation of the Wa- " ter, by the Heat of the Sun-Beams.

'* In the mountainous, as well as the dry " low Woods, ip Scarcity of Water, this Re- *■ fervatory is nor only necessary and fufficienc

P '' for

" for the Nourifliment of the Plant it self, but '' likewife is very ufeful to Men, Birds, and all " Sorts of Infedts, whither in Scarcity of Wa- *' ter they come in Troops, and feldom go away " without Refrefhment.

" Captain Dampier^ in his Voyages, Vol II. " oi Campeche, tells us. That these Bafins made " of the Leaves of the Wild-Pine^ will hold a " Pint and half or a Quart of Water, and that *' when they find these Pinesy they flick their " Knives into the Leaves juft above the Roots, " and that lets out the Water, which they catch " in their Hats, as (faith he) I have done many *' times, to my great Relief.

Fourthly, The Cinnamon-Tree of Ceylon, in whose Parts there is a wonderful Diverfity : Out of the Root they get a Sort of Camphire, and its Oil ; out of the Bark of the Trunk, the true Oil of Cinnamon ; from the Leaves, an Oil like that oi Cloves \ out of the Fruit, 2iyu?iipcr 0\\, with a Mixture of those of Cinnanwi and Cloves -, befides, they boil the Berries into a Sort of Wax, out of which they make Candles, Plaifters, Unguents. Here we may take Notice of the Candle- Trees of the Wejl-Indies, out of whose Fruit, boil'd to a thick fat Confiftence, are made very good Candles, many of which have been lately diftributed by that most ingenious Merchant, Mx. Charles Dubois.

Fifth!:!,

Fifthly^ The Fount aim ^ or Dropping-Trees, m the I lies of Ferro, St. Thomas^ and in Guiney^ which serve the Inhabitants instead of Rain, and frefli Springs : ' My honoured Friend, Dr. T^ancred Robinjon^ in a late Letter to me, is not of VoJJiiis's Opinion, that these Trees are of the Farulaceous YawA, because he observes, that by ^ the Defcriptions of Eye-witneiTes, and by the dry'd Sample fent by Paludafius to the Duke of Wirtenberg, the Leaves are quite different from those of the Ferula ^^ coming nearer to the Sefeli Fthiopicum Salicis vel Periclymeni folio : Therefore the DoBor rather thinks them to be of the haurel-YxwA^ though he concludes here may be many different Sorts of these running Aqueous- Trees ; because that Pba?2ome?2on does not depend upon, or proceed from any Peculiarity of the Plant, but rather from the Place and Situation ; of which he writes more at large, in a Letter printed in another discourse of mine.

'Sixthly^ and Lajily, We will only mention the Names of some other Vegetables, which,, with Eighteen or Twenty Thoufand more of that Kind , do manifest to Mankind the illuftrious Bounty and Providence of the Almighty and • Omnifcient Creator, towards his undeferving Creatures 5 as the Cotton-Tree's y the J^anyoc^ or Cajfava -, the Potatoes the Jefuit'S' Bark Tree j the Poppy ; the Rhubarb ^ the Scam-

P 2 mony-^

mony -, the Jalap -, the Coloqui7itida ; the China ; Sarfa-y the Serpent aria Virginiana ^ or Snakeweed 5 the A^///, or Gen/eg -, the Numerofe Balfam^ and Gum-tree^', many of which are of late much illuftrated by the great Iilduftry and Skill of that most difcerning Botanift, Dr. Leonard Plukenet. Of what great Ufe all these, and innumerable other Plants, are to Mankind in the several Parts of Life, few or none can be ignorant ; befides the known Ufes in Curing Difeafes, in Feeding and Cloathing the Poor, in Building, in Dying: In all Mechanicks there may be as nuny more not yet discovered, and which may be referved on purpose to exercife the Faculties beftowed on Man, to find out what is necessary, convenient, pleafant, or profitable to him.

To fum up all in brief: This T' err aqueous Globe we know is made up of two Parts j

1. A thin and fluid.

2. A firm and confiftent..

The former, called by the Name of Water , the latter, of Earthy or Dry Land. The Land^ being the more denfe and heavy Body, doth naturally defcend beneath the Water, and occupy the lower Place ; the Water afcends* and floats above it. But we see that it is not thus : For the Land, though the more heavy, is forcibly and contrary to its Nature so elevated as to cafl: off the Water, and stand above it, be-

ing (as the Pfalmifl phrafes it) founded upcn or above the Seas, and eJiabliJISd above the Floods ^ Plal. xxiv. 2. and this in such manner, that not only on one side of the Globe, but on all sides, there were probably Continents and Iflands, raised so equally as to counterbalance one another, the Water flowing between them, and filling the hollow and depreflTed Places; neither was the ^ dry Land only raised up and made to appear, but some Parts (which we call Mountains) were highly elevated above others, and those so difpos'd and fituated (as we have shewn) in the mid-land Parts, and in continued Chains running Eajl and Weji, as to render all the Earth habitable, a great Part whereof otherv^ife would not have been so ; but the Torrid Zone mull indeed have been such a Place as the Ancients fancy 'd it, unhabitable for Heat. Let us now consider how much be<:ter it is that the dry Land fiaould be thus raised up, and the Globe divided almost equally between Earth and Water, than that all its Surface fiiould be one uniform and dark Body of Water j I say Water, because that naturally occupies the fuperior Place, and not Earth ; for were it all Water, the whole Beauty of this inferior Vv^orld were gone; there could be no such pleafant and delicious Profpeds as the Earth now aftbrds us ; no Diftindlion, and grateful Variety of Mountains and Hills, Plains and Vallies, Rivers and Pools, and Fountains; no (h ad y Woods, ficr'd with lofty and towring Trees for Timber, lowly and more fpread ones for Shade and Fruit ; no ami-

P ^ able

214 77)e WisTiOM of GOD Part IL able Verdure of Herbs, befpangled with an infinite Variety of fpecious and fragrant Flowers ; for those Plants that grow at the bottom of the Sea, are for the most part of a dull, fullen, and dirty Olive Colour, and bear no Flowers at all ; instead of the elegant Shapes and Colours, the Sagacity and Docility of ingenious beasts and Birds, the mufical Voices and Accents of the aereal Chorifters, there had been nothing but mute, and ftupid, and indocil Fifhcs, which seem to want the very Senfe of Difcipline, as may be gathered from that they are not vocal, and that there appear in them no Organs of hearing, it being alfo doubtful whether the Element they live in be capable of tranfmitting Sounds^ the best Senfe they have, even their Sight, can be but dull and imperfed:, the Element of Water being femi-opake, and reflecting a good part of the Beams of Light ; the most noble and ingenious Creatures that live there, the Cetaceous Kind, being near a-kin to terreftrial Animals, and breathing in the same Element, the open Air. Had, I say, all been Water, there had been no Place for such a Creature as Man, as we see there is no such there i there is no business for him, no Subjedl to employ his Art and Faculties, and consequently there could be no Effeds of them ; no such Things as houses and Cities, and (lately Edifices ; as Gardens and Orchards, and Walks, and Labyrinths j as Corn-Fields and Vineyards, and the rest of these Ornaments, wherewith the

Wit

Wit and Induflry of Man hath embelifli'd the World.

these are great things, and worthy the Care and Providence of the Creator; which whofo confidereth, and doth not difcern and acknowledge, must needs be as ftupid as the Earth he goes upon.

But because Mountains have been look'd upon by some as Warts, and fuperfiuous Excrefcencies, of no Ufe or Benefit, nay, rather as Signs and Proofs that the present Earth is notliing elfe but a Heap of Rubbifh and Ruins, I ihall reduce and demonftrate in Particulars the great Ufe, Benefit, and NecefTity of them.

I. They are of eminent Ufe for the Produdion and Original of Springs and Rivers; without Hills and Mountains there could be no such things, or at leafl: but very few, no more than we now find in plain and level Countries, that is, so few, that it was never my hap to see one ; in Winter-time indeed we might have Torrents and Land-floods, and perhaps fomecimes great Inundations; but in Summer nothing but ftagnating Water, referv'd in Pools and Cifterns, or drawn up out of deep Wells; but as for a great Part of the Earth (all lying within or near the Tropicks) it would neither have Rivers, nor any Rain at all ; we jQiould consequently lofe all those Conveniences and Advantages that Rivers aftbrd

P 4 u^

us, ofFiftiing, Navigation, Carriage, driving of Mills, Engines, and many others. This End of Mountains I find affign'd by Mr. Edmund Hally^ a Man of great Sagacity and deep Infight into the Natures and causes of Things, in a Difcourle of his publifli'd in .the Philojhph, '^franfaBionSy Numb. 192. in these Woids: l^his, if njoe may allow final causes [Hardime?it, the thing is clear, pronounce boldly, without any Ifs or ji?2ds] nisfeems to be one Defgnofthe Hills, that their Ridges being placd through the midft of their Continents, might serve as it were fir Alembicks, to d'fiilfrefj Water for the Ufe of Man and Beaji ; and their Heights to give a Defcent ofthofe Strea?r.s ; to run gently, like so many Veins of the Microcofn, to be the more beneficial to the Creation,

II. They are of great Ufe for the Generation, and convenient digging up of Metals and Minerals; which how necessary Inflruments they are of Culture and Civility, I have before ihewn ; these we see are all digg'd out of Mountains, and I doubt whether there is or can be any Generation of them in perfedly plain and level Countries j but if there be, yet could not such Mines, without great Pains and Charges, if at all, be wrought; the Delfs would be so flown with Waters (it being impoflible to make any ^^i/if^ or Soughs to drain them) that no Gins or Machines could fufSce to lay and keep them dry.

III. They

Part 11. in t^e Great ION. 217

III. They are ufeful to Mankind in affording them convenient Places for Habitation, and Situations of houses and Villages , ferving as Skreens to keep off the cold and nipping Blafts of the Northern and Bajierly Winds, and reflecting the benign and cheriihing Sun-beams, and so rendring their Habitations both more comfortable and more chearly in Winter ; and promoting tfie Growth of Herbs and Fruit-Trees, and the Maturation of their Fruits in Summer ; belides cafting off the Waters, they lay the Gardens, Yards, and Avenues to the houses dry and clean, and so as well more falutary as more elegant ; whereas houses built in Plains, unless fhaded with Trees, lie bleak, and expos'd to Wind and Weather, and all Winter are apt to be grievoufly annoy'd with Mire and Dirt.

IV. They are very ornamental to the Earth, affording pleafant and delightful Profpedts, both, I. To them that look downwards from them upon the fubjacent Countries, as they must needs acknowledge w^ho have been but on the Downs of Sujfex^ and cnjoy'd that ravifliing Profpedl of the Sea on oijc hand, and the Country far and wide on the other. And, 2. To those th.ic look upwards, and behold them from the Plains and low Grounds, which what a Refrefliing and pleasure it is to the Eye, they are best able to judge who have liv'd in the Ifle of £/)', or other

level

level Countries, extending on all Sides further than one can ken; or have been out far at Sea, where they can see nothing but Sky and Water. That the Mountains are pleafant Objects to behold, appears, in that the very Images of them, their Draughts and Landlkips, are so much efteem'd.

V. They serve for the Produftion of great Variety of Herbs and Trees ; for it is a true observation, that Mountains do especially abound with different Species of Vegetables, because of the great Diverfity of Soils that are found there, every Vertex or Eminency almost affording a new Kind. Now these Plants serve partly for the Food and Suftenance of such Animals as are proper to the Mountains, partly for medicinal Ufes, the chief Phyfick Herbs and Roots, and the best In their Rinds, growing there ; it being remarkable that the greatest and most luxuriant Species in most Genera of Plants are native of the Mountains; partly alfo for the Exercife and Diverfion of such ingenious and induftrious Perfons as are delighted in fearching out these natural Rarities, and obferving the outward Form, Growth, Natures and Ufes of each Species^ and reflecting upon the Creator of them his due Praifes and Benedid:ions.

VI. They serve for the Harbour, Entertainment, and Maintenance of various Animals, Birds, beasts, and Infefts, that breed, feed, and

frequent

frequent there ; for the higheft Tops and Pikes of the Alps themselves are not deftitute of their Inhabitants ; the Ibcx^ or Steift-Buck^ the Riipicapra or Chamois among Quadrupeds ; the Lagopus among Birds ^ and I my self have obferv'd beautiful Papilios^ and Store of other Infedts, upon the Tops of some of the Alpine Mountains; nay, the higheft Ridges of many of those Mountains serve for the Maintenance of Cattel for the Service of the Inhabitants of the Valleys ; the Men there, leaving their Wives and younger Children belov^, do not without some difficulty clamber up the Acclivities, dragging their Kine with them, where they feed them, and milk them, and make Butter and Cheefe, and do all the Dairy- Work, in such forry Hovels and Sheds as they build there to inhabit in during the Summer Months ; this I my self have seen and obferv'd in Mount Jura^ not far from Geneva^ which is high enough to retain Snow all the Winter.

The same they do alfo in the Grifons Country, which is one of the higheft Parts of the AlpSy travelling through which I did not set Foot off Snow for four Days Journey, at the latter End of March.

VII. those long Ridges and Chains of lofty and topping Mountains which run through the whole Continents Eajl and Weji (as I have elfewhere

where obferv'd) serve to flop the Evagation of the Vapours to the North and South in hot Countries, condenfing them, like Alemhick Heads, into Water, and so by a kind of external Diftillation giving Original x.o Springs and Rivers ; and likewife by amaffing, cooling, and conftipating of them, turn them into Rainj by those means rendring the fervid Regions of the Torrid Zone habitable.

This discourse concerning the Ufe of Moun- * The Diffo' t^ii^s, I have made ufe of in anoluiion of the ther * Treatife ; but because it is World. proper to this Place, I have (with

some Alterations and Enlargements) here repeated it.

I had almost forgotten that Ufe they are of to Mankind, in ferving for Boundaries and Defences to the Territories of Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

A fecond Particular I have made choice of more exadtly to furvey and consider, is the Body of Man ; wherein I ihall endeavour to discover fomething of the wisdom and goodness of God : first, by making some general observations concerning the Body. Secondly, by running over and difcourfing upon its principal Parts and Members.

I. Then,

I. Then, in general, I say, the wisdom and goodness of God appears in the ereB Pojlure of the Body of Man, which is a Privilege and Advantage giv^en to Man above other Animals; but tho' this be so, yet I would not have you think that all the Particulars I (hall mention are proper only- to the Body of Man, divers of them agreeing to many other Creatures. It is not my business to consider only the Prerogatives of Man above other Animals, but the Endowments and Perfedtions which Nature hath conferr'd on his Body, tho* comm.on to them with him. Of this EreBion of the Body of Man the Ancients have taken notice, as a particular Gift and Favour of God,

Fronaq\ climfpeclent Animalia cater a terram^

Os homini fublime dedit^ ccelumque tueri

Jicffit^ & eredfos ad Sydera tollere vultus,

Ovid. Metam. i.

And before him, ^idly in his Second Book, De Nat. Deorum ;

Ad banc providentiam jjatura tarn diligentem tarnque Jolertem adjiingi multa poffunty e quibus inteiUgatur quanta res hominibiis a Deo^ quamque eximia trtbutce J'unt^ qui primiim ecs humo exi:ita' toSy celjbs & ereBos conjlituit^ lit Deorum cognitio" nem cerium intuentes capcre pojfent. Sunt enltn e terra hojiiines^ non iit^iiKolc^ citque kabitatores^ fed

quafi

qua/i fpedtatores fup^rariim reriim atque ccelejiium^ quaruni fpeBaculum ad nullum aliiid genus animantium pertinet.

Man being the only Creature in this fublunary World made to contemplate Heaven, it was convenient that he ihould have such a Figure, or Situs of the Parts of his Body, that he might conveniently look upwards. But to say the Truth in this refpedt, of contemplating the Heavens, or looking upwards, I do not see what Advantage a Man hath by this Eredion above other Animals, the Faces of most of them being more fupine than ours, which are only perpendicular to the Horizon^ v>rhereas some of theirs stand reclining 5 but yet two or three other Advantages we have of this Ercftion, which I shall here mention.

Firjl^ It is more commodious for the fuftaining of the Flead, which being full of Brains, and very heavy (the Brain in Man being far larger, in proportion to the Bulk of his Body, than in any other Animal) would have been very painful and wearifom to carry, if the Neck had lain parallel or inclining to the Horizon.

Seccndhy This Figure is most convenient for Profped]:, and looking about one; a Man may see further before him, which is no small Advantage for avoiding Danger, and difcovering whatever he fearches after,

mrdl)\

nirdly. The Convenkncy of this Site of our Bodies will more clearly appear, if we consider what a pitiful Condition we had been in, if we had been conftantl)^ neceffitated to stand and walk upon all Four ; Man being, by the Make of his Body, of all Quadrupeds (for now I mufl compare him with them) the most unfit for that kiijd of InceJJas^ as I ihall fliew anon ; and befides that, we should have wanted, at least in a great measure, the Ufe of our Hand, that invaluable Inftrument, without which he had wanted most of those Advantages we enjoy as reafonable Creatures, as I (hall mors particularly demonftrate afterwards.

But it may be perchance objefted by some, that Nature did not intend this Ereftion of the Body, but that it is fuperinduc'd and artificial ; for that Children at first creep on all four, according to that of the Poet -,

M(>x ^ladrupeSy rituque tulit Jua memhra fe- 7" arum. Ovid.

To which I answer, that there is so great an Inequality in the Length of our Legs and Arms, as w^ould make it extreamly inconvenient, if not impoffible for us to walk upon all four, and see us almost upon our Heads ; and therefore we see that Children do not creep upon their Hands and Feet/ but upon their Hands and Knees; so

that

224 The Wisdom of GO D Part IL that it is plain that Nature intended us to walk as we do, and not upon all four.

2. I argue from the SifuSy or Pofition of our F^ces ; for had we been to walk upon all four, we had been the most prone of all Animals, our Faces being parallel to the Horizon, and looking diredtly downwards.

3. The Greatnefs and Strength of the muscles of the Thighs and Legs above those of the Arms, is a clear Indication that they were by Nature intended for a more difficult and laborious Adion, even the moving and transferring the whole Body, and that Motion to be fometimes continued for a great while together.

As for that Argument taken from the contrary Flexure of the Joints of our Arms and Legs to that of Quadrupeds, as that our Knees bend forward, whereas the same Joint of their hind Legs bends backward ; and that our Arms bend backward, whereas the Knees of their fore Legs bend forward ; although the observation be as old as Jrijlotle, because I think there is a Miftake in it, in not comparing the same Joints (for the first and uppermoft Joint in a Quadruped's hind Legs bends forward as well as a Man's Knees, which answer to it, being the uppermoft Joint of our Legs, and the like mutatis mutandh may be said of the Arms) I fl:iall not infift upon it.

Another

Another Particular which may serve to demonflrate that this ered: posture of the Body of Man was intended and design'd by the wife and good Author of Nature, is the faftning of the Cone of the Pericardium to the Midriff, an Account whereof I (hall give tiie Reader out of the ingenious Dr. Tyfons Anatomy of the Orang-Outang^ or Pig7nic\ p. 49.

Vefalius (faith he) and others make it a Peculiarity to Man, that the Pericardium^ or Bag that inclofes the Heart, {l:iould be faften d to the Dia^ phragm, Vefalius tells us (De Corporis Humani fabric a y lib. 6. cap. 8.) Cateriim i?2voliicri miicro^ .& dextri ipfius lateris egregia portio Septi traiif- "verji nerveo circulo validi/Jime amploqiie admodicm Jpatio counafcitur, quod Hominibus ejl peculiars, T'he Point of the Pericardium, and a vefj conjide" rable Portion of its right Side^ is 77ioft jirjnly fajl^ end to the nervous Circle of the Midriff for a large Space ^ which is peculiar to Mankind, So B Linear dius^ An at, P,eformat. cap. 2. p. 8. Homo pr^s cceteris Ammalibus hoc peculiare habet^ quod ejus Pericardium Septi tranjherji medio femper accrefcat^ ciun idem in '^ladrupedum genere liberum & aliquanto Jpatio ab ipjb remotumfit : Man hath this peculiar to him^ and differ eiit from other Animals^ that his Pericardium doth always grow to the middle of the Midriff', whereas in the ^adrupedKind it is free ^ and remov'd Jbme distance fro7n it-

The Pericardium in Man is therefore thu5 faftt mieht affift the Dia^ Q_^ . ftok

.en*d, that in Expiration it mieht affift the Dia

Hole of the Diaphragm^ for otherwife the Liver and Stomach being so weighty, they would draw it down too much towards the Abdomen^ so that upon the Relaxation of its Fibres in its Diajlole it would not afcend fufficiently into the 'Thorax, so as to cause a Subfidency of the Lungs, by leffening the Cavity there. In ^ladrupeds there is no need of this Adhefion of the Pericardium to the Diaphragviy for in them in Expi-ratio?i, when the Fibres of the Diaphragm are relax'd , the weight of the Vifcera of the Abdomen will eafily prefs the Diaphragm up into the Cavity of the Thorax , and so perform that Service ; befides, were the Pericardium faften'd to the Diaphragm in ^ladriipeds^ it would hinder its Syftole in /;?- fpiration, or its Defcent downwards upon the Contradtion of its mufcular Fibres, and the more, because the Diaphragm being thus ty'd up, it could not then so freely force down the weight of the Vifcera, which are always preffing upon it, and consequently not fufficiently dilate the Cavity of the Thorax, and therefore must hinder their Infpiration. Thus we see how necessary it is that in Ma?i the Pericardiu?n should be faften'd to. the Diaphragm, and in ^ladrupeds how inconvenient it would be. And Jince %ve find this difference between the Hearts of Brutes and Men in this Particular, how can we- imagiiie but that it miifi needs be the Effect of wisdom and design, and that Man was intended by N atiire to walk creel, and not upon all four, as ^adrupcds do ?

IL The

II. The Body of Man may thence be proved to be the Effedt of wisdom, because there is nothing in it deficient, nothing fuperfluous, nothing but hath its Ei)d and Ufe. So true are those Maxims we have ah"eady made ufe of ; Natura nihil fa cit Jriiftra, and Natura non abundat infiiperjhiis^ nee deficit in necejfariii^ no Part that we can well fpare. T^he Eye cannot say to the Handy I have 710 need of thee ; nor the Head to the Feet^ I have no need of you, i Cor. xii. 21. that I may ufurp the Apodle's Simihtude.

The Belly cannot* quarrel with the Members, nor they with the Belly for her feeming Sloth ; as they provide for Meat for her, so she concodts and diftributes it to them ; only it may be doubted to what Ufe the Paps in Men (hould serve. I answer, partly for Ornament, partly for a kind of Conformity between the Sexes, and partly to defend and cherifh the Heart ; in some they contain Milk, as in a Danijh Family we read of in Bartholines Anatotnical Obfervatiom ; however, it follpws not that they or any other Parts of the Body are ufclefs because we are ignorant.

I have lately met with a Story in Signior Paulo Boccones natural Obfervaiions, printed at Bologna in Italy 1684, well attefted, concerning a Countryman call'd Billardirio di Billo, living in a Village belonging to the City of Nocera in Umb7^iay call'd Scwareggio, whose Wife dying, and leaving a young Infant, he nouriih.'d it with his own Milk. This Man,, citfer because in the small

Q^jj Village

228 ^njeWisDouof GOD Part I L Village where he liv'd there was not a wet nurse to be had, or because he was not able to hire one, took the Child, and applying it to his own Bofom, and putting the Nipples of his Breafls into its Mouth, invited it to luck, which. the Infant did, and after divers times drawing, fetch'd some Milk s whereat the Father encouraged, continued to apply it, and so after a while it brought dov^n the Milk so plentifully as to nourifh it for many Months, till it was fit to be wean'd. Hereupon my Author, having prov'd by sufficient Authoriry of able Anatomifts, such as Fra72cifcus Maria Florentinus J and Marcellus Malpighius^ that the Paps of Men have the same Strudlure and the iame Veffels with those of Women, conclude?, that Nature hath not given Paps to Men either to no putpofe, or for meer Ornament, but, if need requires, to supply the Defedt of the Female, and give Suck to the Young.

Had we been born with a large Wen upon our Faces, or a Bavarian Poke under our Chins, or a great Bunch upon our Backs like Camels^ or any the like fuperfiuous Excrefcency, which should be not only ufelefs but troublefome , not only Hand us in no ftead, but alfo be ill-favour'd to behold and burdenfome to carry about, then we might have had some Pretence to doubt whether an intelligent and bountiful Creator had been our Archited: ; for had the Body been made by Chance, it must in all likelihood have had many of these fuperfiuous and unnecellary Parts. I

But

Part 11. in the Creation. 229

But now feeing there is none of our Members but hath its Place and Ufe, none that we could fpare, or conveniently live without, were it but those we account Excrements, the Hair of our Heads, or the Nails on our Fingers ends, we mull: needs be mad or fottifh, if we can conceive any other than that an infinitely good and wife Qod was our Author and -Former.

III. We may fetch an Argument of the Wildom and Providence of God from the convenient Situation and disposition of the Parts and Members of our Bodies ; they are feated mioil: conveniently for Ufe, for Ornament, and for mutual Alfiftance.

F/r/?, For Ufe. So we see the Senfes, of such eminent Ufe for our well-being, iituate in the Head, as Sentinels in a Watch-Tower, to receive and convey to the Soul the Impreffions of external Objed:s. Sen jus autem interpretes ac nuntii rerum in capite tanqiiam in arce mirifce ad itjia 7teceffarios & faBi & collocati fant. Cic. de Nat. Deorum. The Eye can more eafily see Things at a diflance, the Ear receive Sounds from afar ; how could the Eye have been better placed, either for Beauty and Ornament, or for ihe Guidance and Direction of the whole Body ? As CVcero^ proceeds well. Nam Oculi tanquam fpeculatores altijjimiim locum ohtinent^ ex quo plurima coji- Jpicienfes fungu7itur Jko munere : Et Aures qu£ so-

Q_.3 num

2 30 rhe WisGo M of GOD Part ll.

nuw recipere debent^ qui naturci in Jublime fertufy reBe in altis corpcriim par'tibus collccatce funt ; itemque Nares^ eo quod omnis odor ad Jiiperiora fertiir^ re5te fiirfumjuiit. For the Eyes^ like Scutinelsj occupy the higheji Place, from ^vhetice feeing many things, they perform their FunBiciis 5 and the Ears, which are made jor the Reception of Sounds ^ which naturally are carrfd upwards, are rightly placed in the uppcrmofi Tarts of the Body ; aljo the Nofrils, becauje all Odours afcend, are fitly fituate in the fuperior Farts, I might instance in the other Members \ how could the Hands have been more conveniently placed for all Sorts of Exercifes and Works, and for the Guard and Security of the Head and principal Parts ? the Heart, to difpenfe Life and Heat to the whole Body, viz, near the Center ? and yet bccaufe it is harder for the Blood to afcend than defcend, fomewhat nearer the Head? It is alfo obfervable, that the Sinks of the Body are removed as far from the nose and Eyes as may be, which Cicero takes notice of in the fore-mention'd Place : Vt in Mdificis ArchiteBi avertunt ab Oculis & Naribus Dominorum ea quce profuentia necefdrio efjhit tetri aliquid habitura,fic natura resfitmlesprocul amandavit afenfibus,

Secondly, For Ornament : What could have been better contriv'd, than that those Members which are Pairs, iliouid stand by one another in equal Altitude, and answer on each Side one to

another ? And,

- ■ T^hirdly^

T^hirdly^ For mutual Affiftance. We have before ihew'd how the Eye stands most conveniently for guiding the Hand, and the Hand for defending the Eye ♦, and the like might be said of the other Parts, they are so fituate as to afford Direction and Help one to another; this will appear more clearly, if we imagine any of the Members fituate in contrary Places or Pofitions. Had a Man's Arms been fitted only to bend backwards behind him, or his Legs only to move backwards, what Diredlion could his Eyes then have afforded him in working or walking? or how could he then have fed himself ? na}^ had one Arm been made to bend forward, and the other diredly backward, we had then loft half theUfe of them, since they could not have aliifted one the other in any Adion. Take the Eyes, or any other of the Organs of Senfe, and see if you can find any so convenient a Seat for them in the whole Body as that they now possess.

IV. From the ample Provifion that is made for the Defence and Security of the principal Parts; those are, i. The Hearty which is the Fountain of h\ic and Vegetation, OJpchia Spi?-ituiim vitalium,, Prindpium <^ Pons Caloris nativi^ Liicerna hiuuidi radicdh ; and that I may speak with the Chymifts, Ipfe Sol Microcofmi^ the very Sun of the Microcofm^ or little World, in which is contained that vital Flame, or heavenly Fire, which Pr^/WtYZw/i^ is fabled to have ftole from

232 He Wisdom (?/ GOD Part IL

Jupiter \ or, as Arijlotle phrafes it, that 'AixM- -yv TSif ¥ d^XoLV'2v 9^i'^l'^> Divimim quid refponde72S Ektnejito Stellarum, This for more Security is iituate in the Center of the Trunk of the Body, covered first with its own Membrane, call'd Tericardium^ lodg'd within the soft Bed of the Lungs, encom.pass'd round with a double Fence, (i.) Of firm Bones or Ribs, to bear off Blows: (2.) Of thick muscles and Skins, befides the Arms conveniently plac'd, to fence off any Violepce at a distance, before it can approach to hurt it. 2. The Brairij which is the Principal of all Senfe and Motion, the Fountain of the animal Spirits, the chief Seat and Palace Royal of the Soul, upon whose Security depends whatever Privilege belongs to us as fenfitive or rational Creatures; this, I say, being the prime and immediate Organ of the Soul, from the right constitution whereof proceeds the Quicknefs of Apprehenfion, Acutenefs of Wit, Solidity of Judgment, Method and Order of Invention, Strength and Power of Memory (which if once weaken'd and diforder'd, there follows nothing but Confufion and Diilurbance in our Apprehenfions", Thoughts and Judgment) is environed round about with such a potent Defence, that it mull be a mighty Force indeed that is able to injure it.

I. A Skull, so hard, thick and tough, that it is almofi: as eafy to fplit a Helmet of Iron as to make a Fradure in it. 2. This is cover'd with jSkin and Hair, which serve to keep it warm, being

ing naturally a very cold Part, and alfo to quench and diffipate the force of any Stroke that shall be dealt it, and retund the Edge of any Weapon. 3. And yet more than all this, there is still a thick and tough Membrane, which hangs loofcr about it, and doth not so closely embrace it (that they call Dura Mater) and in cafe the Skull happens to be broken, doth often preferve it from Injury and Diminution. And lastly, a thin and fine Membrane, ftrait, and closely adhering, to keep it from qua(hing and fliaking. The many- Pairs of Nerves proceeding from it, and afterwards diftributing and branching themselves to all the Parts of the Body, either for Nutrition or Motion, are wonderful to behold in prepared Bodies, and even in the Schemes and Figures of Dr. Willis and Vieuffens,

I might instance (3.) in the Lungs, which are so ufeful to us as to Life and Senfe, that the Vulgar think our Breath is our very Life, and that we breathe cut our Souls from thence; fuitable to which Notion both A?iima and Spiritus in Latin^ and 'zd-v^jj^ in Greek, are derived from Words that fignify Breath and Wind -, and effiare^ or exhalare Animam^ fignify to die. And the old Romajis ufed to apply Mouth to Mouth and receive the lafi; Gafps of their dying Friends, as if their Souls had come out that way ; from hence perhaps might first spring that Opinion of the Vehicles of Spirits ; the Vulgar, as I hinted beforej conceiving that the Breath v/as, if not the Soul it self, yet that .wherein it was wafted and

carry 'd

carry 'd away. Theft Liings^ I say, are, for their better Security and Defence, iliut up in the same Cavity with the Heart.

V. In the abundant Provifion that is made against evil Accidents and Inconveniences. And the Liberality of Nature as to this Particular appears, I. In that {he hath given many Members (which are of eminent Ufe) by Pairs, as two Eyes, two Ears, twoNoflrils, two Hands, two Feet, two Breafts \Mamm(z\ tv/o Reins ; that so, if by any crofs or unhappy Accident one should be disabled or rendered ufelefs, the other might serve us tolerably well; whereas had a Man but one Hand or one Eye, ©f . if that were gone, all were gone, and we left in an evil Cafe. See then and acknowledge the Benignity of the Deity, who hath beftow'd upon us two Hands and two Eyes, and other the like Parts, not only for our necessity but Conveniency so long as we enjoy them, and for our Security in cafe any Mifchance deprive us of one of them. 2. In that all the Veffels of the Body have many Ramifications, which particular Branches, tho' they serve mainly for one Member or muscle, yet fend forth some Twigs to the neighbouring muscles, and so interchangeably the Branches that serve these fend to them ; so that if one Branch chance to be cut off or obftruded, its Defeat may in some measure be supply'd by the Twigs that come from the neighbouring Veffels. 3. In that she hath provided so many ways to evacuate what might be

hurtful

Part 11. in /^^ C r e at i b n. 235

hurtful to us, or breed Difeafes in our Bodies; if any thing opprefs the Head, it hath a Power to free it self by fneezing ; if any thing fall into the Lungs, or if any Humour be difcharg'd upon them, they have a Faculty of clearing themselves and carting it up by coughing ; if any thing clog or burden the Stomach, it hath an Ability of contrading itself and throwing it up by Vomit. Befic^es these ways of Evacuation, there are Siege, Urine, Sweating, Hamorrhaiges from the nose, and hc^morrhodialV tm%, Fluxes of Rheum. Now the reason why Nature hath provided so manyways of Evacuation is, because of the different Humours that are to be voided or cafl out ; when therefore there is a Secretion made of any noxious Humour, it is carry'd off by that Emundlory, whose Pores are fitted to receive and tranfmit the minute Parts of it ; if at least this Separation be made by Percolation, as we will now suppose, but not affert, yet I doubt not but the same Humour may be cafl off by divers Emundories, as is clear in Urine and Sv>^eat, which are for the main- the same Humour carry'd ofFfeveral ways.

To this Head of Provifion againfl Inconveniences, I shall add an observation or two concerning Sleep.

I. Sleep being necessary to Man and other Ani^mals for their Refreflimeiit, and for the Reparation of that great Expence of Spirits which is made i^i the Day-time by the constant Exercife

of

of the Senfes and Motions of the muscles, that it might cafe and refrefh us indeed. Nature hath provided, that tho* we He long upon one Side, we {hould have no Senfe of Pain or Unealinefs during our rest, no, nor when we awake ; whereas in reason one would think, that the whole Weight of the Body preffing the muscles and Bones on which we lie, jQiould be very burdenfome and uneafy, and create a grievous Senfe of Pain ; and we find by Experience that it doth so when we lie long awake in the Night, we being not able (especially if never so little indifpofed) to rest one Quarter of an Hour in the same posture, without (hif ting of Sides, or at least etching this way and that way, more or less. How this may be effedled, is a great Queftion. To me it seems most probable that it is done by an Inflation of the muscles, whereby they become both soft, and yet renitent, like so many Pillows, diffipating the Force of the Preffure, and so preventing or taking away the Senfe of Pain. That the muscles are in this manner inflated in time of rest, appears to the very Eye in the Faces of Children, and may be prov'd from that, when we rest in our Cloaths we are fain to loofen our Garters, Shoe-ftrings, and other Ligatures, to give the Spirits free Paflage, elfe we iliall experience Pain and Uneafinefs in those Parts, which when we are waking we find not.

The

The reason of this Pkdemmcnoji ^ viz, that dvct'Kyymot^ or want of Pain we experience in Sleep, during and after a long decubitus on one Side, 'Dv, Lifter in his Journey to Paris, p. 113. and Dr. Jo72es in his Treatife of ^he Myjieries of Opium reveal' d, attribute to the Relaxation of the Nerves and muscles in time of Sleep ; and the Sepfe of Pain and Uneafinefs when we lie awake, to the Teniion of them during that time: This I do not deny, but yet I think the reason I have affign'd hath a great interest in that rest and Ealinefs we enjoy when afleep.

2. because Sleep is inconfiftent with the Senfe of Pain , therefore during rest , those Nerves which convey that Motion to the Brain, which excites in the Soul a Senfe of Pain, are obftrud;- ed i this I my self have had frequent Experience of since I have been troubled with Sores on my Legs ; upon fudden awaking finding my self at perfed Eafe, and void of all Senfe of Pain for a Minute's time or more, the Pain then by degrees returning ; which I could attribute to nothing but the diffipating that Vapour, or whatever elfe it were, which obftruded the Nerves, and giving the dolorifick Motion free passage again.

Upon fecond Thoughts, and reading what Dr. Lijler and Dr. Jones have written concerning this Subjed, I rather incline to believe, that the Motion caufing a Senfe of Pain, is convey 'd to

the

the Brain by the Nerves themselves in Tenfion, as we see in Cords, any the least touch at one end, pafTes fpeedily to the other when they are ftretch'd, which it doth not when they are relax'd , and not by the Spirits passing thro' them ; and on the other side, the Infenliblenefs of Pain proceeds rather from the Relaxation of the Nerves than their Obftrudion ; but yet this Tenfion of the Nerves and muscles is owing to the Spirits flowing down into them and diftending them.

VI. From the Conftancy that is obferv'd in the Number, Figure, Place, and Make of all the principal Parts, and from the Variety in the less. Man is always mending and altering his Works, but Nature observes the same Tenor, because her V^orks are so perfedt, that there is no place for Amendments, nothing that can be reprehended -, the moil fagacious Men in so many Ages have not been able to find any Flaw in these divinely contrived and form'd Machines, m Blot or Error in this great Volume of the Worlds as if any thing had been an imperfeB Efay at the fr'Ji (to ufe the Bifnop of Chejiers Words) nothing that can be alter'd for the better, nothing but if it were altered would be marr'd ; this could not have been had Man's Body been the Work of Chance, and not Council and Providence : Why should there be conilantly the same Parts ? why should they retain conilantly the same Places? why should they be endu'd with the same Shape and Figure ? Nodiing so contrary as Conilancy and Cliance.

Should

Should I see a Man throw the same Number a thoufand times together upon but three Dice, could you perfuade me that this were accidental, and that there was no necessary cause of it ? How much more incredible then is it, that Conftancy in such a Variety, such a Multiplicity of Parts, should be the result of Chance ? Neither yet can these Works be the Effefts of necessity or pafe, for then there would be the same Conftancy obferv'd in the smaller as well as the larger Parts and Veflels ; whereas there we see Nature doth ludere^ as it were fport it self, the minute Ramifications of all the VeiTels, Veins, Arteries, and Nerves , infinitely varying in Individuals of the same Species, so that they are not in any two alike.

VII. The great wisdom of the divine Creator appears, in that there is pleasure annexed to those Adlions that are neceflfary for the Support and Prefervation of the Individuum ^ and the Continuation and Propagation of the Species j and not only so, but Pain to the Ncgledt or Forbearance of them. For the Support of the Perfon, it hath annexed pleasure to eating and drinking, which elfe, out of Lazinefs or Multiplicity of business, a Man would be apt to neglccl, or fometimes forget; indeed to be oblig'd to chew and fwallow Meat daily for two Hours Space, and to find no Relifh or pleasure in it, would be one of the most burdenfom and ungrateful Talks of a Man's whole Life ,; but becaufc this Adion is absolutely

necessary.

240 TZeWisDOM of GOD PartIL

necessary, for abundant Security Nature hath inlerted in us a painful Senfe of Hunger, to put us in mind of it ; and to reward our Performance hath adjoin'd pleasure to it 5 and as for the Continuation of Kind, I need not tell you that the Enjoyments which attend those Ad:ions are the higheft Gratifications of Senfe.

VIII. The wonderful Art and Providence of the Contriver and Former of our Bodies, appears in the Miiltitude of Intentions he must have in the Formation of the several Parts, or the Qualifications they require to fit them * Bijipop of for their several Ufes. * Galen in ^^j^g^''^-J^ his Book de Formatione F(Etus, takes €. 6, notice, " That there are in a human

" Body above Six-hundred several " muscles, and there are at least Ten several In- " tentions or due Qualifications to be obferv'd " in each of these ; proper Figure, juft Mag- " nitude, right disposition of its several Ends, '' upper and lower, Pofition of the whole, the " Infertion of its proper Nerves, Veins, and '' Arteries, which are each of them to be du- '' ly placed J so that about the muscles alone '' no less than Six thoufand several Ends or '' Aims are to be attended to. The Bones are " reckon'd to be 284. The diflincft Scopes or '' Intentions in each of these are above 40 ; in " all about looooo. And thus it is in Ibme '' Proportion with all the other Parts, the " Ski/7y Ligaments, Feffe/s, Glandules, Uimours : "

■ '' But

Part 11. in the C r e a t i o n. 241

" But more especially with the several Members " of the Body, which do, in regard of the great " Variety and Multitude of those several Inten- " tions required to them, very much exceed the *' homogeneous Parts ; and the failing in any one " of these would cause Irregularity in the Body, *' and in many of them such as would be very *^ notorious/* Now to imagine that such a Machine , composed of so many Parts, to the right Form, Order and Motion whereof such an infinite Number of Intentions are required, could be made without the Contrivance of some wife Agent, must needs be irrational in the higheft degree.

This wonderful mechanism of human Bodies, next to viewing the Life, may be k^n at large in the excellent Figures of Spigelius and Bidloo^ their Situation, Order, Connexion, and manner of feparating them, in Lyferus his Cult, Anatom, The almost infinite Ramifications and Inofculations of all the several Sorts of Veflels, the Structures of the Glands, and other Organs, may eafily be detefted by Glaffes, and trac'd by blowing in of Air and drying them, or by injedling thro' peculiar Syringes melted Wax or Quickfilver, the Operations whereof may be learned out of Swam* merdamy Cafpar Bartholiney ^nd Antonio Nuck.

IX. Another Argument of wisdom and Pelign in Contrivance of the Body of Man and other Animals, is the fitting of some Parts to divers Offices and Ufes^ whereby Nature doth (as

R the

the Proverb is) Una Jidelid duos parietes dealbare, Jiop two Gaps with one Bujh ; so (for instance) the T'ongiie serves not only for tailing, but alfo to affift the Maftication of the Meat and Deglutition, by turning it about, and managing it in the Mouth, to gather up the Food, in Man by licking ♦, in the Dog and Cat-Kind by lapping ; in Kine by pkicking up the Grafs j particularly in Man it is of admirable Ufe for the Formation of Words and fpeaking.

The Dlaphragmy and muscles o^ th& Abdomen^ or lower Belly, are of ufe not only for respiration, but alfo for compreffing the Inteftines, and forcing the Chyle into the ladeal Veins, and likewife out of the said Veins into the thoracick Channel ; and here (to note that by the way) appears the ufe of a common Receptacle of Chyle, that by the Motion of the muscles of respiration it being prefs'd upon, the Chyle might with more Facility be impelFd into the fore- mentioned Dudt ; befides , this Adion of respiration and Motion of the said Diaphragm and muscles, may serve alfo for the Comminution and Concodlioa of the Meat in the Stomach (as some, not without reason, think) by their constant Agitation and Motion upwards and downwards, resembling the pounding or braying of Materials in a Mortar.

And to instance in no more, the mufcular Con-

: adlion and Pulfe of the Heart serves not only

for the Circulation of the Blood, but alfo for the

more

Part If. in the Creation. 243

more perfedl Mixture of its Parts, preferving its due Crafis and Fluidity, and incorporating the Chyle, and other Juices it receives, with it.

X. The wisdom and goodness too of the divine Former of our Bodies, appears in the Nourifliment of them ; for that Food which is of a wholfome Juice, and proper to nourifli and preferve them in a healthful State, is both pleafant t(5 the Tafte and grateful and agreeable to the Stomach, and continues to be so till our Hunger and Thirft be well appeased, and then begins to be less pleafant, and at last even naufeous and loathfome. The full Stomach loaths the Honey- Comb,

On the other side, that which is unwholfome and unfit for Nourifhment, or deftru6live of Health, is alfo unpleafant to the Tafte and ungrateful and difagreeable to the Stomach, and that more or less, according as it is more or less improper or noxious ; and though there be some Sorts of Food less pleafant to the Tafte, which by ufe may be render'd grateful, yet to Perfons that are in health, and in no necessity of ufing such Viands, I think it were better to abftain from them, and follow Nature, in eating such things as are agreeable to their Palate and Stomach ; for such unpleafant Diet must needs alter the Temper of the Body before it can become acceptable, and doubtlefs for the worfe.

R 2 I might

244 TheWisDouofGOD PartIL I might add hereto, that even Pain, which is the moll grievous and affli<ftive thing that v^e are sensible of, is of great Ufe to us. God hath annexed a Senfe of Pain to all Difeafes and Harms of the Body, inward and outward (and there is no Pain but proceed^ from some Harm or Difeafe) to be an effeftual Spur to excite and quick-* en us to feek for fpeedy Help or Remedy ; and hath so order'd it, that as the Difeafe heals,^ so the Pain abates. Neither doth Pain provoke us only to feek Eafe and Relief when we labour under it, but alfo makes us careful to avoid for the future all such things as are produdive of it ; that is, such things as are hurtful to our Bodies, and deftrudtive of the Health and Well-being of them, which alfo are for the most part prohibited by God, andfo fmful and injurious to our Souls. So we see what Care the divine Providence hath taken, and what effedual Means it hath us'd for the healing of our Difeafes, and the Maintenance and Prefervation of our Health. This 'is the true reason of our Painj howbeit, I will not deny but that God doth fometimes himself immediately inflia Difeafes, even upon his own Children, for many good Confiderations, which I shall not here enumerate ; neither shall I mention the Ufes that Parents and Mafters make of it, for the correding their Children and Servants ; or Magiftrates, for the punifhing. of Malefaftors, they being beyond my Scope > only I cannot but take notice, that it is a 'OTAwjj/pMpr, a thing of manifold Ufes, and necessary for the

Govern-

Government both of Commonwealths and Families.

XI. Some fetch an Argument of Providence from the Variety of Lineaments in the Faces of Men, which is such, that there are not two Faces in the World absolutely alike ; which is fomewhat ftrange, fmce all the Parts are i?i Specie the same. Were Nature a blind Architeft, I see not but the Faces of some Men might be as like as Eggs laid by the same Hen, or Bullets cast in the same Mould, or Drops of Water out of the same Bucket. This Particular I find taken notice of by Pliny in his Seventh Book, cap. i. in these Words : Jam in facie vultuque nojiroy ciimjint decern aut paulo plura membra^ ?iiillas duas in tot mil'* lihus hominum indifcretas ejigies exiftere^ quod Jlrs nulla in paucis numero prajlet affedlando. To which, among other things, he thus prefaces : Jslaturce vero rerum vis atque majejias in omnibus momentis side caret.

Tho' this at first may seem to be a Matter of small moment, yet, if duly consider'd, it will appear to be of mighty Importance in all human Affairs ; for should there be an undifcernable Similitude between divers Men, what Confufion and Difturbance would necessarily follow? What Uncertainty in all Sales and Conveyances, in all Bargains and Contrads? What Frauds and Cheats, and fuborning of Witneffes ? What a Subverfion of all Trade and Commerce ? What hazard in all judicial Proceedings, in all Affaults

R 3 and

and Batteries, in all Murders and Affaffinations ? In Thefts and Robberies what Security would there be to Malefadlors ? who could fwear that such and such were the Perfons that committed the Fafts, tho' they faw them never so clearly ? Many other Inconveniences might be inftanc'd in 5 so that we see this is no contemptible Argument of the wisdom and goodness of God.

Neither is the difference of Voices less considerable, for the diflinguifliing of Sexes and particular Perfons, and Individuals of all Animals, than that of Faces ; as Dr. Cockburn makes out,

Cafes more ; for hereby Perfons in the dark and those that are blind may know and diftinguilh one another, which is of great Importance to them, for otherwife they might be most grofly cheated and abus'd.

Farther we may add out of the same Author, f. J I, '' And to no other cause [than the wife " Providence of God] can be referr'd the no less *' ftrange Diverfuy of Hand-writings. Common <« Experience shews, that though Hundreds and *' Thoufands were taught by one Mailer, and <* one and the same Form of Writing, yet they *' ftiould all write differently: Whether Men " write Court or Ro7nan Hand, or any other, " there is fomething peculiar in every one*s Wri- " ting which diftinguiflieth it. Some indeed can " counterfeit another's Charadter and Subfcrip- " tion, but the instances are rare, nor is it done *^ without Pains and Trouble 5 nay, the most

" Expert

€i

<C

*' Expert and Skilful cannot write much so ex- ** aftly like as that it cannot be known whether *' it be genuine or counterfeit ; and if the Pro- ** vidcnce of God did not so order it, what Cheats ** and Forgeries too would daily be committed, which would not only juftle private Men out of thtiv Rights, but alfo unhinge States and Governments, and turn all into Confufion? The Diverfity of Hand-writings is of mighty great Ufe to the Peace of the World ; it pre- *' vents Frauds, and fecures Mens Property; it *' obligeth the Living and present to Honefty and *' Faithfulnefs ; it importeth the Mind of the ** Abfent, and iheweth the Will of the Dead, *' which ought to be facredly obferv'd:. And " what is so very ufeful, is not the Effed of any *' human Concert -, Men did not of themselves " agree to it, they are only carry*d to it by the " fecret Providence of God, who underftandeth " and mindeth what is for the Good and interest *' of Mankind in general, and of every particu- " lar Perfon.

Add farther to all this, that whereas there are several Parts peculiar to Brutes which are wanting in Man ; as for Example, the feventh, or fufpenfory muscle of the Eye, the nidtating Membrane, the strong Aponeurofes on the sides of the Neck, caird by some Packwax^ it is very remarkable that these Parts are of eminent and constant Ufe to them, as I shall particularly fliew hereafter, but to M^n would have been altogether ufelefs and fuperfluous;

R 4 I have

I have done with my general observations, I proceed now more accurately and minutely to consider some particular Parts or Members of the Body 5 and first, the Heady because it was to contain a large Brain, made of the most capacious Figure, as near as could be to a fpherical ; upon this grows the Hair, which, tho' it be efteem*d an Excrement, is of great Ufe (as I fliew'd before) to cherifti and keep warm the Brain, and to quench the Force of any Stroke, that might otherwife endanger the Skull 5 it serves alfo to difburden the Brain of a great deal of fuperfluous Moifture, wherewith it abounds.

I find it remarked by Machettty a famous Ana-? tomift in Padua, that the cause of Baldnefs in Men is the drynefs of the Brain, and its fhrinking from the Crarthim, or Skull 5 he having obferv'd, that in bald Perfons, under the bald Part there was always a Vacuity or empty Space between the Skull and the Brain : and lastly, to name no more, it serves alfo for a graceful Ornament to the Face, which our present Age is sensible e-^ nough of, best owing so much Money upon falfc Hair and Perriwigs.

Secondly-, Another Member which I shall more particularly treat of, is the Eye, a Part so artificially composed and commodioufly fituate, as nothing can be contrived better for Ufe, Ornament, or Security ; nothing to Advantage added thereto or altered therein. Of the Beauty of the Eye I ihall say little, leaving that to Poets and Orators j

that

that It is a very pleafant and lovely Objedl to behold, if we consider the Figure, Colours, and Splendc^ of it, is the least that I can say. The Soul, as it is more immediately and ftrongly moved and afFed;ed by this Part than any other, so doth it manifest all its Paffions and Perturbations by this. As the Eyes are the Windows to let in the Species of all exterior Objedts into the dark Cells of the Brain for the Information of the Soul, so are they flaming Torches to reveal to those abroad how the Soul within is moved or affeded. these Reprefentations made by the Impreffions of external Objeds upon the Eye arc the most clear, lively, and diftind: of any others. Now to this Ufe and purpose of informing us what is abroad round about us in this afpedable World, we shall find this Strufture and mechanism of the Eye, and every Part thereof, so well fitted and adapted, as not the least Curiofity can be added 5 for first of all, the Humours and Tunicles are purely transparent, to let in the Light and Colours unfoiFd and unfophifticated by any inward Tindure. It is ufually said by the Peri^ fateticksy that the cryftalline Humour of the Eye (which they eneptly fancy'd to be the immediate Organ of Vifion, wherein all the Species of external Objeds were terminated) is without all Colour, because its Office was to difcern all Colours, or at least to receive the Species of fevcral Colours, and convey them to the common Senfe. . Now' if it self had been coloured, it would have tranfmitted all visible Objeds tindur'd with the

famt-

same Colour ; as we see whatever is beheld thro' a coloured Glafs, appears of the same Colour with the Glafs ; and to those that have the Jaundice, or the like SufFufion of Eyes, Objects ap>- pear of that same Colour wherewith their Eyes are infedted j this, they say, is in a great measure true, altho* they are much miftaken about the Organ and Manner of Vifion, and the Ufes of the Humours and Membranes of the Eye. Two reasons therefore may be affign'd why all the Membranes and Humours of the Eye are perfeftly pellucid, and void of Colour : Firfi^ For the Clearnefs. Secondly ^ For the JJiftindnefs of Vifion.

Firjiy The Clearnefs; 'for had the Tunicles and Humours of the Eye, all, or any of them, been colorate, many of the Rays proceeding from the visible Objedt would have been ftopt and fufFocated before they could come to the bottom of the Eye, where the formal Organ of Vifion is fituate; for it is a most certain Rule, how much any Body hath of Colour, so much hath it of Opacity; and by so much the more unfit it is to tranfmit the Species.

Secondly^ For the Diftindnefs of Vifion : For, as I said before, and the Peripateticks observe well, were the Humours of the Eye tinftur'd with any Colour, they would refund that Colour upon the Objed, and so it would not be reprefented to the Soul as in it self it is ; so we see that

thro'

thro' a coloured Glafs things appear as well more dim and obfcure as tindtur'd with the Colour thereof.

Secondly, The Parts of the Eye are made convex, and especially the cryftalline Humour, which is of a lenticular Figure, convex on both sides, that by the Refractions there made, there might be % Direction of many Rays coming from one Point in the Objeft, viz, as many as the Pupil can receive, to one Point anfwerable in the bottom of the Eye, without which the Senfe would be very obfcure, and alfo confused. There would be as much difference in the Clearnefs and Diftindtion of Vifion, were the outward Surface of the Tu^ 7iica Cornea plain, and the cryftalline Humour remov'd, as between the Pidture received on white Paper in a dark Room thro' an open or empty Hole, and the same received through a Hole furnifh'd with an exaftly polifli'd lenticular Cryftal ; which, how great it is, any one that hath but seen this Experiment made, knows wxll enough ; indeed, this Experiment doth very much explain the manner of Vifion, the Hole anfwering to the Pupil of the Eye, the cryftalline Humour to the lenticular Glafs, the dark Room to the Cavity containing the vitreous Humour, and the white Paper to the T'unica Retina.

Thirdly y The uveous Coat^ or Iris of the Eye, hath a mufculous Power, and can dilate and contrail that round Hole ^ia it call'd the Pupil, or

Sight

Sight of the Eye 5 it contrafts it, for the excluding fuperfluous Light, and preferving the Eye from being injured by too vehement and lucid an Objedt, and again dilates it, for the apprehending Objedls more remote, or plac'd in a fainter Light; iam miro artificio (faith Scheiner) quam muntfica natures largitate. If any one defires to make Experiment of these Particulars, he may, following Scheiner and Des Cartes their Dired:ion, take a Child, and fetting a Candle before him, bid him look upon it, and he shall observe his Pupil contraft it self very much, to exclude the Light, with the Brightnefs w^hercof it would otherwife be dazzled and offended 5 as we are, when after we have been some time in the dark, a bright Light is fuddenly brought in and set before us, till the Pupils of our Eyes have gradually contrafted themselves j let the Candle be withdrawn or remov'd afide, he {hall observe the Child's Pupil by degrees to dilate it self; or let him take a Bead, or the like Objeft, and holding it near the Eye, command the Child to look at it, the Pupil will contradt much when the Objeft is near; but let it be withdrawn to a greater distance in the same Light, and he {hall observe the Pupil to be much enlarged.

Fourthly^ The uveous Coat, and alfo the infide of the Chorides, are blackened, like the Walls of a Tennis-Court, that the Rays may be there fufFocated and fuppreffed, and not refledted backwards , to confound the Sight -, and if any be by

the

the fetiforfn Coat reflefted, they are foon choak'd in the black infide of the Uvea-, whereas were they reflefted to and fro, there could be no diftindt Vifion ; as we see the Light admitted into the dark Room we even now speak of, obliterates the Species which before were {Qcn upon the white Cloth or Paper.

Fifthly, because the Rays from a nearer and from a more remote Objedt do not meet ju ft in the same distance behind the cryftalline Humour (as may eafily be obferv'd in lenticular Glafs, where the Point or Concourfe of the Rays from a nearer Objeft is at a greater distance behind the Glafs, and from a farther at a lesser) therefore the ciliary Procejes, or rather the Ligaments obferv'd in the infide of the fclerotick Tunicles of the Eye by a late ingenious Anatomift, do serve instead of a muscle, by their Contraftion to alter the Figure of the Eye, and make it broader, and consequently draw the Retina nearer to the cryftalline Humour 5 and by their Relaxation suffer it to return to its natural distance, according to the Exigency of the Objed, in refpeft of distance or Propinquity; and befides, poflibly the ciliary Proceffes may, by their Conftriftion or Relaxation, render the Cryftalline it self more gibbofe or plain, and with the help of the muscles a little alter the Figure of the whole Eye for the same reason. To what I have said might be ^dded, that the retiform Tunicle is whitifli, for the bet- "Ter and more trup Reception of the Species of

Things ;

254 TieWisDoM of GOD Part II-

Things J that there being a distance neceiTarily required for the CoUedion of the Rays received by the Pupil, viz, those that proceed from one Point of the Objedl to one Point again in the bottom of the Eye, the Retiita must needs be set at a distance from the cryftalline Humour j and therefore Nature hath provided a large Room, and fiird it with the pellucid vitreous Humour, most fit for that purpose.

I must not omit a notable observation concerning the Place of the Infertion of the optick Nerve into the Bulb of the Eye, and the reason of it ; which I owe to that learned Mathematician Pe^ ter Herigon : Ncrvus opticus (faith he in his O/- tica) ad latus ponitur^ ne pars imaginis in ejus so-^ ramen incidens piBurd car eat: The Optick Nerve is notftuate directly behind the Eye, but on one side ^ lefi that Part of the Image that falls upon the Hole of the optick Nerve Jhould want its PiBure, This I do not conceive to be the triie reason of this Situation y for even now as it is fituate, that Part of the Objeft whose Rays fall upon the Center, or Hole of the optick Nerve, wants its Pifture, as we find by Experience, that Part not being seen by us, tho' we heed it not ; but the reason is, because if the optick Axis should fall upon this Center (as it would do were the Nerve feated juft behind the Eye) this great Inconvenience would follow, that the middle Point of every Objedt we view'd would be invifible, or there would be a dark Spot appear in the midft of it j Z thus

Part 11. 7';^ /^^ Creation. 255

thus we see the admirable Wifdbm of Nature in thus placing the optick Nerve in refped of the Eye, which he that did not consider or underfland, would be apt to think more inconveniently fituate for Vifion than if it had been right behind.

Another thing alfo concerning Vifion is most remarkable, that tho' there be a Decuffation of the Rays in the Pupil of the Eye, and so the Image of the Objecft in the Retina or bottom of the Eye be inverted, yet doth not the Objed appear inverted, but in its right or natural Poflure ; the reason whereof is, because the vifual Rays coming in ftraight Lines by those Points of the Senfory or Retina which they touch, affed: the common Senfe or Soul, according to their Dirediion ; that is, fignify to it, that those several Parts of the Objed: from whence they proceed lie in ftraight Lines (Point for Point) drawn thro' the Pupil to the several Points of the Senfory, where they terminate, and which they prefs upon> whereupon the Soul must needs conceive the Objed, not in an inverted, but a right posture ; and that the Nerves are naturally made, not only to inform the Soul of external Objeds which prefs upon them, but alfo of the Situation of such Objeds, is clear; because if the Eyes be diftorted, the Objed, will we nill we, will appear double ; so if the fore and middle Fingers be crois'd, and a round Body put between them, and mov'd, it will seem to be two; the reason is, because in

that

:256 i:U WisBOM of GOD PartU.

that posture of the Fingers the Body touches the outfides of them, which in their natural Site are diftant one from another, and their Nerves made to fignify to the Soul Bodies feparate, and diftant in like manner, two Fingers lying between them ; and tho' our reason, by the help of our Sight, correds this Error, yet cannot we but fancy it to be so.

Neither is the aqueous Hiimoury as some may fupinely imagine, altogether ufelefs or unprofitable as to Vifion, because by its Help the Uvea tunica is foftained, which elfe would fall flat upon the cryftalline Humour ; and fluid it must be to give way to the Contraction and Dilatation of the uveous ; and because the outermoft Coat of the Eye might chance to be wounded or pricked, and this Humour, being fluid, let out, therefore Nature hath made Provifion fpeedily to repair it again in such a Cafe, by the help of certain Water-Pipes , or Lymphaedufts , inferted into the Bulb of the Eye, proceeding from Glandules design^d by Nature to feparate this Water from the Blood for that Ufe. Antontm Nuck afiirms, that if the Eye of an Animal be pricked, and the aqueous Humour fqueez'd out, in ten Hours Space the said Humour and Sight shall be teftored to the Eye, if at least the Creature be kept in a dark Place. And that he did publickly demonftrate the same in the Anatomical Theatre at Leyden, in a Dog, out of whose Eye, being wounded, the aqueous Humour did 2 so

so copioufly slow, that the Membranes appeared flaccid, and yet in fix Hours Space the Bulb of the Eye was again replete with its Humour, and that without the Application of any Medicines. Antoniui Niick dc Duclu novofaUvaliy &c.

Moreover, it is remarkable, that the Cornea T^iinica [horny or pellucid Coat of the Eye] doth i\pi lie in the same Superficies with the White of the Eye, but rifeth up, as it were a Hillock, above its Convexity, and is of an hyperbolical or parabolical Figure 5 so that tho' the Eye seems to be perfectly round, in reality it is not lb, but the Iris thereof is protuberant above the White ; and the reason is, because that if the Cornea tunica, or cryftalline Humour, had been concentrical to the Selerodes^ the Eye could not have admitted a whole Hemifphere at one View, & fie Aniraalis incolumitati in multis rebus minus caiitum ejfet^ as Scheiner well observes. In many things there had not been sufficient Caution or Care taken for the Animal's Safety.

And now (that I may ufe the ^^- MoreV ^/?- Words of a late Author of our 'l^^L'^""-^ ^' own) xhe Eye is already so perfedt, that I believe the reason of a Man would eafily have refl:ed here, and admir'd at his own Contrivance. For he being able to move his whole Body upward and downward, and on every side, might have unawares thought himself fufiiciently well iprovided for; but Nature hath added Mujcles alfo to the Eyes, that no Perfedion

S . mi^hc

258 7%eWisjyou of GOD Part II,

might be wanting ; for we have often occalion to move our Eyes, our Head being unmov'd, as in reading and viewing more particularly an Objed: set before us, by transferring the ^xes of our Eyes all over it -, and that this may be done with the more Eafe and Accuracy, {he hath furnifh'd this Organ with no less than fix muscles, to move it upward^ downward, to the Right and Left, obliquely, and round about.

I (hall now consider what Provifion is made for the Defence and Security of this most excellent and ufeful Part.

Firji, The Eyes are funk in a convenient Valley, latent utiliter^ and are encompaffed round with eminent Parts, as with a Rampart, Q? excel-^ Jis undique farttbm Jepiuntur^ * Cic. dcmmTl ^^ ^^e defended from the Strokes of any flat or broad Bodies. Above stand the Eye-brows, to keep off any thing from running down upon them, as Drops of Sweat from the Forehead, or Duft, or the like. Superiora fuperciliis ohdii5la fudorem a capite iS front e defuentem repelliint, • Cic. Then follow the Eye-lids ^ which fence them from any fudden and lesser Stripes 5 these alfo round the Edges are fortified with ftiflF Briftles, as it were Palifadoes, against the Incurfions of importunate Animals, ferving partly as a Fan to ftrike away Flies, or Gnats, or any other troublefome Infed: ; and partly to keep off fuperfluous Light. Munitceque Jimt palpebra

tanquum

tanquam vallo piloriim^ qiiibus & apertis oculis Jiquid infideret repelleretur. Idem, ibid. And because it was necessary that Man and other Animals should sleep, which could not be so well done if the Light came in by the Windows of the Eyes, therefore hath Nature provided these Curtains to be then drawn to keep it out. And because the outward Coat of the Eye ought to be pellucid, to tranfmit the Light, which, if the Efyes should always fland open, would be apt to grow dry and fhrink, and lofe their Diaphaneity, therefore are the Eye-lids so contriv'd as often to wink, that so they may as it were glaze and var-* nifh them over with the Moifture they contain, there being Glandules on purpose to feparate a Humour for that Ufe, and withal wipe off whatever Duft or Filth may flick to them; and this, left they should hinder the Sight, they do with the greatest Celerity. Cicero hath taken notice, that they are made very soft, left they should hurt the Sight. MoliJJime ta5iu ni Icederent aciem, ap^ tijjime faBa & ad claudendas pupillas ne quid i?2ciderety & ad aperiendas, idque providit iit identic demjieri pojfet maxima cum celeritate.

Secondly, If we consider the Bulb or Ball of the Eye, the exterior Membrane or Coat thereof is made thick, tough and strong, that it is a very hard matter to make a Rupture in it, and befides so flippery, that it eludes the Force of any Stroke, to which alfo its globular Figure gives it a verygreat Advantage.

S 2 Lajilyy

Lajlly, because for the Guidance and Direaion of the Body in walking, and any Exercife, it is necessary the Eye should be uncovered and expos'd to the Air at all Times and in all Weathers, therefore the most wife Author of Nature hath provided for it a hot Bed of Fat, which fills up the Interilices of the muscles, and be sides made it more patient and less sensible of Cold than our other Parts 5 and tho' I cannot say with Cicero, absolutely free from Danger or Harm by that Enemy, yet least obnoxious to the Injuries thereof of any Part, and not at all, unless it be immoderate and extreme.

To all this I might add the Convenience of the Situation of the Eye in refped: of its Proximity to the Brain, the Seat of Apprehenfion and common Senfe; whereas had it been farther removed, the Optick Nerves had been liable to many more Dangers and Inconveniences than now they are.

Seeing then the Eye is composed of so great Variety of Parts, all confpiring to the Ufe of Vifion, whereof some are absolutely necessary, others very ufeful and convenient, none idle or fuperfluous j and which is remarkable, many of them of a different Figure and Confiftency from any others in the Body befides, as being transparent, which it was absolutely necessary they should be, to tranfmit the Rays of Light ; who can but believe that this Organ was design'd and made purpofely for the Ufe for which it serves ? ■ Neither

Neither is it to be efteem'd any Defedl or Imperfection in the Eyes of Man, that they wantthe feventh muscle, or the nidlating Membrane, which the Eyes of many other Animals arc furnifli'd withal i for tho' they be very ufeful, and in a manner necessary to them, confidering their manner of living, yet they are not so to Man. T*o such Beads as feed upon Grafs, and other Herbs, and therefore are forc'd to hold their Eyes long in a hanging posture, and to look downwards for the chufing and gathering of their Food, the feventh or fufpenfory muscle is very ufeful, to enable them to do so without much Pain or Wearinefs •, yet to Man, who doth not, nor hath any occafion, indeed cannot hold his Head or look long downwards, it would be ufelefs and fuperfluous. As for the nidating Mem.- brane, or Periophtkalmiiwt^ which all Birds, and I think most Quadrupeds are furnifli'd with, I have been long in doubt what the Ufe of it might be, and have fometimes thought it was for the more abundant Defence and Security of the Eye; but then I was puzzled to give any tolerable Account why Nature should be more follicitous for the Prefervation of the Eyes of Brutes than Men, and in this Refpedt alfo to be a Step-mother to the most noble Creature.

But the honourable * Author ^ * Boyle of final formerly mentioned gives a pro- ^-^/^j* p- 53» 54-. bable Account why Frogs and Birds are furnifli'd'

S 3 with

262 ne Wisi>ou of GOD Part IL

with such a Membrane. Frogs, because being amphibious Animals, design'd to pass their Lives in watery Places, which for the most part abound with Sedges, and other Plants endow'd with sharp Edges or Points 5 and the progreffive Motion of this Animal being to be made not by walking, but by leaping, if his Eyes were not provided of such a Sheath, he must either (hut them, and so leap blindly, and by consequence dangeroufly, or by leaving them open run a venture to have the Cornea cut, prick'd, or otherwife offended by the Edges or Points of the Plants, or what may fall from them upon the Animal's Eye; whereas this Membrane (being fomething transparent as well as strong) is like a kind of Speftacle, that covers the Eye without taking away the Sight. Birds are likewife furnifh'd with it, because being deftinated to fly among the Branches of Trees and Bu(hes, their Prickles, Twigs, Leaves, or other Parts, would be apt otherwife to wound or offend their Eyes. But yet flill v\^e are to feek why it is given to other Quadrupeds, whose Eyes are in no such danger.

thirdly, The Ear, another Organ of Senfe, Jiow admirable it is contrived for the receiving and conveying of Sounds. Firjiy There is the outward Ear, or Auricula^ made hollow, and contracted by degrees, to draw the Sound inward, to take in as much as may be of it, as we ufe a fuDBcl to pour Liquor into any VefTely and

therefore

Part IL in the Ckeatio^. 263

therefore if the Auricula be cut clear off the Hearing is much impaired, and almost quite marr'd, as hath been by Experience found. From the Auricula is extended a small, long, round Hole inward into the Head, to intend the Motion, and so augment the Force of the Sound, as we see in a Shooting-Trunk, the longer it is to a certain Limit, the fwifter and more forcibly the Air paiTes in it and drives the Pellet. At the end of this Hole is a Membrane faften'd to a round boney Limb, and ftretch'd like the Head of a Drum, and therefore by Ana torn ifts call'd alfo Tympanum^ to receive the Impulfe of the Sound, and to vibrate or quaver according to its reciprocal Motions or Vibrations ; the small Ear-bones being at the end faften'd to the Tympanum^ and furnifh'd with a muscle, serve for the Tenlion of that Membrane, or the Relaxation of it, according to the Exigency of the Animal, it being ftretch'd to the utmoft when it would hearken diligently to a lower or more diftant Sound. Behind the Drum are several Vaults and anfraduous Cavities in the Ear-bone, fiU'd only with what Naturalifts call the implanted Air, so to intend the least Sound imaginable that the Senfe might be affected with it ; as we see in fubterraneous Caves and Vaults how the Sound is redoubled, and what a great Report it makes however moderate it be ; and because it was for the behoof of the Animal^ that upon any fudden Accident it might be awaken'd out of its Sleep, therefore

S 4 were

were there no Shuts or Stopples made for the Ears, that so any loud or sharp Noife might awaken it, as alfo a soft and gentle Voice of Murmur provoke it to sleep. Now the Ears, for the Benefit and Conveniences of the Animal^ being alv^ays to stand open, because there was some danger that Infeds might creep in thereat, and eating their way thro' the I'ympanum harbour in the Cavities behind it, therefore hath Nature loricated or plaifter'd over the sides of the foremention'd Hole with Ear-wax, to flop and entangle any insects that ihould attempt to creep in there. But I must confefs my self not fufficiently to understand the nature of Sounds, to give a full and fatisfaftory Account of the Strudxire and Ufes of all the Parts of the Ear^ they who have a mind to fearch into the curious Anatomy and Ufe of this Part, may confult Monfieur du Verney.

Fourthly, The next Part I shall take notice of shall be the 'Teethy concerning which I find feven observations in the honourable Mr. Boyle's Treatife of filial causes, which I shall briefly recapitulate, and add one or two more.

I. That the Teeth alone, among the Bones, continue to grow in length during a Man's whole Life, as appears by the unfightly Length of one Tooth, when its Oppofite happens to fall or be puU'd out, which was most providently design'd to repair the Wafte that is daily made of them

by

Part 11. in the Ck EAT I on. 265

by the frequent Attrition in Maftication. Here, by the by, I inight advife Men to be careful how they attempt to cure this Blemifh, by filing or cutting off the head of such an overgrown Tooth, left that befal them which happen'd to a certain Nun in Padua, who upon cutting off a Tooth in that manner, was prefen^y convulfed, and fell into an Epilepfy, as Bartholine in his Anatomy reports.

II. That that Part of the Teeth which is extant above the Gums is naked, and not inverted with that sensible Membrane call'd Periojieuniy wherewith the other Bones are covered.

III. That the Teeth are of a clofer and harder Subftance than the rest of the Bones, for the more eafy breaking and comminution of the more folid Aliments, and that they might be more durable, and not so foon worn down by grinding the Food.

IV. That for the nourifhing and cherifliing these so necessary Bones, the all-wife Author of Things has admirably contrived an unfeen Cavity in each side of the Jaw-bone, in* which greater Channel are lodg'd an Artery, a Vein, and a Nerve, which thro' leffer Cavities, as it were thro* Gutters,, fend their Twigs to each particular Tooth.

V. Eecaufe

V. because Infants were for a confiderabic Time to feed upon Milk, which needs no chewing, and left Teeth {hould hurt the tender Nipples of the nurse, Nature hath dcferr'd the ProducSion of them for many Months in a human Fcetus'y whereas those^of divers other Animals, which are reduc'd to feek betimes Food that needs Maftication, are born with them.

VI. The different Figure and Shape of the Teeth is remarkable. That the fore Teeth {hould be form'd broad, and with a thin and (harp Edge, like Chiffels, to cut off and take away a Morfel from any folid Food, call'd therefore Incijores, The next, one on each side, stronger, and deeper rooted, and more pointed, call'd therefore Camm^ in Englijh^ Eye-Teeth, to tear the more tough and refifting sort of Aliments. The rest, call'd Jaw-teeth, or Grinders, in Latin^ Molares^ are made flat and broad a-top, and withal fomewhat uneven and rugged, that by their Knobs and little Cavities they may the better retain, grind, and commix the Aliments.

VII. because the Operations to be performed by the Teeth oftentimes require a considerable Firmnefs and Strength, partly in the Teeth themselves, partly in the Inftruments which move the lower Jaw, which alone is moveable, Nature hath provided this with strong muscles, to make it bear forcibly against the upper Jaw 5 and thus

not

not only plac'd each Tooth in a diflinft Cavity of the Jaw-bone, as it were in a close, strong, and deep Socket, but has furnifli'd the several Sorts of Teeth with Holdfafts fuitable to the Strefs, that by reason of their different Offices they are to be put to , and therefore, whereas the Cutters and Eye-teeth have ufually but one Root (which in these last nam'd is wont to be very lojig) the Grinders, that are employed to crack Nuts, Stones of Fruit, Bones, or other hard Bodies, are furniih'd with three Roots, and in the upper Jaw often with four, because these are pendulous, and the Subftance of the.Jaw some* what fofter.

VIII. The Situation of the Teeth is most convenient, viz, the Molar es or Grinders behind, neareft the Center of Motion, because there is a greater Strength or Force required to chew the Meat than to bite a piece -, and the Cutters before, that they may be ready to cut off a Morfel from any folid Food, to be tranfmitted to the Grin-- ders, '

IX. It is remarkable that the Jaw in Men, and such Animals as are furnifh'd with Grinders, hath an oblique and tranfverfe Motion, which is necessary for chewing and comminution of the Meat, which it is obferv'd not to have in those Ani/nals that want the Molares.

ISiov/

268 Tie Wisdom of G OD Part 11^

Now if (as Galen faith) he that shall marfhal a Company but of Thirty-two Men in due Order, is commended for a fkilful and induftrious Perfon, shall we not admire Nature, which hath so fkilfuUy rank'd and difpos'd this Quire of our Teeth ?

Fifthly^ The Tongue is no less admirable for the Contexture and manifold Ufes of it. Firjiy It is the Organ of Tailing ; for being of a fpongy Subftance, the small Particles of our Meat and Drink being mingled with the Saliva^ eafily infinuate themselves into the Pores of it, and so do either gratefully affeft it, or harflily grate upon it, accordingly as they are figured and mov'd ; and hereby we difcern what is convenient or inconvenient for our Nourifhment. It helps us likewife in the chewing and fwallowing of our Meat. And lajilyy it is the main Inftrument of Speaking, a Quality so peculiar to Man, that no beast could ever attain to it. And altho' Birds have been taught to form some Words, yet they have been but a few, and those learn'd with great difficulty ; but what is the chief, the Birds understand not the meaning of them, nor ufe them as Signs of Things, or their own Conceptions of them, tho' they may ufe them as Exprefiions of their Paffions; as Parrots having been ufed to be fed at the Prolation of certain Words, may afterwards, when they are hungry, pronounce the same. For this Des Cartes makes his

main

main Argument to prove that Brutes have no Cogitation, because the highefh of them could never be brought to lignify thqir Thoughts or Conceptions by any artificial Signs, either Words or Geflures (which, if they had any, they v^ould in all likelihood be forward enough to do;) whereas all Men, both Fools and Mutes, make ufe of Words or other Signs to express their Thoughts about any Subjects that present themselves, which Signs alfo have no reference to any of their Pailionsj whereas the Signs that brute Animals may be taught to ufe, are no other than such as are the Motions of some of their Paffions, Fear, Hope, Joy, Gfc. Hence some of die jVwijld Rabbins did not so abfurdly define a Man * Animal loqiiens^ 2l fpeaking nn!2^n * Creature. Having had occafion juit now to mention the Saliva^ or Spittle, I am put in mind of the eminent Ufe of this Humour, which is commonly taken for an Excrement. because a great Part of our Food is dry, therefore Nature hath provided several Glandules to fepar^te this Juice from the Blood, and no less than four Pair of Channels to convey it into the Mouth, which are of late- Invention, and call'd by Anatomifts Du6ius Salivales^ thro' which the Saliva diftilling continually, serves well to macerate and temper our Meat, and make it fit to be chewed and fwallow'd. If a copious Moifture did not .by these Conduit-Pipes inceffantly slow . down into the Mouths of Horjes and Kine, how were it poilible they should for a long time to- I gether

gether grind and fwallow such dry Meat as Hay and Straw? Moreover, it is ufeful not only in the Mouth, but in the Stomach too, to promote Concodiion, as we have already noted.

Sixthly y To the Mouth fucceeds the Windpipe^ no less wonderful in its Conformation ; for because continual respiration is necessary for the Support of our Lives, it is made with annulary Cartilages, to keep it constantly open, and that the sides of it may not flag and fall together ; and left, when we fwallow, our Meat or Drink ihould fall in there and obftruft it, it hath a strong Shut or Valve, call'd Epiglottis^ to cover it close and ftop it when we fwallow: For the more convenient bending of our Necks, it is not made of one entire continued Cartilage, but of many annular ones, join'd together by strong Membranes, which Membranes are mufcular, compounded of ftraight and circular Fibres, for the more effedlual Contradion of the Windpipe in any strong or violent Expiration or coughing; and left the Afperity or Hardnefs of their Cartilages ftiould hurt the Oejophagus or Gullet, which is tender, and of a fkinny Subftance, or hinder the fwallowing of our Meat, therefore these annulary Griftles are not made round, or entire Circles ; but where the Gullet touches the Windpipe, there to fill up the Circle, is only a soft Membrane, which may eafily give way to the Dilation of the Gullet ; and to demonftrate chat this was defignedly done for this End and Ufe,

so

Part 11. m t/je C^EA^io]^. 271

so foon as the Windpipe enters the Lungs, its Cartilages are no longer deficient, but perfect Circles or Rings, because there was no necefiity they should be lb, but it was more convenient they {hould be entire. Lajily^ For the various Modulation of the Voice, the upper end of the Windpipe is endu*d with several Cartilages and muscles, to contrad: or dilate it, as we would haye our Voice flat or sharp ; and moreover, the whole is continually moiften'd with a glutinous Humour, iffuing out of the small Glandules that are upon its inner Coat, to fence it againfl the (harp Air received in, or Breath forc'd out ; yet is it of quick and tender Senfe, that it may be eafily provoked to cast out by coughing whatever may fall into it from without, or be difcharg'd into it from within.

It is alfo very remarkable which Cafpar Bar^- tholine hath obferv'd in the Gullet, that where it perforateth the Midriff, the carneous Fibres of that mufcular Part are infled:ed and arcuate, as it were a Spinier embracing and clofing it fafl:^ by a great Providence of Nature, left in the perpetual motion of the said Midriff the upper Orifice of the Stomach should gape, and cast out the Viduals as faft as it receiv'd it.

Seventhly, The Heart , which hath been alvvays

efteem'd, and really is one of tlie principal Parts

of the Body, the primum vivem, & ultimum moriens^ the first Part that quickens, and the last

I that

that dies, by its inceflant Motion diftribut;ing the Blood, the Vehicle of Life, and with it the vital Heat and Spirits, throughout the whole Body, whereby it doth continually irrigate, nouriih, and keep hot, and fupple all the Members. Is it not admirable that from this Fountain of Life and Heat there should be Channels and Conduit-pipes to every, even the least and m.oft remote Part of the Body ? Juft as if from one Water-house there should be Pipes conveying the Water to every house in a Town, and to every Room in each house ; or from one Fountain in a Garden there ihould be little Channels or Dikes cut to every Bed, and every Plant growing therein, as we have seen more than once done beyond the Seas. I confefs the Heart seems not to be design'd to so noble an Ufe as is generally believ'd, that is, to be the Fountain or Confervatory of the vital Flame, and to infpire the Blood therewith (for the Lungs serve rather for the Accenfion, or maintaining that Flame, the Blood receiving there from the Air those Particles which are one Part of the Pabuhimy or Fuel thereof, and so impregnated, running back to the Heart) but to serve as a Machine to receive the Blood from the Veins, and to force it out by the Arteries thro* the whole Body, as a Syringe doth any Liquor, though not by the same Artifice ; and yet this is no ignoble Ufe, the continuance of the Circulation of the Blood being indifpenfably necessary for, the quickning and enlivening of all the Members of the Body, and fupplying of Matter to the Brain, for the Preparation of the animal Spirit^.

rits, the Inftrumenrs of all Senfe and Motion. Now for this Ufe of receiving and pumping out of the Blood, the Heart is admirably contrived. For, Firfl^ being a mufcular Part, the Sides of it are composed of two Orders of Fibres, running circularly or fpirally from Bafe to Tip, contrarily one to the other, and so being drawn or contrad:ed contrary ways, do violently conftringe ai^ ftraiten the Ventricles, and ftrongly force out the Blood, as we have formerly intimated ; then the Veffels vi^e call Arteries^ which carry from the Pleart to the several Parts, have Valves, v^hich open outwards, like Trap-doors, and give the Blood a free passage out of the Heart, but will not suffer it to return back again thither; and tlie Veins^ which bring it back from the several Members to the Heart, have Valves or Trap-doors, which open inwards, so as to give way unto the Blood to run into the Heart, but prevent it from running back again that way ; befides, the Arteries consist of a quadruple Coar, the third of which is made up of annular or orbicular carneous Fibres to a good thicknefs, and is of a mufcular nature, after every Pulfe of the Heart, ferving to contrad the Veffel fucceflively with incredible Celerity, so by a kind of periftaltick Motion impelling the Blood onwards to the capillary Extremities and thro' the muscles with great Force and Swiftnefs 3 so the Pulfe of -the Arte/ies is not only caus'd by the Pulfation of the Heart driving the Blood thro* them in manner

T of

of a Wave or Flufh, as Des Cartes and others would have it, but by the Coats of the Arteries

themselves, which the Experiments

* Cartes Ep. of a Certain * Lovai?i Phyfician (the

df Sep. ^' ^'^' fi^'f*^ whereof is Galen i) do, in my

Opinion, make good against him. *' first, faith he, if you flit the Artery, and " thruft into it a Pipe, so big as to fill the Cavi- " ty of it, and cast a ftrait Ligature upon that *' Part of the Artery containing the Pipe, and so " bind it faft to the Pipe ; notwithflanding the " Blood hath free passage thro' the Pipe, yet " will not the Artery beat below the Ligature; ^' but do but take off the Ligature, it will com- " mence again to beat immediately." But because one might be ready to reply to this Experiment, that the reason why v/hen bound it did not beat, was because the Current of the Blood being ftraiten'd by the Pipe, when beneath the Pipe it came to have more liberty, was not sufficient to ftretch the Coat of the Artery, and so cause a Pulfe, but when the Ligature was taken off it might slow between the inclos'd Tube and the Coat of the Artery ; therefore he adds another, which clearly evinces that this could not be the reason, but that it is fomething flowing down the Coats of the Artery that causes the Pulfe ; that is, if you fl:raiten the Artery never so much, provided the Sides of it do not quite meet and ftop all passage of the Blood, the. Veffel will notwithfl:anding continue still to beat below or beyond the Coardation. So we see some PhyflciaaS;>

Part If. in tha Creation. 275

cians, both ancient (as Galen) and modern, were of opinion that the Pulfe of the Arteries was owing to their Coats; tho' the first that I know of who obferv'd the third Coat of an Artery to be a mufcular Body, composed of annular Fibres, was Dn Willis. This mention of the periftaltick Motion puts me in mind of an ocular Demonftration of it in the Gullet of Kine when they cbew the Cud, which I have often beheld with pleasure ; for after they have fwallow'd one Morfel, if you look ftedfaftly upon their Throat you will foon see another afcend, and run pretty fwiftly all along the Throat up to the Mouth, which it could not do, unless it were impell'd by the fucceffive Contradion or periftaltick Motion of the Gullet continually following ; and it is remarkable that these ruminant Creatures have a Power by the Imperium of their Wills of dire- (fting this periftaltick Motion upwards or downwards. I shall add no more concerning the Heart, but that it and the Brain do mutuus operas tradere^ enable one another to work ; for, firfi^ the Brain cannot itself live unless it receive continual Supplies of Blood from the He:irr, but less can it perform its Fundlions, of preparing and diftributing the animal Spirits, nor the Heart Pulfe, unless it receives Spirits or fomething elfe that defcends from the Brain by the Nerves \ for do but cut afunder the Nerves that go from the Brain to the Heart, the Motion thereof, in most perfed: and hot Creatures, ceafeth immediately. Which Part began this Round is the Queftion.

T 2 ^ I find

276 neWisDouof GOD PartlL

I find in the Philofopbical T^ranfaBlom^ N<5 280. some notable Obiervations of the famous Anatomift ^x, William Cowper^ concerning the Artifice of Nature in regulating the Motion of the Blood in the Veins and Arteries, to aflTift and promote it in the one, and moderate it in the other, which I shall give you in his own \Yords.

" As the Arteries (faith he) are known to export the Blood, so the Veim to carry it back again to the Heart ; but having already described their Extremities, we come now to the large Trunks of the Veins-, and here, as in the Arteries^ we find the common Pradlice of Nature, in difpofing the Branches of Veins to difcharge the refluent Blood into the next adjacent Trunk, and so on to the Heart. As the Arteries afford abundance of instances of Checks given to the Velocity of the Current of Blood thro* several Parts, so the Veins supply us with as many Artifices to afljft its regular Return to the Hearty as well as favour those Contrivances in the Arteries,

" The carotid, vertebral, and fplenick Arteries, are not only varioufly contorted, but alfo here and there dilated, to moderate the Motion of the Blood; so the Veins that correfpond to those Arteries are alfo varioufly dilated. The Beginnings of the internal Jugular shawQ a bulbous Cavity, which are diverticula to the refluent Blood in the Si?2us's of the Dura Mater, I . " left

Part IL i7t the Creation. 277

" left it should defcend too faft into the ^ugu- " lars. The hke has been taken notice of by ** Dr. Lower in the vertebral Sijtuss. The fple- " nick Vein has divers Cells opening into it near " its Extremities in human Bodies, but in Qua- " drupeds the Cells open into the Trunks of the " fplenick Veins.

" Thtjpermatick Veins do more than equal the " ^Length of the Arteries of the l^ejies m Men ; " their various Divifions, and several Inofcula- " tions, and their Valves, are admirably contri- " ved to fufpend the Weight of the Blood, in or- " der to difcharge it into the larger Trunks of " the Veins-, and were it not that the refluent " Blood from the Tejies is a Po?idus to the influ- " ent Blood from the Arteries, and still lellens " its Current in the Tejies, these fpermatick Veins, " like those of other Parts, might have difcharg'd " the Blood into the next adjacent Trunk.

" Who can avoid Surprize at the Art of Na- " ture, in contriving the Veins that bring part of ** the refluent Blood from the lower Parts of the " Body, when they consider the necessity of pla- " cing the human Heart, as well as that of most " Quadrupeds, so far from the Center of the " Body towards its upper Part; it is for chat " End neceflfary that the large Trunks of the " Veins and Arteries {hould not afl!bciate each " other; for if all the Blood fent to the lower " Parts by the defcending Trunk of the Aorta^ " should return to the Heart again by one fingle " Trunk (as it is fent out from thence) the-

T 3 " Weight

Weight of so much Blood in the afcending Trunk of the Fena Cava would oppofe all the Force the Heart could give it from the Arteries, and hinder its Afcent ; for this reason the Vena Azygos ox fine Pari is contriv'd to convey the Blood fent to the muscles of the Back and T'horax into the defcending Trunk of the Vena Cava above the Heart 5 hence it is evident that more Blood comes into the Heart by the defcending or upper Trunk of the Vena Cavay than paffes out by the afcending Trunk of the Aorta ; nor does the Quantity of Blood conveyed to the Heart by the fuperior Trunk of the Vena Cava, seem, without some other design in Nature befides tranfporring it thither, to free the inferior Trunk from its Weight ; but perhaps it was necessary so much Blood should be ready there to join with the Chyle, for its better Mixture, before it reaches the right Auricle of the Heart." So far Mr. Cowper.

Eighthly, The next Part I fball treat of shall be the Hand, this opyzvov opyximy or fuperlative Inftrument, which serves us for such a multitude of Ufes, as it is not eafy to enumerate j whereto, if we consider the Make and Structure of it, we shall find it wonderfully adapted. Firf, It is divided into four Fingers bending forward, and one oppofite to them bending backwards, and of greater Strength than any of them fingly, which ^'e call the Thumb, to join with them feverally

or

or united, whereby it is fitted to lay hold of Objeds of any Size or Quantity -, the lead things, as any small fingle Seed, are taken up by the Thumb and fore Finger, those a Httie greater by the Thumb and two Fingers, which alfo we chiefly employ to manage the Needle in fewing and the Pen in writing; when we would take up a greater Quantity of any thing, we make ufe of the Thumb and all the Fingers; fometimes we ufe one Finger only, as in pointing at any thing, picking things out of Holes or long and narrow VefTeb; fometimes all feverally at one time, as in flopping the Strings when we play upon any mufical Inilruments. Secondly^ The Fingers are ftrengthen'd with several Bones, jointed together for Motion, and furnifli'd with several muscles and Tendons, like so many PuUics, to bend them circularly forwards, which is most convenient for the firm holding and griping of any Objed:^ which of how great, constant and ncceflary Ufe it is in pulling or drawing, but especially in taking up and retaining any sort of Tool or Inftrument to work withal in Hufbandry and all mechanick Arts, is so obvious to every Man's observation, that I need not fpend Time to instance in Particulars ; m.oreover, the several Fingers are furnifli'd with several muscles, to extend and open the Hand, and to move to the Right and Left ; and so this divifion and motion of the Fingers dQth not hinder but that the whole Hand may be employed as if it were all of a piece, as we see it is, either expanded, as in flriking out,

T 4 fmooth-

fmoothing and folding up of Clothes, and some mechanick Ufes ; or contraded, as in fighting, kneading of Dough, and the like ; it is alfo notable, and indeed wonderful, that the Tendons bending the middle Joint of the Fingers should be perforated, to give Paflage to the Tendons of the muscles which draw the uppermoft Joints, and all bound down close to the Bone with strong Fillets, left they ihould ftart up and hinder the Hand in its Work, standing like so many Bow-ftrings. Thirdly^ The Fingers-ends are ftrengthen'd with Nails, as we fortify the ends of our Staves and Forks with Iron Hoops or Ferules ; which Nails serve not only for Defence, but for Ornament, and many Ufes. The Skin upon our Fingers-ends is thin, and of most exquifite Senfe, to help us judge of any thing we handle. If now I should go about to reckon up the several Ufes of this Inftrument, Time would fooner fail me than Matter. By the help of this we do all our Works, we build ourselves houses to dwell in , we make ourselves Garments to wear, we plow and fow our Grounds with Corn, drefs and cultivate our Vineyards, Gardens and Orchards, gather and lay up our Grain and Fruits, we prepare and make ready our Victuals ; Spinning, Weaving, Fainting, Carving, Engraving, and that divinely invented Art of Writing, whereby we tranfmit our own Thoughts to Pofterity, and converfe with and participate the observations and Inventions of them that are long ago dead, all perform'd by this -, this is the only Inftrument

ftrument for all Arts whatfoevcr, no Improvement to be made of any experimental Knowledge without it. Hence (as Arijiotle faith well) they do amifs that complain that Man is worfe dealt with by Nature than any other Creatures; whereas they have some Hair, some Shells, some Wool, some Feathers, some Scales, to defend themselves from the Injuries of the Weather, Man alone is bo;*n naked and without all Covering ; whereas they have natural Weapons to defend themselves and offend their Enemies, some Horns, some Hoofs, some Teeth, some Talons, some Claws, some Spurs and Beaks ; Man hath none of all these, but is weak and feeble, and unarm'd fent into the World : why, a Hand, with reason to ufe it, fupplies the Ufes of all these, that's both a Horn and a Hoof, a Talon and a Tulk, &c. because it enables us to ufe Weapons of these and other fafhions, as Swords, and Spears, and Guns; befides, this Advantage a Man hath of them, that whereas they cannot at pleasure change their Coverings, or lay afide their Weapons, or make ufe of others as Occafion serves, but must abide Winter and Summer, Night and Day with the same Cloathing on their Backs, and sleep with their Weapons upon them -, a Man can alter his Cloathing according to the Exigency of the Weather, go warm in Winter and cool in Summer, cover up himself hot in the Night, and. lay afide his Cloaths in the Day, and put on or off more or fewer, according as his Work and Exercife is; and can, as Occafion requires, make

Ufe

Ufe of divert Sorts of Weapons, and Choice of such at all Turns as are most proper and convenient; whereby we are enabled to fubdue and rule over all other Creatures, and ufe for our own Behoof those Qualities wherein they excel, as the Strength of the Ox, the Valour and Swiftnefs of the horse, the Sagacity and Vigilancy of the Dog, and so make them as it were our own. Had we wanted this Member in our Bodies we must have liv'd the Life of Brutes, without house or Shelter, but what the Woods and Rocks would have afforded, without Cloaths or Covering, without Corn, or Wine, or Oil, or any other Drink but Water ; without the Warmth and Comfort, or other Ufes of Fire, and so without any artificial bak'd, boird, or roaft Meats; but must have fcrambled with the wild beasts for Crabs, and Nuts, and Acorns, and such other things as the Earth puts forth of her own accord ; we had laid open and exposed to Injuries, and had been unable to refift or defend ourselves against almost the weakeft Creature.

The remaining Parts I shall but briefly run over.

That tht Back-Bone (hould be divided into so many Vertebres for commodious bending, and not be one entire rigid Bone, which being of that Length would have been often in danger of fnapping in funder ; that it should be made tapering, in form of a Pillar, the lower Vertebres being the broadeft and largeft, and the fuperior in order lesser and leffer, for the greater Fkmnefs and Stability

Part 11. in /^^ C r e at i o n. 2 83

bility of the Trunk of the Body 5 that the several Vertebres (hould be so elegantly and artificially compacted and join'd together, that they are as strong and firm as if they were but one Bone \ that they (hould be all perforated in the middle, with a large Hole for the fpinal Marrow or Pith to pass along, and each Particular have a Hole on each side to tranfmit the Nerves to the muscles of the Body, to convey both Senfe and Motion ; that by reason of the fore-mention d close Connexion of the Vertebres, it should be so form'd as not to admit any great Flexure or Recefs from a right Line any angular, but only a moderate circular bending, left the fpinal Pith should be comprefs'd, and so the free Intercourfe or passage of the Spirits to and fro be ftopt.

One observation relating to the Motion of the Bones in their Articulations I shall here add, that is, the Care that is taken and the Provifion that is made for the eafy and expediate motion of them, there being to that purpose a twofold Liquor .prepared, for the Inundion and Lubrification of their Heads or Ends. i. An oily one, furni{l:i'd by the Marrow. 2. A mucilaginous, supply'd by certain Glandules feated in the Articulations, both which together make up the most apt and proper Mixture for this Ufe and End that can be invented or thought upon 5 for not only both the Ingredients are of a lubricating nature, but there is this Advantage gain'd from their Compofiiion, that they do mutually improve one

another \

another ; for the Mucilage adds to the Lubricity of the Oil, and the Oil preferves the Mucilage from Infpiffation, and contracting the Coniiftency of a Gelly. Now this Inundlion is ufeful, indeed necessary, for three Ends chiefly.

1. For the facilitating of Motion. For tho' the Ends of the Bones are very fmooth, yet were they dry they could not with that Readinefs and Eafe, nay, not without great Difficulty, yield to and obey the Plucks and Attraftions of the motory muscles ; as we see Clocks and Jacks, tho' the Screws and Teeth of the Wheels and Nuts be never so fmooth and polilh'd, yet if they be not oil'd will hardly move, tho' you clog them with never so much Weight ; but if you apply but a little Oil, they prefently whirl about very fwiftly with the tenth Part of the Force.

2. For preferving the Ends of the Bones from an Incalefcency, which they, being hard and folid Bodies, would necelTarily contradt from a fwift and long continuing Motion 5 such as that of running, or mowing, or threfhing, orfawing, and the like, if they afe immediately touch'd and rubb'd against one another with that Force they must needs do, especially in running, the whole Weight of the Body bearing upon the Joints of the Thighs and Knees. So we see in the Wheels of Waggons or Coaches, the Hollows of the Naves, by their fwift Rotations on the Ends of the Axle-trees, produce a Heat, fometimes so intenfe

tenfe as to set them on fire ; to prevent which they (land in need to be frequently anointed or belmear'd with a Mixture of Greafe and Tar, imitating the fore-mention'd natural Compofition of Oil and Mucilage. Nay, Bodies fofter a great deal than Metals contrad: a great Heat by Attrition, as is evident from those black circular Lines we see on Boxes, Diflics, and other turp'd Veflels of Wood, which are the EfFed:s of Ignition, caus'd by the Preffure of an edg'd Stick upon the Veffel turn'd nimbly in the Lathe. And if there had not been a Provifion in the Joints against such a preternatural Incalefcence upon their violent motion, this would have made a flothful World, and confin'd us to leifurely and deliberate Movements, when there were the most urgent and hafty Occafions to quicken us.

3. P'or the preventing of Attrition, and wearing down the ends of the Bones by their motion and rubbing one against another, which is so violent and lafting fometimes, that it is a Wonder any Inundion should fuffice to fecure their Heads from wafting and confumption. I have often seen the Tops of the Teeth (which are of a harder Subftance than the rest of the Bones) worn off by Maftication, in Perfons who have loft most of their Grinders, and been compell'd constantly to make ufe of three or four only in chevvdng,-.so low^ that at last the inward Marrow arid Nerve lay bare, and they could no longer for Pain make ufe of them ; (o that bad there not been this Provifion

286 neWisDOM of GOD Part IL

vifion made for the anointing the Bones, the curious Workmanfhip of Nature in adapting them so exadly one to another, as was most fit for the eafy Performance of all those Motions to which they were deftin d, would not fuffice for Ufe ; but the ftirring Part of Mankind would foon find themselves fitter for an Hofpital than for Adion and the Purfuit of business.

these observations I acknowledge myself to * M r/ ^^^^ borrowed of a late ingenious

Haz^ers, ^^^"^ * Writer of OJieokgy, who thus concludes his discourse upon this Subjedl. And here we cannot avoid the Notice of the vijible Footjieps of an infinite reason^ which as they are deeply imprefsd upon the Univerje^ so more especially on the sensible Farts of it in those rational Contrivances which arefoimd in Animals: And we can never fufficiently admire the wisdom and Fro* vidence of our great Creator^ who has given all Farts in these animated Bei?2gSy not only such a StruBure as renders them fit for their necejfary Motions and defignd FunBions^ but withal the Benefit and Advantage of whatever may preferve themy or facilitate their ABion.

Moreover, the Artifice of Nature is wonderful in the Conflrudlion of the Bones that are to fupport the Body, and to bear great Burdens, or to be employed in strong Exercifes, they being made hollow, for Lightnefs and StifFnefs. For we have before noted, a Body that is hollow may be

demon-

Part 11. /;/ /^^ Creation. 287

demonftrated to be more rigid and inflexible than a folid one of the same Subilance and Weight ; so that here is Provifion made for the Stiffnefs and Lightnefs of the Bones. But the Ribs, which are not to bear any great Weight, or to be ftrongly exercis'd, but only to fence the Breaft, have no Cavity in them, and towards the fore part or Breaft are broad and thin, that so they might bend and give way without danger of Frailure ; when bent returning by their elaftick Property to their Figure again. Yet is not the Hollow of the Bones altogether ufelefs, but serves to contain the Marrow, which fupplies an Oil for the maintaining and inundion of the Bones and Ligaments, and so facilitating their Motion in the Articulations ; and particularly (which we mentioned not before) of the Ligaments, preferving them from Drynefs and Rigidity, and keeping them fupple and flexible, and ready to comply with all the Motions and postures of that moveable Part to which they appertain ; and lastly, to fecure them from Difruption, which, as strong as they are, they would be in some danger of, upon a great and fudden Stretch and Contortion, if they were dry, Gfc. See more to this purpose in the Treatife fore quoted, ^.183.

That whereas the Breaft is encompafs'd with

Ribs, the Belly is left free, that it might give way

to the motion of the Midriff in respiration, and

to the necessary Reception of Meat and Drink,

I ^ as

as alfo for the convenient bending of the Body ; and in Females for that extraordinary Extenfion that is requifite in the time of their Pregnancy.

That the Lungs (hould be made up of such innumerable Air-pipes and Veficles, interwoven with Blood- Veffels, in order to purify, ferment, or supply the fanguineous Mafs w^ith Nitro-aerial Particles, which rufli in by their elaftick Power upon the mufcular Extenfion of the Thorax, and so feed the vital Flame and Spirits ; for upon obflru6ling this Communication all is prefently extind, no Circulation, no Motion, no Heat, nor any Sign of Life remains.

That the Stomach should be membranous, and capable of Dilatation and Contraction, according to the Quantity of Meat contained in it ; that it should be fituate under the Liver, which by its Heat might cherifli it, and contribute to Concod:ion; that it (hould be endu'd with an acid or glandulous Ferment, or some corruptive Quality, for so fpeedy a DifTolution of the Meat and Preparation of Chyle ; that after Concoilion it should have an Ability of contradting itself, and turning out the Meat.

That the Guts should immediately receive it from the PhyloruSy farther elaborate, prepare

pare and feparate it, driving by their periftaltick Motion the Chyle into the Ladteals, and the excrementitious Parts to the Podex, from whence there is no Regrefs, unless when the Valve of the . Colon is torn and relax'd. But for the curious Strudure of these Parts see more in Kerkringiusy Glijfony Willis^ and Preyer,

^That the Bladder {hould be made of a membranous Subftance, and so extremely dilatable, for receiving and containing the Urine till opportunity of emptying it j that it should have Shuts for the Ends of the Ureters, so artificially contriv'd as to give the Urine free entrance, but to flop all passage backward, so that they will not tranfmit the Wind, tho' it be ftrongly blown and forc'd in.

That the Liver should continually feparate the Choler from the Blood, and empty it into the Inteftines, where there is good Ufe for it, not only to provoke Dejedion, but alfo to attenuate the Chyle, and render it so fubtile and fluid as to enter in at the Orifices of the ladeous Veins.

That in the Kidneys there should be such innumerable little Siphons or Tubes, conveying the urinous Particles to the Pelves and Ureters, first discover'd by Belli??!, and illuftrated by Malpighi-, that indeed all the Glands of the Body should be Congeries of various Sorts of Veflels cur'd, circumgyrated and complicated together, whereby they. give the Blood time to flop and feparate

U . thro',

thro* the Pores of the capillary Veffels into the fecretory ones, which afterwards all exonerate themselves into one common DuBus ; as may be seen in the Works of Dr. Whaf^touy Graaf^ Bartholiney Rudback^ Bilfius^ Malpighi^ Nuck^ and others. That the Glands fhoiild feparate such Variety of Humours, all different in Colour, Tafte, Smell, and other Qualities.

Finally, That all the Bones, and all the muscles, and all the Veffels of the Body, {hould be so admirably contrived, and adapted, and compacted together for their several Motions and Ufes, and- that most geometrically^ according to the ftrifteft Rules of Mecba?2icks -, that if in the whole Body you change the Figure, Situation and Conjunftion but of one Part, if you diminifh or increafe the Bulk and Magnitude ; in fine, if you endeavour any Innovation or Alteration, you marr and fpoil instead of mending ; how can all these things put together but beget Wonder and Aftonifhment ?

In the muscles alone there seems to be more Geometry than in all the artificial Engines in the World J and therefore the different Motions of Animals are a Subjed fit only for the great Mathematicians to handle, amongft whom Sleno, Dr. Croo?2, and above all, Alphofifo Borelli, have made their Effays towards it.

That under one Skin there should be such infinite Variety of Parts, varioufly mingled, hard with soft, fluid with fix'd, folid with hollow, those in rest with those with Motion ; some

I with

with Cavities, as Morteffes to receive, others w^ith Tenons to fit those Cavities, all these so packed and thruft so close together, that there is no unncceflary Vacuity in the whole Body, and yet so far from clafliing or interfering one with another, or hindring each others Motions, that they do all friendly confpire, all help and aflift mutually one the other, all concur in one general End and Delign, the Good and Prefervation of the whole, are certainly Arguments and Effefts of infinite wisdom and Council ; so that he must need^ be worfe than mad that can find in his Heart to imagine all these to be cafual and fortuitous, or not provided and design'd by a most wife and intelligent cause.

Every Part is cloath*d, join'd together and corroborated by Membranes, which upon several Occafions (as Extravafations of Humours, Compreflions or Obftrudions of Veffels) are capable of a prodigious Extenfion, as we see in the Hydatides of the Female Tefticles or Ovaries, in hydropical Tumors of the LyrnphceduEis^ of the Scro^ turn -or Peritonceum^ out of the last of which alone twenty, and even forty Gallons of Water have been drawn by a Pm-acentefis, or Tapping ; for which we have the undoubted Authority of ^idpiiis^ Meekren^ Pechlin^ Blaftus ^ and other medical Writers. What vast Sacks and Bags are necefl^ary to contain such a CoUedion of Water, which seems to ifTue from i\\cLy77tph^duffs^ either delacerated or obftrudled, and exonerating themselves into the Foldings, or between the Duplicatures of the Membranes ?

U 2 ^ those

those Parts which one would think were of little Ufe in the Body, ferving chiefly to fill up empty Spaces, as the Fat^ if examined ftridly, will be found very beneficial and ferviceable to it. I. To cherifh and keep it warm, by hindring the Evaporation of the hot Steams of Blood; as Cloaths keep us warm in Winter, by refleding and doubling the Heat. 2. To nourifli and maintain the Body for some time when Food is wanting, ferving as Fuel to preferve and continue the natural Heat of Blood, which requires an oily or iulphurous Pabulum as well as Fire. Hence upon long Abftinence and fafting the Body grows lean. Hence alfo some beasts, as the Marmotto^ or Mus AlpinuSy a Creature as big or bigger than a Rabbet y which abfconds all Winter, doth (as Hildanus tells us) live upon its own Fat -, for in the Autumn^ when it fhuts itself up in its Hole (which it digs with its Feet like a Rabbet, making a Neft with Hay or Straw to lodge itself warm) it is very fat; [Hildanus took out above a Pound and a half of Fat between the Skin and muscles, and a Pound out of the Abdome}i\ but on the contrary, in the Spring-time, when it comes forth again, very lean, as the Hunters experience in those they then take. 3. The internal Fat serves for the Defence and Security of the Veffels, that they might lie soft, and be fafely convey'd in their passage, wherefore it is especially gathered about them.

By what Pores, or Pafiages, or Veffels, the Fat

is feparated from the Blood when it is redundant,

I and

Part 11. in t&e Cre AT loi^. 293

and again abforb'd into it when it is deficient, ia a Matter of curious Enquiry, and worthy to be induftrioufly fought out by the most fagacious and dextrous Anatomifts. The Veffels whereinto it is received, and wherein contain'd, are by the Microfcope detedted to be Bladders, and those doubtlefs perforated and pervious one into another; and tho' for their exceffive Subtilty and TJiinnefs they appear not in a lean Body, yet feerji to have been primitively formed and provided by Nature to receive the Fat upon occalion. Why the Fat is collecfled chiefly about some particular Parts and Veifels, and not others; as for Example, the Reins and the Caul, I ealily confent with Galen and others the reason to be, the cherifhing and keeping warm of those Parts upon which such Veffels are fpread -, so the Caul serves for the warming the lower Belly, like an Apron or piece of woollen Cloth. Hence a certain Gladiator, whose Caul Galen cut out, was so liable to suffer from the Cold, that he was conftrain'd to keep his Belly constantly cover'd with Wool ; for the Inteftines containing a great deal of Food, there to undergo its last Concoftion, and no Veffels of Blood penetrating it and flowing thro' it to keep it warm, they had need be defended from the Injuries of the external Air by outward Coverings. Why there should be such copious Fat gathered about the Reins to inclofe them, i§ not so-eafy to difcern, but furely there is a great and constant Heat requir'd there, for the Separatiori pf the Urine from the Blood, the constant Sepa-

U 3 ration

294 77)eWisr>ou of GOD Part IL

ration and Excretion whereof is necessary for the Prefervation of Life ; and we see if the Blood be in any degree chill'd, the Secretion of Urine is in a great measure ftopt, and the Serum cast upon the Glandules of the Mouth and Throat; and if the Blood be extraordinarily heated by Exercife, or otherwife, it calls off its Serum plentifully by Sweat, which may be effefted by the fwift motion of the Blood thro' the Glandules of the Skin, where its plentiful Streams being ftrengthen'd and conftipated into a Liquor, force their way thro' those Emundtories, which at other times tranfmit only infenfible Vapours. Some such Effeds may be wrought upon the Blood by the Heat of the Kidneys. Certain it is that the Humours excern'd by Sweat and Urine are near a-kin, if not the same 5 and therefore it is wonthy the consideration, whether there might not be some Ufe made of fweating in a Suppreffion of Urine. But I digrefs too far.

I {hall only add to this Particular, that because the design of Nature in coUedting Fat in th^fe places is for the fore-mention d Ufe, it hath lor the effeding thereof fitted the Veffels there with Pores or Paflfages proper for the Separation and Tranfmiffion of it.

I (hould now proceed to treat of the Generation and Formation of the Foetus in the Wpmb> but that is a Subjed too difficult for me to handle, the Body ot Man and other Animals being

formed

Part jr. Z;^ />5^ Creation. 295

form'd in the dark Recefles of the Matrix^ or, as the Ffalmiji phrafes it, PfaL cxxxix. 14. made in Jecret^ and curioujly wrought in the loivejl Parts of the Earth. This Work is so admirable and unaccountable, that neither the Atheifts nor mechanical Philofopher.s have attempted to declare the Manner and process of it, but have (as I noted before) very cautioufly and prudently broke off their Syftems of natural Philofophy here, and left this Point untouch'd j and those Accounts which some of them have attempted to give of the Formation of a few of the Parts, are so exceffively absurd and ridiculous, that they need no other Confutation than ha^ ha^ he. And I have already farther (hewn, that to me it seems impoffible that Matter divided into as minute and fubtle Parts as you will or can imagine, and those mov'd according to what Catholick Laws foever can be devis'd, should without the Prelidency and Diredion of some intelligent Agent, by the mere Agitation of a gentle Heat, run itself into such a curious Machine as the Body of Man is.

Yet must it be confefs'd that the Seed of Animals is admirably qualify'd to be failiion'd and form'd by the Plajiick Nature into an organical Body, containing the Principles or component Particles of all the leveral homogeneous Parts thereof; for indeed every Part of the Body seems ta club and contribute to the Seed, elfe why {hould Parents that are born blind or deaf, or that want a Finger or any other Part, or have one full 4 periiuous.

perfluous, fometimes generate Children that have the same Defers or Imperfedions 5 and yet (which is wonderful) nothing of the Body or groffer Matter of the Seed comes near the first Principle of the Fcetia^ or in some so much as enters the Womb, but only. some contagious Vapour or fubtle RJiuviiims thereof, which seems to animate the Gemina or Cicatricula of the Egg contain d in the Female Ovary before it paffes thro' the T^iihe^ or Cornua into the Uterus. How far the Animalcules obferv'd in the Seed of Males may contribute to Generation, I leave to the more fagacious Philofophers to enquire, and (hall here content myself with referring the Reader to the several Letters publifli'd by Mr. Lewenhoek,

But to what (hall we attribute th^Fatus its Likenefs to the Parents, or omitting them, to the precedent Progenitors; as I have obferv'd, some Parents that have been both black hair'd, to have generated most red hair'd Children ; because their Anceftors Hair hath been of that Colour ? Or why are Twins so often extremely aiike ? Whether this is owing to the Efficient, or to the Matter ?

those Effluvia we fpake of in the Male Seed, as fubtile as they are, yet have they a great, if not the greatest Stroke in Generation, as is clearly demonftrable in a Mule, which doth more resemble the Male Parent, that is, the Afs, than the Fernale, or horse. But now, why such different

rent Species should not only mingle together, but alfo generate an Animal, and yet that that hybridous Produdion (hould not again generate, and so a new Race be carry 'd on, but Nature fhouid flop here, and proceed no farther, is to me a Myftery, and unaccountable.

One thing relating to Generation I cannot omjt j that is, the Conftrudion of a Sett of temporary Parts (like Scaffolds in a Building) to serve a present End, which are afterwards laid afide^ afford a strong Argument of Council and design. Now for the Ufe of the Young during its Inclo-r fure in the Womb there are several Parts form'd, as the Membranes inveloping it, call'd the SecundineSy the umbilical Veffels, one Vein, and two Arteries; the Uracbus^ to convey the Urine out of the Bladder, and the Placenta Uterina-, part whereof fall away at the Birth, as the Secundines and Placenta ; others degenerate into Ligaments, as the UrachuSy and part of the umbilical Vein ; befides which, because the F^tus during its abode in the 'Womb hath no Ufe of respiration by the Lungs, the Blood doth not all, I may say, not the greatest part of it, slow thro' them, but there are two passages or Channels contrived, one call'd the Foramen Ovale^ by which part of the Blood brought by the Vena Cava paffeth immediately into the Left Ventricle of the Heart, withput entrjng the Right at all; the other is a large arterial Channel paffnig from the pulmonary Artery immediately into the Aortay or great Artery,

which

which likewife derives part of the Blood thither, without running at all into the Lungs; these two are clos'd up foon after the Child is born, when it breathes no more (as I may so say) by the Placenta Vterina, but respiration by the Lungs is needful for it. It is here to be noted, that tho* the Lungs be form'd so foon as the other Parts, yet during the abode of the F^stus in the Womb they lie by as ufelefs. In like manner I have obferv'd, that in ruminating Creatures the three foremoft Stomachs, not only during the continuance of the Young in the Womb, but so long as it is fed with Milk, are unemployed and ufelefs, the Milk pafling immediately into the fourth.

Another observation I ftiali add concerning Generation, which is of some moment, because it takes away some Conceffions of Naturalifts that give countenance to the Atheifts fiditious and ridiculous Account of the first Produftion of Mankind and other Animals, viz. That all Sorts of Infeds, yea, and some Quadrupeds too, as Frogs and Mice, are produc'd spontaneously. My observation and Affirmation is, that there is no such thing in nature as aequivocal or spontaneous Generation, but that all Animals, as well small as great, not excluding the vileft and moid contemptible Infed:, are generated by animal Parents of the same Species with themselves; that noble Italian Virtuofo Francijco Redi haying experimented, that no putrify'd Fleih (which one would think were the moil likely of any thing)

will

Part 11. in /^^^ C r e at i o n. 299

will of itself, if all Infeds be carefully kept from it, produce any. The same Experiment I remember Dr. WilkinSy late Bifhop of Chejier, told me had been made by some of the Royal Society. No instance against this Opinion doth so much puzzle me as Worms bred in the Inteftines of Man and other Animals. But feeing the round Worms do manifeftly generate, and probably the other Kin;is too, it is likely they come originally from Seed, which, how it was brought into the Guts, may afterwards possibly be discover'd. Moreover, I am inclinable to believe that all Plants too, that themselves produce Seed (which are all but some very imperfed: ones, which scarce deferve the Name of Plants) come of Seed themselves. For the great Naturalift Malpighius^ to make Experiment whether Earth would of itself put forth Plants, took some purpofely digged out of a deep place and put it into a Glafs Veffel, the top whereof he cover'd with Silk many times doubled, and ftrain'd over it, which would admit the Water and Air to pass thro', but exclude the least Seed that might be wafted by the Wind ; the Event was, that no Plant at all fprang up in it. Nor need we wonder how in a Ditch, Bank or Grafs-plat newly digged, or in the Fen-Banksv in the IJle of Ely, Muftard should abundantly spring up^ where in the Memory of Man none hath been known to grow, for it might come of Seed, which had lain there more than a Man's •^Age, some of the Antients mentioning some Seeds that retain their Fecundity forty Years ; and I

have

have found in a Paper received from a Friend, but whom I have forgotten, that Melon-Seeds after thirty Years are best for raifing of Melons. As for the Muftard that fprung up in the IJJe of Ely^ tho' there had never been any in that Country, yet might it have been brought down in the Channels by the Floods, and so being thrown up the Banks together with the Earth, might germinate and grow there.

And indeed a spontaneous Generation of Animals and Plants, upon due Examination, will be found to be nothing less than a Creation of them; for after the Matter was made, and the Sea and dry Land feparated, how is the Creation of Plants and Animals defcrib'd, but by a commanding, that is, effeftually caufing the Waters and Earth to produce their several Kinds without any Seed ? Now Creation being the Work of Omnipotency, and incommunicable to any Creature, it must be beyond the Power of Nature or natural Agents to produce Things after that manner. And as for God Almighty, he is said to have refted from his Work of Creation after the feventh Day. But if there be any spontaneous Generation, there was nothing done at the Creation but what is daily done y for the Earth and Water produced Animals then without Seed, and so they do still •

because some, I understand, have been offended at my confident Denial of all spontaneous Ge* neration, accounting it too bold and groundlefs,

Ifhall

I shall a little enlarge upon it, and give my reasons, in order to their Satisfadlion.

Firjl^ Then, I say, such a spontaneous Generation seems to me to be nothing less than a Creation 5 for Creation being not only a Produdion of a thing out of nothing, but alfo out of indifpos'd Matter, as may be clearly inferr'd from the Scripture, and is agreed by all Divines, this spontaneous Generation being such a Produdion, wherein doth it differ from Creation ? Or v^hat did God Almighty do at the first Creation of Animals and Plants more than what (if this be true) we see every Day done ? To me, I must confefs, it seems almost demonftrable,that whatever Agent can introduce a Form into indifpos'd Matter, or difpofe the Matter in an Inftant, must be fuperior to any natural one, not to say omnipotent.

Secondly, those who have with the greatest Diligence and Application consider'd and fearch'd into this Matter, as those eminent Virtuofi, Mar-- cellus Malpighius, Fr and feus Redi , John Swammerdam, Lewenhoek, and many others, are unanimoufly of this Opinion, fave that Francifcus Redi would except such Infeds as are bred in Galls, and some other Excrefcencies of Plants. Now their Authority weighs more with me than the general Vogue, or the concurrent Suffrages of a_ thoufand others, who never examin'd the ^thing so carefully and circumfpedly as they have

done.

302 T/)eWisDou of GOD Part 11. done, but run away with the Cry of the common Herd of Philofophers

first of all, Dr. Swammerdam^ who hath been, to the best purpose of any Man I know of, bufy'd in fearching out and obferving the Nature of all Infecfts in general ; all in general I say, for as to one particular Infedt, to wit, the Silk-Worm, I must except Signior Malpighi -y and to one Genus of them, to wit. Spiders, Dr. Lifter, in his general Hiftory of Infefts, written in Low Dutch, and tranflated into Frejich, p. 47. hath these Words, Nous difons quit nej$fait dam toute la nature aucune generation par accident, &c. JVe affirm that there is not in all Nature any accidental \orJpontaneous\ Generation, but all come by Propa^ gation ; wherein Chance hath not the leajt Fart or Inter est. And in p, 159. fpeaking of the Generation of Infefts out of Plants, in Contradiction I suppose to Signior Redi, he faith. Nous croyons abjolument^ &c. We do absolutely believe that it is not pojjible to prove by Experience that any Infedis are engendered out of Plants-, but on the contrary, we are very well informed and ajfur'd, that these little Animals are not fjut up in or inclosd there for any other reason tha?i to draw thence their Nourifloment. It is true indeed, that by a certain, constant, and immutable Order of Nature, we see many Sorts of Infedts affix'd to particular Species of Plants and Fruits, to- which the refpettive Kinds fallen themselves as \t were by Inftindt ;

ftincl ; but we are to know that they all come of the Seed of Animalcules of their own Kind, that were before laid there ; for these InfecSs do thruft their Seed or Eggs so deep into the Plants, that they come to be afterwards as it were united wich them, and the Aperture or Orifice by which they entered quite clos'd up and obliterated, the Eggs being hatch'd and nourifh'd within. We have often found the Eggs of Infefts so deeply funk into the tender Buds of Trees, that without hurting of them it was impoffible to draw them out. Many instances he produces in several Sorts of Infe(5ts making their way into Plants, which, tho' they be well worth the reading, are too long to tranfcribe.

Secondly, That great and fagacious Naturalift, and most accurate Examiner of these Things, Signior Malpighi, in his Trcatife of Galhy under which Name he comprehends all preternatural and morbofe Tumours and Excrefcencies of Plants, doth demonftrate in particular, that all such Warts, Tumours and Excrefcencies, where any Infers are found, are excited or rais'd up either by some venenofe Liquor, which together with their Eggs such Infeds fhed upon the Leaves, or Buds, or Fruits of Plants, or boring with their Terebrcey inftil into the very Pulp of such Buds or Fruits y or by the contagious Vapour of the very Eggs themselves, producing a Mortification or Syderation in the Parts of Plaurs on which they

are

304 7^^ Wis D o M of GOD Part It

are laid; or lastly, by the Grubs or Maggots hatched of the Eggs laid there, making their way with their Teeth into the Buds, Leaves or Fruit/ or even the Wood itself of such Plants on v^hich their Eggs were laid. So that at the last he con-^ eludes : Erunt itaque Gallce & reliqui plant a^ rum tumores morbofce excrefcentic^^ vi depofiti ovi a turhata pluiitarum compage^ & vitiato humo^ rum motu excitatce ^ quibus inclufa ova & animalcula velut in utero fove7itur & augentur^ donee manifeftatis firmatijque propriis partibus^ quaji exoriantur nova?n exoptafitia auram. We conclude therefore that Galls^ and other Tumors of Plants^ are nothing elfe but morbofe Excrefcencies^ raisd up by the Force of the Eggs there laid, diflurbing the Vegetation and Temper of the Plants^ and perverting the Motion of their Humours and Juices-, wherein the inclosed Eggs and Animalcules are cherijh'd, nourifh'd, and augmented, till their proper Parts being manifefied, explicated^ and harden d, or firengthend, they are as it were new born, affeBing to come forth into the open Air. In the same Treatife he defcribes the hollow Inftrument (Terebra he calls it, and we may Englijh it Piercer) wherewith many Flies are provided, proceeding from the Womb, with which they perforate the Teguments of Leaves, Fruits, or Buds, and through the Hollow of it injed their Eggs into the Holes, or Wounds which they have made, where in process of Time they are hatch'd and nourifh'd.

This

This he beheld one of these Infeds doing with his own Eyes in the Bud of an Oak ; the manner whereof he defcribes, p. 47. which I {hall not tranfcribe, only take notice, that when he had taken off the Infedt he found in the Leaf very little and diaphanous Eggs, exadly like to those which yet. remained in the Tubes of the Fly's Womb. He adds farther, that it is probable that there may be Eggs hidden in divers Parts of Plants, whereof no Footftep doth outwardly appear, but the Plant remains as entire and thrives as well as if there were no Infed: there ; nay, that some may be hidden and cherifti'd in dry Places (not wanting any Humour to feed them) as in Sear- Wood, yea, in Earthen Veflels, and Marbles themselves.

Indeed to me it seems unreafonable that Plants, being of a lower Form or Order of Being, should produce Animals ; for either they must do it out of indifpos'd Matter, and then such Producftion would amount to a Creation, or elfe they mufl prepare a fit Matter, which is to adl beyond their Strength, there being requir'd to the Preparation of the Sperm of Animals a great Apparatus of Veffels, and many Secretions, Concodions, Refledlions, Digeftions and Circulations of the Matter, before it can be redify'd and exalted into so noble a Liquor; and befides, there must be an Egg too ; for we know ex ovo omnia ;. to the Perfedlion whereof there are as many Veflels and as long a process requir'd. Now in Plants there are

X no

no such Veflels, and consequently no such Preparation of Eggs or Sperm, which are the necessary Principles of Animals.

Thirdly, That worthy Author of our own Country, I mean Dr. Ltjler^ in his Notes upon Geodartius hifeB, Numb, i6. p, 47. hath these Words : Non e7iim indiicor tit credanty hoc, vel alttid quodvis Animal, modo quodamfpontaneo e Plant a froduci, & alii caufa cuicunque originem fuam de^ here quam Farmti Animali \ i. e. / cannot be fer^ fiiaded or induced to believe, that this, or any other Animal, is for can be) prodiicd out of a Plant in a spontaneous manner, or doth owe its Original to any other Caiife ^whatever, than an Animal Parent of its own Kind. And in his third Note upon InfeB, Numb, 49. these: .^load fpontaneam Ei^ucce hujus aliorumque Inferior urn generatiojiem, pro parte negativa jam fententiam fneam tradidi,&cc. As to the Jpontaneous Generation of this Eruca, and other InfeBs, 1 have already delivered my Opinion for 'the Negative, T'his is mof certain, that these Coffi are produced of Eggs laid by Animal Pare?2ts : It is aU Jh alike clear, that these diminutive Caterpillars are able by degrees to pierce or bore their way into a Tree , which very [mail Holes, after they are fully enter d, do perchance grow together, and quite difappear, at least become fofmally that they are not to be difcern'd, unless by Lynceus'^ Eyes, Add moreover^ that phchance they imdergo no Transfoj'waiion, but continue under the Vizard of [Erucae] Caterpillars for many Tear s^ which doth very well

accord

accord with my observations. Moreover^ that this Caterpillar [Eruca] is propagated by Animal ParentSy to wit, Butterfies^ after the common Origination of all Caterpillars, In all this I fully con^ fent with the Dodtor, only crave Leave to differ in his attributing to them the Name of Cajji which were accounted by the Antients a delicate Morfel, and fed for the Table; fori take thpfe to have been the Hexapods, from which the greater Sort of Beetles come -, for that that Sort of Hexapods are at this Day eaten in our American Plantations, as I am informed by my good Friend Dr. Hans Sloane^ who alfo presented me with a Glafs of them preferv'd in Spirit of Wine.

Having lately had an Opportunity more curiously to view and examine the great Flefh-colour'd, thin-hair'd, Englijld Caterpillar (which is so like that fent me by Dr. Sloane^ that it differs little but in Magnitude, which may be owing to the Climate) I obferv'd that it had a Power of drawing its eight hind Legs or Stumps so far up in its- Body that they did altogether difappear, so that the Creature seem'd to want them, and of thrufting them out again at pleasure ; whereupon I conjectured, that that Infed: oi Jamaica fenc me by the Dodor (which I took to be the Cojfus or Hexapods previous to some large Beetle) had likewife the same Power of drawing up its hind Legs, so that tho* to appearance it wanted them, yet really it did not so, but had only drawn thenpi up and hid them in its Body when ic was ini«-

X 2 mcrs'd

3c8 neWisDouofGOD FartIL

mers'd in the Spirit of Wine, and consequently was not the Hexapod of a Beetle, but an Eruca^ like to, or indeed fpecifically the same with that of our own Country by me obferv*d ; and being eaten at this Day by the Inhabitants of Jamaica^ is in all likelihood the same with the Cojjus of the ^ntient Romans^ which was fed for the Table, as Fliny affures us ; efpecialJy if we consider, that Dr. Lijler found this Eruca in the Body of an Oak newly cut down and faw'd in pieces j on which Tree Pliny faith they feed. Thus much I thought fit to add . to Dr. Lijier^ and do the Truth right, by retracing my former Conjedure concerning the CoJJu

3. My third Argument against spontaneous Generation is, because there are no Arguments or Experiments which the Patrons of it do or can produce which do clearly evince it. For the general and vulgar Opinion, that the Heads of Children, or the Bodies of those that do not change their Linnen, but wear that which is fweaty and fordid, breeds Lice 5 or that Cheefe of itself breeds Mites or Maggots ; I deny, and look upon it as a great Error and Miftakej and do affirm, that all such Creatures are bred of Eggs laid in such fordid Places by some wandring Loufe, or Mite, or Maggot ; for such Places being most proper for the hatching and exclufion of their Eggs, and for the Maintenance of their Young, Nature hath endued them with a wonderful Acutenefs of Scent and Sagacity, whereby they can, tho' far 2 diftant^

diftant, find out and make towards them^ and even Lice and Mites themselves, as slow as they seem to be, can, to my Knowledge, in no long time march a considerable way to find out a convenient Harbour for themselves.

Here, by the by, I cannot but look upon the ftrange Inftindl of this noifome and troublefome Cr&aturc a Loufe, of fearching out soul and nafty Clothes to harbour and breed in, as an Eflfed: of divine Providence, design'd to deter Men and Women from Sluttiihnefs and Sordidnefs, and to provoke them to Cleanlinefs and Neatnefs. God himself hateth Uncleanlinefs , and turns away from it, as appears by Dtv//. xxiii. 12, 13, 14. But if God requires and is pleas'd with bodily Cleanlinefs, much more is he so with the Purenefs of the Mind. Bkjfed are the pure in Hearty for they pall Jie God^ Matth. v. 10.

As for the Generation of Infedts out of putrid Matter, the Experiments of Francifcus Redi, and some of our own Vtrtuoji^ give me fuflicient reason to rejed: it. I did but juft now mention the quick Scent that Infefts have, and the great Sagacity in finding out a proper and convenient Harbour or Matrix to cherifh and hatch their Eggs and feed their Young ; they are so adted and directed by Nature, as to cast their Eggs in such Places as are most accommodated for the Exclufion of their Young, and where there is Food ready for them as foon as they be harch'd ; nay, it is a very hard matter to keep off such Infedts

X -; ^ from

from {bedding their Seed in such proper Places. Indeed if an InjeB ?nay be thus equivocally genera-- ted^ v)hy not fometimes a Bird^ a ^adruped, a Man, or even an Univerfe ? Or^ why no new Species of Animals now and then ? As my learned Friend Dr, Tancred Robinfon very well argues in his Letters ; for there is as much Art shewn in the Formation of those as of these.

A fourtb and mod efFedual Argument against spontaneous Generation is, that there are no new Species produced, which would certainly now and then, nay, very often happen were there any such thing ; for in such pretended Generations, the generant or a6live Principle is fuppos'd to be the Sun, which being an inanimate Body, cannot aft otherwife than by his Heat, which Heat can only put the Particles of the paffive Principle into motion; the paffive Principle is putrid Matter, the Particles whereof cannot be conceived to differ in any thing but Figure, Magnitude and Gravity ; now the Heat putting these Particles in motion, may indeed gather together those which are homogeneous, or of the same nature, andfeparate those that are heterogeneous, or of a different, but that it should so fituate, place and conned: them as we see in the Bodies of Animals, is altogether inconceivable \ which if it could, yet that it should always run them into such a Machine as is already extant, and not often into some new-falhion'd one, such as was never seen before, no reason can be affign'd or imagined. This the Epicurean Poet Lucretius was so sensible of, that

he

he faw a necessity of granting Seeds or Principles to determine the Species. For (faith he) if all Sorts of Principles could be connected,

Fulgo fieri portent a videres^

Semiferas hominum Jpecies exifiere^ G? alto^ Inter dum rainos egigni corpore vivoy Multdque conneBi terrejlria membra marinis ; Turn fiafnmam retro fpir antes ore chimaras Pa/cere naturam per terras omniparenteis ^orum nil fieri manifefium efi^ omnia quando Seminibus certis^ certa genetrice^ creata Confervare genus crefcentia pojfe videmus^ &c.

That is Thence would rife

Vafi Monfiers^ Nature s great Ahjurdities ; Something half Bea/l, half Man, and some would Tall Trees above, and /mimals below, (grow

Some joi?id of Fijh and Beafis, a?id every where Frightful Chimaera's breathing Flaines appear. But since we see no such, and Things arife From certain Seeds, of certain Shape and Size^ And, keep their Ki?id as they increafe and grow ^ There s some fix d Reajbn why it pould be so.

The raining of Frogs, and their Generation in the Clouds, tho' it may be attefled by many and great Authors, I look upon as utterly falfe and ridiculous j it seems to me no more likely that Frogs should be engend&r'd in the Clouds, than S'panifh Gennets begotten by the Wind, for that hath good Authors too 3 and he that can fwallow the raining of Frogs, hath made a fair Step to-

X 4 wards

wards believing that it may rain Calves alfo, for we read that one fell out of the Clouds in Avicens Time ; nor do they much help the matter, who say, that those Frogs that appear fometimes in great Multitudes after a Shower, are not indeed engendered in the Clouds, but coagulated of a certain sort of Duft commix'd and fermented with Rain- Water -, to which Hypothefis Fromondus adheres.

But let us a little consider the Generation of Frogs in a natural way. i. There are two different Sexes, which must concur to their Generation. 2. There is in both a great Apparatus of fpermatick VefTels, wherein the nobler and more fpirituous Part of the Blood is by many Digeilions, Concoftions, Refledions and Circulations exalted into that generous Liquor we call Sperm ; and likewife for the preparing of the Eggs. 3. There must be a Copulation of the Sexes, which I rather mention because it is the most remarkable in this that ever I obferv'd in any Animal ; for they continue in complexu venereo at least a Month indefinitely, the Male all that while refling on the Back of the Female, clipping and embracing her with his Legs about the Neck and Body, and holding her so faft, that if you take him out of the Water he will rather bear her whole Weight than let her go -, this I obferv'd in a Couple kept on purpose in a VeiTel'of Water by riiy learned and worthy Friend Mr. John Nid, Fellow of trinity 'College J long since deceas'd 3 after this the Spawn must be cast into Water, where the Eggs

lie

lie in the mldft of a copious Jelly, which serves them for their first Nouriihment for a considerable while ; and at last the result of all is not a perfed: Frog, but a Tadpole, without any Feet, and having a long Tail to swim withal ; in which Form it continues a long time, till the Limbs be grown out and the Tail fallen away, before it arrives at the Perfeftion of a Frog.

Now if Frogs can be generated spontaneously in the Clouds out of Vapour, or upon the Earth out of Duft and Rain-Water, what needs all this a-do ? To what purpose is there such an Apparatus of Veflels for the Elaboration of the Sperm and Eggs ? such a tedious process of Generation and Nutrition? This is but an idle Pomp; the Sun (for 'he is fuppos'd to be the equivocal Generant or Efficient by these Philofophers) could have difpatch'd the business in a Trice ; give him but a little Vapour, or a little dry Duft and Rain- Water, he will produce you a quick Frog, nay, a whole Army of them, perfe6lly form'd, and fit for all- the Fundions of Life, in three Minutes, nay, in the hundredth Part of one Minute, elfe must some of those Frogs that were generated in the Clouds fall down half formed and imperfect, which I never heard they did; and the process of Generation have been obferv'd in the Produdlion of Frogs out of Duft and Rain- Water, which no Man ever pretended to mark or difcern. But that there can be no Frogs generated in the Clouds, may further be made appear, i. From

the

the extreme Cold of the middle Region of the Air, where the Vapours are turn'd into Clouds, which is not at all propitious to Generation ; for did not so great Men as Arijiofle and Erajmus report it, I could hardly be induced to believe that there could be one Species of Infefts generated in Snow. 2. because if there were any Animals engendered in the Clouds, they must needs be maim'd and dafh'd in pieces by the Fall, at least such as fell in the High- ways and upon the Roofs of houses ; whereas we read not of any such broken or imperfect Frogs found any where. This last Argument wasfufficient to drive off the. learned Fromondus from the Belief of their Generation in the Clouds ; but the Matter of Fad: he takes for granted, I mean, the spontaneous Generation of Frogs out of Duft and Rain- Warter,from an observation or Experiment of his own at the Gates of Tournay in Flanders^ to the Sight of wliich Spedacle he call'd his Friends who were there pLefcnc, .that they might admire it with him. Afudden Shower (filth* hS)faili7ig upon the '■v.cry dry Dujiy there fuddenly appear d such an Ar^ my of little FrogSy leaping about every where upon the dry hand^ that there was almojl nothing elj'e to, he seen ; they were alfo of one Magnitude and Colour ; neither did it appear out of what lurking Places [Latibula] so many Myriads could creep out^. and fuddenly discover tbemf elves upon the dry and. dufly Soil^ which they hate. But faving the Reverence due to so great a Man, I doubt not but they did all creep out of their Holes and Coverts, in- > vited

Patt II. in the C?.^ AT 10^. 315

vited by the agreeable Vapour of the Rain- Water; this, however unlikely it may seem, is a thoufand times more probable than their inftantaneous and undifcernible Generation out of a little dry Dufl and Rain- Water, which alfo cannot have any time to mix and ferment together, which is the Hypothe/is ht 2idhcvcs to 'y nay, I affirm, that it is not at all improbable; for he that shall walk out in Summer Nights, when it begins to grow dark, may observe such a Multitude of great Toads and Frogs crawling about in the High-ways, Paths and Avenues to houses, Yards, and Walks of Gardens and Orchards, that he will wonder whence they came, or where they lurk'd all the Winter and all the Day-time, for that then it is a rare thing to find one.

To which add, that in such Frogs as we are fpeaking of, Monfieur Perault hath upon DifTeftion often found the Stomach full of Meat, and the Inteftines of Excrement; whence he juftly concludes, '' that they were not then first formed, " but- only appear'd of a fudden; which is no " great Wonder, fmce upon a Shov^er after a *' Drought, Earth-worms and Land-Snails innu- *' merable come out of their lurking Places in " like manner.

In Confirmation of what I have here written aga.infk the spontaneous Generation of Frogs, either in the Clouds out of Vapour, or on the Earth out of Dufl and Rain- Water commix'd, endeavouring

vouring to prove by Force of Argument that there is no such thing, I have lately received from my learned and ingenious Friend Mr. William Derham^ Reftor of Upminjler, near Rumford in EJfex^ a Relation parallel to that oi FromonduSy concerning the fudden Appearance of a vast Number of Frogs, after a Shower or two of Rain, marching crofs a fandy Way, that before the Rain was very dufty, and giving an Account where, in all likelihood, they were generated by Animal Parents of their own Kind, and whence they did proceed. The whole Narrative I (hall give the Reader in his own Words.

Some Tears ago^ as I was riding forth one Afternoon in Berks, / happened upon a prodigious Multitude creeping crofs the Way ; // was a fandy Soil, a?2d the Way had been full of Duji^ by reason of a dry Seafon that then was ; but an Hour or two before a refrefnng fragrant Shower or two of Rain had laid the Dujt ; whereupon what I had heard or read of the rainifig of Frogs, immediately came to my Thoughts, as it eafily might do, there being probably as good reason then for me, as I believe any ever bad before, to conclude that these came from the Clouds, or were iizftantaneoufly generated \ but being prepofefsd with the contrary Opinion, v\z, that there was no equivocal Generation, I was very curious in enquiring whence this vaji Colony might probably come ; and upon fe arching I found two or three Acres of hand cover d with this black Regiment, and that they a'l march' d the same way towards

some

Part 11. in tieCRnATio"^. 317

some Woods^ Ditches^ and such like cool Places in their Fronts and from large Ponds in their Rear; I tracd them backwards^ even to the very side of c?ie of the Po?ids \ these Ponds in fpawning'time aU ivays usd to abound much with Frogs, whose croaking I have heard at a confderable dijiancc y and a great deal of Spawn I have found there.

From these Circumjlances I concluded that this vaji Colony was bred in tbofe Ponds, from whence^ ward they Jieerd their course-, that after their Incubation (if I may so call it) or hatching by the Sun^ and their having fafs'd their Tadpole State, they had livd (till that time of their Migration) in the Waters, or rather on the Shore, among the Flags^ Rujhes, and long Grafs 5 but now being i?ivited out by the refrejhing Showers, then newly fallen, which made the Earth cool and moifi for their March, that they left their old Latibula, where perhaps they had devour d all their proper Food, and were now in purfuit of Food, or a more convenient Habitation^

This I think not only reafonable to be concluded^

but withal so eafy to have been difcoverd by any inquifitive Obferver, who in former Times met with

the like Appearance, that I cannot but admire that

such fagacious Philofophers as Ariftotle, Pliny, and

many other fnce, Jhould ever imagine Frogs to fall

from the Clouds, or be any way injiantaneoufiy^ or

spontaneously generated, especially confidering how

^ openly they aH their Coition, produce Spawn^ this

Spawn Tadpoles, and Tadpoles Frogs.

Neither

3i8 T/jeWisDOM of GOD Part IL

Neither in Frogs only^ but alfo in many other Creatures^ as Lice, F/eJJj-FlieSy Silk-Worms, and €ther Voi^iYio s>y an uniform regular Generation was <Dery obvious , which is an Argument to me of a Jirange Prepofjefjion of Fancy in the Ages since Ariftotle, not to say of CareleJJhefs and Sloth. So far Mr. Derham.

In like manner doubtlefs Fromondus, had he made a diligent Search, might have found out the Place where those Myriads of Frogs, obferv'd by him about the Gates oiTournay, were generated^ and whence they did prcX:eed.

As for the Worms and other Animals bred in the Inteftines of Man and beast, I have declar'd myself not to be satisfy'd of the Ways and Means how their Seeds come to be convey'd into those Places, but yet that their Generation is analogous to that of other Creatures of those Kinds, I doubt not ; the Conftancy to their Species, their exadt Agreement and perpetual Similitude in the Shape and Figure of their Bodies and all the Parts, their Confidence , Temper, Motion, and other Accidents, are to me little less than a Demonftration that they are not the Effefts of Chance, but the Products of a fettled and fpermatick Principle J I am at present, till better informed, of opinion that their Eggs are fwallow'd with the Meat we eat ; and I am the rather induced to think so^ bccaufe Children in their first Infancy, and as ^ 2 long

long as they are constantly confin'd to a Milk Diet, are feldom troubled with them.

After this was written I received a Letter from my often remembered ingenious Friend Dr. 7^?;zcred RobinJb?i referring to this Matter, part whereof I shall tranfcribe, as being very pertinent, inftrudive, and confonant to my oAvn Thoughts. / think it may be provd^ that the <vajl Variety of Worms found in almof all the Farts of differ e7it Animals^ as well terreftrial as aquatick, are taken into their refpedfinje Bodies by Meats and Drinks^ and there either lie jiill for some time ^ or elfe grow and alter by change of Place and Food [not Jpecifi^ cally^ but accidentally^ in Magnitude^ Colour^ Fi^ gure of some Farts ^ or the like^ We know as yet hut little of the numerous Infeds bred in Water ^ or indeed of those in Roots^ Leaves^ Buds, Flowers^ Fruits and Seeds, which we are conti?iually f -wallowing, and these too all "vary according to Climate [that is, the same Species 0/ Roots, Leaves, &c. da in differefit Climates produce many different Species oflnfeBs, tho Jome there be common to all] the long fender Worms, as f mall as Hairs, that breed be^ tween the Skin and the Flefi in the IJle of Ormuz, and in India, which are generally twified out upon Sticks or Fowlers, and often break in the Operation^ are without doubt taken in by the Water they drink in those Regions, as I could prove by many and good Experiments had I 'Time, They who have Letfure -may find them in the GolleBions of Voyages and Travels, ejpecially in Monficur Thevenot. By this

Explication

320 7'/>eWisDOM of GOD Partll.

^Explication we may give a better Account of the VomitingS'Up of Tadpolesy Snails, ajid other Animals, recorded ifi medical Hijlories, than by any Hypothefs of equivocal Generation, As to InfeBs found in finking Flejh or rotten Vegetables, I could never observe or find any of them different from thoj'e Parent-Infecis which hover about or feed upon such Bodies.

If any (hall objed the infinite Multitudes of Animalcules discover'd in Pepper- Water , and defire an Account of their Generation ; to him I shall say, that it is probable that some few of these Animals may be floating in all Waters, and that finding the Particles of Pepper fwimming in the Water, very proper for the cheriihing and excluding of their Eggs, by reason of their Heat, or some other unknown and fpecifick Quality, they may faflen their Eggs to them, and so there may be a fudden Breed of infinite Swarms of them ; but these being not to be difcern d by the most piercing and Lyncean Sight without the Affiftance of a Microfcope, I leave the Manner of their Generation to future discovery.

No less difficult is it to give an Account of the Original of such Infeds as are found, and seem to be bred in the Bodies of others of different Kinds. Out of the Sides and Back of the most common Caterpillar, which feeds upon Cabbage , Cole- wort , aind Turnep-

Leaves,-

Leaves, which we have defcrib'd in the Catalogue oi Cambridge Plants, we have seen creep out small Maggots to the Number fometimes of Threefcore or more, which so foon as ever they came forth began to weave themselves filken Cafes of a yellow {hining Colour, wherein they chang'd, and after some time came out thence in the form of small Flies with four Wings ; for a full DefcriptioHL and Hiftory whereof I ihall refer the Reader to the fore-mention'd Catalogue, The like I have alfo obferv'd in other Caterpillars of a different Kind, which have produc'd no lesser Number of Maggots, that in like m.anner immediately made themselves up in Cafes. Others, instead of change ing into Aurelias, as in the ufual process of Nature they ought to do, have turn'd into one, two, or three, or more Flefli-Fly- Cafes, at least contained such Cafes within them, out of which after a while were excluded Flefh-Flies. Other Caterpillars, as that caird the /3//V^;j Maggot, found in the dry Heads of Teafel, by a dubious Meta- 7norphofn^ fometimes chang'd into the Aurelia of a Butterfly, fometimes into a Fly-Cafe. You'll say, how comes this to pass ? must we not here necessarily have recourfe to a spontaneous Generation ? I answer, No ; the most that c^n be inferred from hence is, a Tranfmutation oi Species -y one Infedl may, inflead of generating another of its own Kind, beget one or more of^a different; but I can by no means grant this ; 1 do believe^ 'that these Flics do either cast their Eggs -upon the '^• very Bodies of the fore-mention'd Caterpillars,

Y or

or upon the Leaves on which they feed, all in a String ; which there hatching, eat their way into the Body, where they are nouriih'd till they be come to their full Growth ; or it may be the Fly may with the hollow and sharp Tube of her Womb punch and perforate the very Skin of the Erucay and cast her Eggs into its Body 5 so the Ichneumon will convey her Eggs into Caterpillars.

The discovery of the Manner of the Generation of these Sorts of Infedts I earneftly recommend to all ingenious Naturalifts as a Matter of great moment -, for if this Point be but clear'd, and it be demonftrated that all Creatures are generated univocally by Parents of their own Kind, and that there is no such thing as spontaneous Generation in the World, one main Prop and Support of Atheifm is taken away, and their strongest Hold demolifh'd -, they cannot then exemplify their foolifh Hypothejis of the Generation of Man and other Animals at first by the like of Frogs and lafedls at this present Day.

It will be farther objeded that there have live Toads been found in the midft of Timber Trees, nay, of Stones when they have been fawn afunder.

To this I answer, that I am not fully satisfy*d of the Matter of Fad ; I am so well acquainted with the Credulity of the Vulgar, and the Delight they, and many of the better Sort too, have in telling of Wonders and ftrange things, that I must I have

Part IL in the Creation. 323

have a thing well attefted before I can give a firm Aflent to it.

Since the v^riting hereof the Truth of these Relations, of live Toads found in the midft of Stones, hath been confirm'd to me by sufficient and credible Eye-witneffes, who have seen them taken out ; so that there is no doubt of the Matter of Fad.

But yet, suppose it be true, it may be accounted for; those Animals when young and little finding in the Stone some small Hole reaching to the middle of it, might, as their nature is, creep into it, as a fit Latibulmn for the Winter, and grow there too big to return back by the Pafiage by which they entered, and so continue imprifon'd therein for many Years, a little Air, by reason of the Coldnefs of the Creature, and its lying torpid there, fufficing it for respiration 5 and the Humour of the Stone, by season it lay immoveable, and fpent not, for Nouri{hment -, and I do believe that if those who found such Toads had diligently fearch'd, they might have discover'd and trac'd the way whereby they enter'd in, or some Footfteps of it ; or elfe there might fall down into the lapideous Matter, before it was concrete into a Scone, some small Toad (or some Toad-Spawn) which being not able to extricate itself and get out again, might remain there imprifon'd till the Matter about it were condensed, and compafted into a Stone; but however it

Y 2 came

324 T^eWi^t^buof GOD PartIL came there, I dare confidently affirm it .was not there fpontaneoully generated ; for elfe either there was such a Cavity in the Stone before the Toad was generated, which is altogether improbable, and gratis diBum^ alTerted" without any ground, or the Toad was generated in the folid Stone, which is more unlikely than the other, in that the so ft Body of so small a Creature should extend itself in such a Prifon, and overcome the Strength and resistance of such a great and ponderous Mafs of folid Stone.

And whereas the Aflertors of equivocal Generation were wont to pretend the Imperfedion of these Animals as a ground to facilitate the Belief of their spontaneous Generation, I do affirm that they are as perfed: in their Kind, and as much Art {hewn in the Formation of them as of the greatest, nay, more too in the Judgment of that

great Wit and natural Hiftorian * Lib. II. ^ Pliny, ' In magnis fiquidem corporihiis (faith he) aut certe major ibm facilis qfficinafequaci materia fuit -, in his tarn par^ vis atque tarn nullis, quce ratio, quanta vis, quam inextricabilis perfeSiio?. In the greater Bodies the Forge was eafy, the Matter being ducftil and fequacious, obedient to the Hand and Stroke of the Artificer, apt to be drawn, formed or moulded into such Shapes and Machines even by clumfy Fingers 5 but in the Formation of these, such diminutive Things, such Nothings, what Cunning and Curiofity ! what Force and Strength

was

Part IL hi /^^^ G r e a t i o n. 325

was requifite, there being in them such inextri* cable Perfedtion!

To what Proofs or Examples of spontaneous Generation may be brought from Infed:s bred in the Fruits or Excrefcencies of Plants, I have already made answer in my fecond Particular, which contains the Teftimonies of our best modetn Naturalifts concerning these Things.

In my Denial of the spontaneous Generation of Plants, I am not so confident and peremptory, but yet there are the same Objedions and Arguments against it as against that of Animals, 'vix, because it would be a Produdion out of indifpos'd Matter, and consequently a Creation; or if it be said there is difpos'd Matter, prepared by the Earth, or Sun, the Heat, or whatever other Agent you can aflign \ I reply, this is to make a thing ad beyond its Strength, that is, an inferior Nature, which hath nothing of Life in it, to prepare Matter for a fuperior, which hath some degree of Life, and for the Preparation of which it hath no convenient Veffels or Inflruments ; if it could do so, what need of all that Apparatus of Veffels, Preparation of Seed, and, as I alfo suppose, Diftindion of Mafculine and Feminine that we see in Plants ? I demand farther, whether any of the Patrons of spontaneous Generation in Plants did ever see any Herbs or Trees, except those of the Grafs-Leav'd Tribe, come up without two Seed-Leaves ? which if they never did or

Y 3 could,

could, it is to me a great Argument that they came all of Seed, there being no reason elfe why they should at first produce two Seed-Leaves different from the fubfequent > and if all these Spe^ cies (which are far the greatest Number) come from Seed, there is not the least reason to think that any of the rest come up spontaneously ; and this, with what I have written before, may fuffice concerning this Point.

Whereas I have often written in many Places that such and such Plants are spontaneous, or come up spontaneously, I mean no more by that Expreflion, but that they were not planted or fown there induftrioufly by Man.

Having spoken of the Body of Man, and the Ufes of its several Parts and Members, I shall add some other observations, giving an Account of the particular Strudture, Acftions and Ufes of some Parts, either common to whole Kinds of Animals, or proper to some particular Species^d^i^^vtm from those of Man, and of the reason of some Inftinfts and Aaions of Brutes.

Fbjt of all, the manner of respiration^ and the Organs ferving thereto in various Animals, are accommodated to their Temper of Body, and their Place and Manner of Living ; of which I have obferv'd in more perfeft Animals three Differences,

I. The

I. The hotter Animals, which require abundance of Spirits for their various Motions and Exercifes, are provided with Lungs, which indefinitely draw in and expel the Air alternately, without Intermiflion, and have a Heart furnifh'd with two Ventricles ; because to maintain the Blood in, that degree of Heat which is requifite to the Performance of the Ad:ions of all the muscles, there is abundance of Air necessary. I (hall not now take notice of the difference that is between the Lungs of Quadrupeds and Birds, how the one are fix'd and immoveable, the other loofe and moveable; the one perforated, tranfmitting the

f: Air into large Bladders, the other inclos'd with

' a Membrane.

It is here worth the notice taking, that many Animals of this Kind, both Birds and Quadrupeds, will endure and bear up against the extreamell Rigor of Cold that our Country is expos'd to ; horse^ Kine, and Sheepy as I have experienc'd, will lie abroad in the open Air upon the cold Ground during our long Winter-Nights, in the fliarpeft and fevereft Frofts that ever happened with us, without any Harm or Prejudice at all -, whereas one would think, that at leafl the Extremities of their Members (hould be bitten, benummed and mortify'd thereby. Confidering with myself by what means they were enabled to do this, and to abide and refift the Cold, it occurr'd to my Thoughts, that the Extremities of their

Y 4 Toes

Toes were fenc'd with Hoofs, which in good meafurc fecur'd them ^ but the main thing wasiy that the Cold is, as it were, its own Antidote j for the Air being fully charg'd and fated with nitrous, or some other sort of Particles (which are the great Efficients of Cold, and no less alfo the pabulum of Fire) when infpir'd, doth by means of them cause a great Accenfion and Heat in the Blood (as we see Fuel burns raflily in such Weather) and so enable it to refift the Impreffions of the Cold for so short a time as its more nimble Circulation expofes it thereto, before it comes to another beating. From hence may an Account be given why the Inhabitants of hot Countries may endure longer Fafting and Hunger than those of colder ; and those feemingly prodigious, and to us scarce credible Stories, of the Faflings and Abftinence of the Egyptian Monks, be ren^ der'd probable,

2. Other Animals, which are of a colder Temper, and made to endure a long Inedia or fafting, and to lie in their Holes almost torpid all Winter, as all Kinds of Serpents and Lizards^ have indeed Lungs, but do not inceffantly breathe, or when they have drawn in the Air, necessarily expire it again, but can retain it at their pleasure, and live without respiration whole Days together, as was long since experimented by Sir "Thomas Brown, M. p. in a Frog ty'd by the Foot under Water for that purpose by him. This Order of Creatures have but one Ventricle in their Hearts, and

the

Part IL in M^ C r e at i o n. 329

the whole Blood doth not so often circulate thro' the Lungs as it doth thro* the rest of the Body ; this manner of breathing is sufficient to maintain in them that degree of Heat which is fuitable to their Nature and manner of living ; for to our Touch they are always cold, even in Summertime, and therefore some will then put Snakes into their Bofom to cool them. >

3. Fifhes, which were to live and converfe always in a cold Element, the Water, and therefore were to have a Temper not excelling in Heat, because otherwife the constant immediate Contrad: of the Water (unless some extraordinary Provifion were made) could not have been fupported by them, that they might not be neceffitated continually to be coming up to the top of the Water to draw in the Air, and for many other reasons that might be alledg'd, perform their respiration under Water by the Gills, by which they can receive no more Air than is difpers'd in the Pores of the Water, which is sufficient to preferve their Bodies in that Temper of Heat that is fuitable to their Nature and the Place wherein they live; these alfo have but one Ventricle in their Hearts.

But now tho' this be thus, the great and most wife GOD, as it were purpofely to demonfti-ate that- he is not by any Condition or Quality of Place necessarily determin'd to one manner of respiration, or one Temper of Body in Fifhes,

he

he hath endu'd the Bodies of some of that Tribe of aquatick Creatures with Lungs like viviparous Quadrupeds, and two Ventricles of the Heart, and an Ability of breathing like them, by drawing in and letting out the open Air, so contriving their Bodies as to maintain in the midft of the cold Water a degree of Heat anfwerable to that of the fore-mention'd Quadrupeds.

Another remarkable thing relating to respiration is, the keeping the Hole or PalTage between the Arteria Venofa and Vena Cava, call'd Foramen ovale, open in some amphibious Quadrupeds, viz, the Phoca, or Vitulus Marinus, calFd in Rnglijlo, Sea-Calf 2inA Seal -y and, as is generally held, the Beaver too. We have already given the reason of the twofold Communication of the great Blood- Veffels in the Fc^tiis or Young so long as it continues in the Womb ; the one between the two Veins entring the Heart, by a Hole or Window ; the other between the two Arteries, by an arterial Channel extended from the pulmonary Artery to the Aorta, or great Artery ; which was, in brief, to divert the Blood from the Lungs. Thefame reason for keeping open this Foramen ovale there is in these amphibious Creatures. For, i. The Lungs probably being not extended, but empty'd of Air when they abide long under Water, and flaccid, it is not eafy for the whole Blood every Circulation to make its way thro' them. 2. To maintain that degree of Heat. and Motion in the Blood as is sufficient for them while they are under

der Water, there is not so much Air required as is when they are above, the Blood then moving but gently, as doth that of the Feetus in the Womb.

Farther, in reference to respiration, it is ohferv'd by the Parifian Academifts, that some amphibious Quadrupeds, particularly the Sea-Calf or Sealj hath his Epiglottis extraordinarily large in»proportion to other Animals, it extending half an Inch in length beyond the Glottis^ to cover it. I believe the Beaver hath the like Epiglottis^ exaftly clofing the Larynx or Glottis^ and hindring all Influx of Water -, because in one difTecSed by WepferuSy that fuiFocated itself in the Water, there v^as not a Drop of Water found in the Lungs ', it is probable (say they) that this is done more exacftly to close the Entrance of the Afpera Arteriay or Windpipe, when the Animal eats his Prey at the bottom of the Sea, and to hinder the Water from running into his Lungs. An Elephant (as is obferv'd by Dr. Moulins^ I think, in the Anatomy of that Creature) hath no Epiglottis at all', there being no danger of any thing falling into their Lungs from eating or drinking, feeing there is no Communication between the Oefophagus and it j for he thus defcribes the Oejophagus or Gullet : The Tongue of this Creature (faith he) had this peculiar in it, that the PafTage to the Ventricle was thro' it, for there was a Hole near the Root of it, and exadtly in the middle of that Part, which Hole was the beginning of the Oejophagus ; there was no Communication between

this

this and the passage into the Lungs, contrary to what we may observe in Men, in all Quadrupeds and Fowl, that ever I had Opportunity to diife(ft ; for the Membrana pitiiitaria anterior reached to the very Root of the Tongue, below the OejophagiiSy and so quite llopt the passage of the Air into the Mouth. But tho' there be no danger of Meat or Drink falling into the Lungs, yet were they not fufficiently fecur'd from small Anirttals creeping in there ; for though, to supply in some measure the want of an Epiglottis^ by leffening the Glottis, there grew to the outfide of the Cartilages czWdylrytenoides, another capable of motion up and down, by the help of some muscles that were implanted in it, strong on both (ides of the Afpera Arteria^ but on the under side, oppolite to that of the Oefophagus, very limber, wanting about two Inches and a half of coming round the aforefaid Cartilages on the upper side, or the next to the Oefophagus \ yet did not this Cartilage so (hut up the way against them, but that even a Moufe creeping up his Probofcis might get into his Lungs, and so ftifle him; whence we may guefs at the reason why the Elephant is afraid of a Motife ; and therefore to avoid this Danger, this Creature (the Elephant^ which this Author defcrib'd) was obferv'd always when he flept to keep his Trunk (Probofcis) so close to the Ground that nothing but Air could get in between them , this is a ftrange Sagacity and Providence in this Animal, or elfe an admirable Inftind:.

Again,

Part IL in /^^ C r e a t i on* 333

Again, the Parifian Academifts oblerve of the Sea Tortoife^ that the Cleft of the Glottis was ftraic and close; which exad: Inclofure I do rather believe is to prevent the Water from entring into the Windpipe when the Tortoifes are under Water, than to afTift the Effedt of the Compreffion of the Air in the Lungs, as they would have it ; /or they make the main reason of respiration and Ufe of the Lungs in this Creature to be, to take in and retain Air, by the Compreffion and Dilatation whereof, made by the muscles, it can raise or fmk itself in the Water, as need requires ; tho' I do not exclude this. But if this be the main Ufe of the Lungs and respiration in this Animal, what is it in Land Animals, which have a like Conformation of Lungs and manner of respiration as the Cameliofi, Serpents^ and Lixai-ds ?

But before I difmifs the Tortoife, I shall add two notable observations concerning him, borrowed of the said French Academifts^ which seem to argue fomething of reason in him, and more than a bare Liftind. The first is in the Land Tortoije ; and it is his manner of turning himself, and getting upon his Feet again when he is cast upon his Back, which they describe in these Words : At the great Aperture of the Shell before^ there was at the top a rais'd Border^ to grant mnrc liberty to the Neck and Head^ for lifting them j elves ^upwards ; and this InfeBion of the Neck is of great Vfe to the 'J'ortoifes^ for it fcrves them to turn again

'when

when they are upon their Backs 5 and their Indujiry upon this Account is very admirable. We have objervd in a living Tortoife, that being turned upon its Backy and not being able to make tije of its Paws for the returning of itfelfy because they could but only bend towards the Belly, it could help itself only by its Neck and Head^ which it turn d Jbmetimes en one side, fometimes on the other, by pufhing againfi the Ground, to rock itself as in a Cradle, to find out the side towards which the Inequality of the Ground might more eafily permit it to rowl its Shell ', for when it had found it, it made all its Endeavours on that side.

The fecond is in the Sea tortoife, as follows. Arifiotle and Tliny have remarked, that when T'ortoifes have been a long time upon the Water during a Calm, it happens that their Shell being dry'd in the Sun, they are eafily taken by the Fifhermen, by reason they cannot plunge into the Water nimbly enough, being become too light ', this shews what Equality there ought to be in their /Equilibrium, feeing so little a Change as this, which may happen by the fole drying of the Shell, is capable of making it ufelefs. This Eafinefs to be taken at such a time, these Academifis do not refer merely to the Lightnefs of this Creature's Body (for he could eafily let Air enough out of his Lungs to render it heavier than the Water, and so enable himself to, fink) but to a wonderful Sagacity and Caution of this Animal ; for (say they) it is probable that the Tortoife,

which

which is always careful to keep himself in this /Equilibrium^ so as other Animals are to keep themselves on their Legs, in this Cafe, by the same Inftind) dares not let the Air out of his Lungs, to acquire a Weight which might make him fpeedily to fink, because he fears that his Shell being wet it should become so heavy, that he being funk to the bottom of the Water, might never haye Power afterw^ards to re-afcend ; if this may be the reason why he expofes himself to the danger of being taken at such a time, rather than he will defcend fuddenly to the bottom, it is clear that he is endu'd with an admirable Providence and Forefight, and a Power of Argumentation.

That Nature doth really design the Prefervation and Security of the more infirm Creatures, by the defenfive Armour that it hath given to some of them, together with Skill to ufe it, is, I think, demonfl:rable in the common Hedge-hog^ or Urchin^ and one Species of T^atou^ or Armadillo. The Hedge-hog hath his Back, Sides and Flanks thick set with strong and fliarp Prickles, and befides, by the help of a muscle given him for that purpose, is enabled to contradl himself into a globular Figure, and so to withdraw, inclofe, and hide his whole Under-part, Head, Belly and Legs (which for the Neceflities and Conveniences of Life mufl be left deftitute of thi§ Armour) within his Covert or Thicket of Prickles ; so that Dogs, or other rapacious Creatures, cannot lay hold upon him or bite him

without

without wounding their own Nofes and Mouths* The muscle whereby he is enabled to draw himself thus together, and gather up his whole Body like a Ball, the Parijtan Academijis describe to be a diftindt carnofe muscle, extended from the 0[fa imiominata to the Ear and nose, running along the Back-bone , without being faften'd thereto. Olaus Borrichius^ in the Danick Tranfadions, makes it to be an almost circular muscle, embracing the Panniculus carnofus^ of a won-* derful Fabrick, varioufly extending its Lacinice^ or Procefles, to the Feet, Tail, and Head of the Creature.

The other Creature which doth thus contrad: and draw up itself into a globular or oval Figure for its Defence, is the fecond Sort of Tatou^ or Armadillo^ largely defcrib^d by Marcgrave^ Lib, 6. cap. 9. by the Name of Tatu Apara^ which is covered on its Back and Sides with a strong fcaly Cruft or Shell, of a hard or honey Subftance, jointed like Armour, or the Scales of the Tail of a Lobfter, by four tranfverfe Commiffures in the middle of the Body, connected by tough Membranes. When it fleeps (as it doth for the most part in the Day-time, going forth to feed in the Night) or when one goes about to lay hold on it^ gathering up its fore and hind Legs as it were to one Point, and drawing its Ears with its Head inward, and bringing its Tail to its Head by reason of the fore-mention'd Commiflbres,

it

it bends its Back so far till its Head comes to touch its hind Part, and so with Armour gather itself into a round Ball, the lateral Extremities of the Shell touching one another, and inclofing the Body on the Sides, and the fore and hind Parts coming so near together, that there is nothing to be seen but the Armature of the Head and Tail, which, like Doors, fhut up the Hole wfeich the Shells of the Body left open ; this it performs by the Acflion of a notable muscle on each Side, of a great length, having the form of the Letter X, made up of many Fibres, decuflating one another long- ways, by the help whereof it can contraft its Shell, and hold it contracted with such a mighty Force, that he must be a strong Man indeed that is able to open it.

Had such a muscle as this, and such an Ability of Contraction, been given to any Creature that was cover'd with soft Hair or Fur, there might have been some Pretence to fancy that this was accidental, and not design'd -, but feeing there is not one instance of this kind in Nature, it must be great Stupidity to believe it, and an Impudence to aifert it; neither will the Atheifts ufual }cpn(7(pvyi<TjiVy or Refuge, that there were indeed at Jirjl such Creatures producd, but being obnoxious to those that werejiroug and rapacious^ they were by degrees dejlrofd, a?2d the Race loji, here help them out; because such a muscle, and Faculty of ufing it to that purpose, might as likely have fiillen to the Lot or Chance of a ilrong and

Z generous

generous Creature, which others dar'd not approach to hurt, who might for his own Difport have thus contraded himself into a Ball, of which Kind we find none.

I have before mentioned the Ufe affign'd by the honourable Mr. Boyle^ of famous Memory, lately deceas'd, to the P eriophthalmium ^ or negating Membrane in Brutes, wherein I could not fully acquiefce as to some Quadrupeds, which were in no danger of having their Eyes harm'd by Buflies and Prickles, or Twigs of Trees ^ since the writing whereof I have met with a different Account of the Ufe of that Membrane, in the Anatomical description of fever al Creatures diJfeBed by the^ Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris, Englifli'd by Mr. Alexander Pitfeld^ p. 249. in the description of the Caffowar, Our Opinion (say those Academifts") is, that the Membrane serves to clean the Cornea, and to hinder, that by drying, it grow no less transparent. Man and the Ape, which are the fole Animals wherein we have not found this Eye-lid, have not wanted this Provifion for the cleanfing of their Eyes, because that they have Hands, with which they may, by rubbing their Eye-lids, express the Humidity which they contain, and which they let out through the DuBm Lachrymalisy which is known by Experience^ when the Sight is darkened, or when the Eyes fuifer any Pain or itching ; for these Accidents do ceafe when the Eyes are rubb'd.

But

Part IL in the Creation, 339

But the Diffedion has diflindtly discover'd to us the Organs which do particularly serve for this Ufe, and which are otherwife in Birds than in Man, where the DuBus pafles not beyond the Glandula Lachrymalis -, for in Birds it goes beyond, and penetrating above half way on the internal Eye-lid, it is open'd underneath upon the Eye ; which is evidently done to fpread a Liquor oyer the whole Cornea^ when this Eye-lid pafles and repafles, as we obferv*d it to do every Moment.

The Artifice and Contrivance of Nature for the extending and withdrawing of this Curtain of the Periophthalmium in Birds is admirable ; but it is difficult so to express it in Words as to render it intelligible to the Reader; for a multitude of Words doth rather obfcure than illuftrate, they being a Burden to the Memory, and the first apt to be forgotten before we come to the lafl: ; so that he that ufes many Words for the explaining any Subjeft, doth, like the Cuttle-Fijh^ hide himself for the most part in his own Ink ; and in the description of the Figure and manner of the Extenfion and Contraction of this Membrane, the Parifian Academijis are confl:rain*d to ufe so many Words, that 1 am afraid few Readers Patience and Attention will lafl: so long as to comprehend and carry it away ; yet because it is so evident and irrefragable a Proof of wisdom and design , I could not omit it; rheir Words are these : The Particularities of the admirable Stru(5lure of this Eye-lid are such things as do difl:indly discover

Z 2 the

the wisdom of Nature among a thoufand others, of which we perceive not the Contrivance, because we understand them only by the Effeds, of which we know not the causes j but we here treat of a Machine, all the Parts whereof are visible, and which need only to be look'd upon to discover the reason of its Motion and Adion.

This internal Eye-lid in Birds is a membranous Part, which is extended over the Cornea when it is drawn upon it like a Curtain by a little Cord or Tendon, and which is drawn back again into the great Corner of the Eye, to uncover the Cornea^ by the means of the very strong Ligaments that it has, and which in drawing it back towards its Origin do fold it up ; it made a Triangle when extended, and it had the Figure of a Crefcent when folded up; its B a/Is (which is its Origin) was toward the great Corner of the Eye, at the edge of the great Circle, which the Sclerotica forms when it is flatted before, making an Angle with its anterior Part, that is, the Cornea^ which is raised like a Hill upon it; the Bafis, which is the Part immoveable, and faften^'d to the edge of the Sclerotica^ did take up more than a third Part of the Circumference of the great Circle of the Sclerotica ; the side of the Triangle, which is toward the little Corner of the Eye, and Is moveable, was reinforced with a Border, which fupplies the place of the 'TarfuSy and which is black in most Quadrupeds ; this side of the Eye-lid is that which is drawn back into the Corner of the 2 Eye,

Eye, by the Adion of the Fibres of the whole Eye-lid, which parting from its Origin, proceed to join themselves to its Tiarjus,

To extend this Eye-lid over the Ccrnea., there were two muscles that were seen, when fix were taken away, which ferv'd to the Motion of the whole Eye ; we found that the greatest of these tw^ muscles has its Origin at the very edge of the great Circle of the Sclerotica^ towards the great Corner, from whence the Eye-lid takes its Original ; it is very flefhy in its beginning, which is a large Bajis, from whence coming infenfibly to contrail itself by passing under the Globe of the Eye, like as the Eye-lid paffes over it, it approaches the Optick Nerve, where it produces a Tendon round and (lender, so that it paffes thro' the Tendon of the other muscle, which serves for a Pulley, and which hinders it from preffing the Optick Nerve, upon which it is bent, and makes an Angle, to pass thro' it to the upper Part of the Eye, and coming out from underneath the Eye to infert itself at the Corner of the Membrane which makes the internal Eye-lid; this fecond muscle hath its Original at the same Circle of the Sclerotica^ but oppofite to the first towards the little Corner of the Eye, and paffmg under the Eye like the other, goes to meet it, and embraces its Tendon, as has been declar'd.

The Aftion of these two muscles is, in refped to the first, to draw, by the means of its Cord or

Z 3 Tendon,

Tendon, the Corner of the internal Eye-lid, and to extend it over the Cornea ; as to the fecond muscle, its Adiion is, by making its Tendon to approach towards its Origin, to hinder the Cord of the first muscle, which it embraces, from hurting the Optick Nerve; but its principal Ufe is to affift the Adion of the first muscle ; and it is herein that the mechanism is marvellous in this Strufture, which makes that these two Mufclcs join'd together do draw much farther than if it had but one -, for the Infledlion of the Cord of the iirft muscle, which causes it to make an Angle on the Optick Nerve, is made only for this End ; and a fingle muscle with a ftrait Tendon had been sufficient, if it had Power to draw far enough ; but the Tradation which must make the Eye-lid extend over the whole Cornea being necessarily great, it could not be done but by a veiy long muscle, and such a muscle not being able to be lodg'd in the Eye all its length, there was no better way to supply the Adlion of a long muscle than by that of two indifferent ones, and by bending one of them to give it the greater Length in a little Space. Thus far the Academijis^ who themselves refleding on the Length and Obfcurity of this description, tell us, that the Infpedlion of the Figure will serve greatly to the understanding of it, which the Novelty of the thing renders obfcure in itself, and so I fear it will be to most Readers ; howbeit,in such a Work as this I ought not by any means, as I said before, to leave out such a notable Liftance, wherein

Contrivance

Contrivance and design do so clearly and undeniably appear.

The same Academijls^ as I remember, tell us, that they have found by Experience that the aqueous Humour of the Eye will not freeze; which is very admirable, feeing it hath the Perfpicuity and Fluidity of common Water, and hath not been taken notice of, so far as I have heard, to have any eminent Quality difcoverable either by Tafte or Smell; so that it must be of some fmgukr and sethereal nature, and deferves to be examined and annaliz'd by the curious Naturalifts of our Times.

The Providence of Nature is wonderful in a Camel or Dromedary^ both in the Strufture of his Body and in the Provifion that is made for the Suftenance of it ; concerning the first I shall instance only in the Make of his Foot, the Sole whereof, as the Parijian Academijis do observe, is flat and broad, being very fleflay, and cover'd only with a thick, fofr, and fomewhat callous Skin, but very fit and proper to travel in fandy Places, such as are the Defarts of Africk and Afia ; we thought (say they) that this Skin was like a living Sole, which wore not with the Swiftnefs and the Continuance of the March, for which this Animal is almost indefatigable ; and it may be this Softnefs of the Foot, which yields and fits itself to the Ruggednefs and Unevennefs of the Roads, does render the Feet less capable of being worn than if they were more folid.

Z 4 ^ As

As to the fecond, the Provifion that is made for their Suftenance in their continu'd Travels over fandy Defarts, the same Academifts observe, that at the top of the fecond Ventricle (for they are ruminant Creatures, and have fowre Stomachs) there vv^ere several fquare Holes, which were the Orifices of about twenty Cavities,made like Sacks, placed between the two Membranes which do compofe the Subftance of this Ventricle; the View of these Sacks made us to think that they might well be the Refer vatories, where P/iny says that Camels do a long time keep the V/ater, which they drink in great abundance when they meet with it, to supply the Wants which they may have thereof in the dry Defarts wherein they are us'd to travel, and where it is said that those that do guide them are fometimes forced, by Extremity of Thirft, to open their Bellies, in which they do find Water.

That such an Animal as this, so patient of long Thirft, {hould be bred in such droughty and parched Countries, where it is of such eminent Ufe for travelling over those dry and fandy Defarts, where no Water is to be had fometimes in two or three Days Journey, no candid and confiderate Perfon but must needs acknowledge to be an Effeft of Providence and design.

Such Animals as feed naturally upon Flefli, both Quadrupeds and Birds, because such kind of

Food

Food is high and rank, do qualify it, the one by Iwallowing the Hair or Fur of the beasts they prey upon, the other by devouring some part of the Feathers of the Birds they gorge themselves with, not eledtively, but because they cannot or will not take the Pains fully to plume them ; and therefore the F arifian Academijis do rationally refer the Death of one of the Lions whom they diffed^ed, to the feeding of him with too succulent and delicate Meat ; for (say they) we know that some time before his Death he was several Months without going out of his Den, and that it was hard to make him eat ; that for this reason some Remedies were prefcrib'd to him, and among others the eating only the Flefh of young Animals,and those alive ; and that those which look'd to the beasts of the Park of Vicennes^ to make this Food more delicate, did ufe a Method very extraordinary i which was, they flead Lambs alive, and thus made him eat several ; which at the first revived him, creating in him an Appetite, and making him brifk ; but it is probable that this Food engender'd ^too much Blood, and which was too fubtile for an Animal to whom Nature had not given the Induftry of flcaing those which he eat ; it being credible that the Hair, Wool, Feathers, and Scales, which all Animals of Prey do fvvallow, are a feafonable and neceifary Corrective, to prevent their G reed inefs from filling themselves with too succulent a Food.

Tho' I have declared in the beginning of this Work that the Means whereby cartilaginous

Fifties

Fifties raise and link phemfclves in the Water, and rest and abide in what Depth they pleafe, is not yet certainly known, yet I shall propound a Conjefture concerning it, which was first fuggefted to me by Mr. Peter Dent, late Phyfician in Cambridge^ viz. that it is by the help of Water which they take in and let out by two Holes in the lower Part of their Abdomen or Belly, near the Vent, or not far off it ; the Fleih of this Sort of Fifti being lax and fpongy, and nothing so firm, folid and weighty as that of the honey Filhes, and there being a good Quantity of Air contain'd in the Cavity of their Abdomen, they cannot fink in the Water without letting in some of it by these Holes (the Orifices whereof are opened and fliut at pleasure by the help of muscles provided for that purpose) into the hollow of their Bellies, whereby they preponderate the Water, and defcend j and when they would afcend, by a Compreflion wrought by the muscles of the Abdomen, they force out the Water again, or at least so much of it as may fuffice to give that degree of Levity they need or defire ; if it be found by Experience that the Bodies of these Fifties without this Ballaft would naturally float in the Water, and that they do really admit Water into their Bellies, then this Conjedure may have some Probability or Truth in it, otherwife not.

Upon the Contemplation and consideration of those various Ways and Contrivances which Nature (I mean the divine wisdom) hath made ufe

of

of for preparing the Chyle, feparating the nutricious Juice from the groffer Parts of the Aliment, and the several Humours and Spirits from the Blood, I cannot but admire her great wisdom, Art, and Curiofity ; for she hath not only employed all those Methods and Devices which Chymiils have either learn'd by Imitation of her, or invented of themselves, for annalizing of Bodies, feparating their Parts, the pure from the impure, and extracting their Spirits, &c. as Maceration in the first Stomach or Paunch of ruminating Creatures, and in the Craws of Birds; Comminution^ by grinding in the Mouths of viviparous Quadrupeds, and in the Gizzards of Poultry; Fermentation in the Stomachs of most terreftrial, and all aquatick Animals; Expre/jion and fqueezing in the Omafus.oi ruminant Quadrupeds, and in the Inteftines of all Creatures, by the motion of the Midriff and other muscles of the Belly, forcing the Chyle out of the Fceces or Excrements into the ladteal Veins ; Straining or Percolation by all the Vifcera of the Body, which are but as so many Colanders to feparate several Juices from the Blood; and lastly, Digeftion and Circulation in the fpermatick Parts and Veflels, and perhaps alfo in the Brain ; I say, it hath not only made ufe of these Operations, but it hath quite out-done the Chymifts, effedling that by a gentle Heat which they cannot perform without great Strefs of Fire ; as for instance, in the Stomach of a Dog, preparing a Liquor that diffolves Bones; and in the Bodies of some Infeds, a Liquor which i^^iris to

be

be as highly acid and corrofive as Oil of Vitriol or Spirit of Nitre, *viz. that which is inftill'd into the Blood when they fling > it is an Experiment I have met with in some Books, and made myself, that if you put Blue-bottles, or other blue Flowers into an Ant-hill, they will prefently be ftain'd with red ; the reason (which these Authors render not) is, because the Ants thruft in their Stings into the Flowers, and inftil into or drop upon them a small Mite of their flinging Liquor, which hath the same Effed: that Oil of Vitriol would have in changing their Colour, which is a fign that both Liquors are of the same nature.

Cafper Bartholine hath obferv'd, that where the Gullet perforates the Midriff, the carneous Fibres of that mufcular Part are infleded and arcuate, as it were a SphinBe?" embracing and clofing it fafl, by a great Providence of Nature, lefl in the perpetual Motion of the Diaphragm the upper Orifice of the Stomach should gape, and cafl out the Victuals as fafl as it received it; and Peyena thinks he hath obferv'd, that in ruminating Creatures the Connection of the Gullet with the Diaphragm is far flraiter and flronger than in Man and other Animals, to the end that there should not be more than one Morfel forced out at once ; for that external Sphincfter inhibits a too great Dilatation of the Gullet, and doth as it were measure out the Morfels, and fit them to. the Capacity of the Oefopbagia,

I fhaU

I (hall conclude with a notable Relation of Gakfi's, Lib, 6. de locis effeBis^ cap. 6. concerning a Kid taken by him alive out of the Dam's Belly, and houriflVd and brought up.

c)KovoiJi.ict?^ lu^av 'm'n 'f^ovoAov to "ifji.Cfvov AmKvcn ^dv i^i ^'-

^ Ki'nV bin T«T« XJUffd/l/^OV Ivi r ^aoi'^v T *OK^^V^ ^ T

OTt^T??, iva^yai h^avm omf 'I'tt'ttok^.tK V^H ^tV«^ (^«dyy et-f)' tfkKToi . JLcu ToiyuM }y dvidfi'^dfivip haeivc so iei^(QV eiefb' /j^ 71 ns^ff(pi^fj^ov v^e^v « 7B j^i'Art/woj/oi', d}^a y^ rtM*

ciMfMmfMiV 'ewra fMhttK^i dKfi[j.Qva4 ^'^vav 7^ xj ^i/T&Tr, <y/

T ^ ? l^y^^^f «t'C' ^^^^i' %Jia-f^'7av, 'AAA a tht^ f^ 'i<mi fjuiL^V C4LHV9 3 (Aycc. To, rjj^ ^v>^a. ty TiAx {.cccKcLKvi aK^ifAOvas

ftihiv ^AozL^oi myjii a.yiC(i»<7ttv AK'TrKccyviTtf ^ r r ^coav Jhveiiu/iffi' (iiya. fjS^ 3^ M ;^ TO irmliio^v J^d re th so^T©- j^ <r^ ccPivTwy (u^<rpifi^az r Ccftyc/VjV' cfcA\* on to Kg^TttTro^y «V -5^ >a-

^(UjyLA<nov gj). Tlct^^^oi 3 '^»•o^^o« Ttt rotaxtTtt. i^i ^vaias if^j (zoycL Tct ^syet StAfwtT* ^cw^^ovTii. That Is to say.

Nature forming, fa/hiom?2gy and perfecting the Parts of the Body, hath so brought it to pass, that they (hould of themfehes, without any teaching, set about and perform their proper ABiom ; and of this I once made a great Experiment, bringing up a Kid without ever feeing its Dam ; for diffeEling some Goats great with Toung, to refohe some ^ejiions made by Anatomifis concerning the 0 economy ofNa-^ ture in the Formation of the Foetus in the Womb, and finding a brisk Embryon \young one] J loosed it from the Matrix after our ufual manner, and fhatching it away before itfaw its Dam, I brought it into a certain Room, having many Veffels full, some of Wine, some of Oil, so??ie of Honey, some of Milk, or some other Liquor , and others, not afeWy filtd with all Sorts of Grain, as alfo with several Fruits^ and there laid it. T'his Embryon we faw

Part 11. in the Great lo^. 351

Jirji ^f all getting up on its Feet and walkings as if it had heard that its Legs were given it for that furpofcy next Jhaking off the Slime it was befmeard with from the Womb-, and moreover^ thirdly^ fcratching its Side with one of its Feet ; then we faw itfmelling to every one ofthofe things that were Jet in the Room ; and when it had [melt to them ally it fupfd up the Milk j whereupon we all for Admiration cry*d outy feeing clearly the Truth of what Hippocrates 7^/7/6, that the Natures and ABiom of Animals are not taught (but by InJlinB.) Hereupon I nourifjd and reard this Kidy and obfervd it afterwards not only to eat Milky but some other things that flood by it. And the I'ime when this Kid was taken out of the Womb being about the Vernal Equinox , after some two Months , were brought into it the tender Sprouts of Shrubs and PlantSy and it again fmelling of all of them y inflantly refusd fomey but was pleas' d to tajle others -, and after it had tajledy began to eat of such as are the ufual Food of Goats, Fer chance this may seem a small things but what I ft: all now relate is great \ for eating the heaves and tender Sprout Sy it jwaU low'd them downy and then a while after it began to chew the Cud, which all that faw cryd out again with Admirationy being aftoniftdd at the InftinBs and natural Faculties of Animals ; for it was a. great thing that when the Creature was hungry it ftoould take in the Food by the Mouthy and chew it with its Teeth , but that it ftould brijigup again in- " to the Mouth that which it had fwallow d down in- 2 to

352 T/)eWisDOM of GOD Partll.

to itsfirji Stomachy and chewing if there a long time> it JJoould grind aftd Jinooth /V, afterwards fwallow it again^ not into the same Stomachy but i^ito another ^ feenid to us wonderful indeed. But many negledi such Works of NaturCy admiri?2g only flrange and unufual Sights. So far Gaht.

This pleafant and admirable Story, should one consider all the Particulars of it, and endeavour to give an Account of them, as alfo all the Inferences that might be drawn from it, one might fill- a w^hole Volume with Comments upon it. All that I shall at present say is this. That in all this Oeconomy, and these Aftions, Council and design doth so clearly appear, that he must needs be very ftupid that doth not difcern it, or impudent that can deny it. I might add, that there seems to be fomething more than can be performed by mere mechanism in the Election this Creature made of its Food; for before it would eat of any, it smell'd to all the Liquors before it, and when it had done so, betook itself to the Milk, and devoured that; he doth not say that the Milk was the last Liquor it fmeird to, or that when it had once smell'd to that, it prefently drank it up. The like alfo he faith of

all

Part IT. f;^ //5^ C R E A T I o K. 353

all the Sprouts and Branches of Plants that were laid before it. By the by we may take notice of one thing very remarkable, that this Kid of its own accord drank Milk after the manner it had done in the Womb; whereas had it once drawn by the Nipple, it would hardly have fupp'd the Milk; and therefore in weaning young Creatures the best way is never to let them fuck the Paps at al>, for then they will drink up Milk without any difficulty ; whereas if they have fuck'd, some will very hardly, others by no means be brought to drink : But how do the Young with such Facility come to take the Nipple, and to fuck at it, which they had never before us'd to do ? Here we must have recourfe to natural Inftind:, and the Diredion of some fuperior cause.

Notice hath been already taken in an observation communicated by my learned Friend Dr. Tancred Robin/on^ of the Providence of Nature in so forming the Membranes of the Body as to be capable of a prodigious Dilatation and Extenfion, which is of great Ufe in some Difeafes ; for Example, the Dropfy, to continue Life for some time till Remedy may be had ; and if not, to give time to prepare for Death: But the wisdom and Delign of this Texture doth in no instance more clearly appear, than in the necessity of it for the Womb in the time of Geftation ; for were not the Womb in Women, which during Virginity is not bigger than a small Purfe, almost infinitely dilatable, and alfo the Ferttomum^ not to mention

A a the

the Skin and the Cuticula^ how were it possible it ihould contain the Child, nay, fometimes Twins, with all their Appurtenances, the Secundines, the Placenta^ the Liquor or Waters, and what elfe is necessary for the Defence, Nutrition, respiration, and soft and convenient lodging of them, till they come to their due Perfedion and Maturity for Exclufion ? How could the Child have room to grow there to his Bignefs, and flir and turn himself, as is requifite ? Add hereto another observation of Blafiiis^y particularly relating to this Subjed ; he hath obferv'd that the Veffels of the in-» terior glandulous Subftance of the Womb are ftrangely contorted and ^refledled with Turnings and Meanders, that they might not be too much ftrain'd, but their Folds being extended and abo^ liih'd, they might accommodate themselves without danger of Rupture to the neceiTary Extenfion of the uterine Subftance at that time.

Another remarkable Proof of Counfel and Delign may be fetched from the Formation of the Veins and Arteries near the Heart, which I meet with in Dr. Lowers Treatife, de Corde. Juft before the entrance of the Right Auricle of the Heart (faith he) to wit, where the afcending Trunk of the Ve?ia Cava meeting with the defcending, is ready to empty itself into the said Right Auricle, there occurs in it a very remarkable Knob or Bunch [T'uberculum'] rais'd up from the fubjacent Fat, by the Interpofition whereof the Blood falling down by the defcending Vein is diverted in

the

the Auricle, which otherwife encouiitring and bearing upon that of the afcendcnt Trunk, would very much hinder and retard the motion of it upward towards the Heart ; and because in an ere6l Site and Figure of the Body there is a greater and more imminent danger of such an Accident, therefore the Vena Cava in Mankind hath this Tubercle far greater and of more extent than it is in Brutes ; so that if you thruft your Finger into either Trunk, you can hardly fihd passage or Admittance into the other.

But in Quadrupeds, as in Sheepy DogSy horse, Kine^ in which the course of the Blood from either Extreme of the Body is more equal, and as it were in a plainer Level ; and because the Heart by rcafon of its Bulk and Weight hanging downwards, both Trunks of the Vena Cava have some little Declivity towards it, there is no need of so great a Bar and Diverfion in them, yet are they not altogether devoid of it.

Moreover, left the Blood here in its Conflux should make a kind of Flood and Whirlpool, whilft the Auricle being contracted doth not give it free Ingrefs, therefore in this place the Vena Cava in great Animals, as well Man as Quadrupeds, is round about mufculous, as well that it may be reftrain'd and kept within its due Limits of Extenfion, as that it may more vigoroufly and ftrongly urge and impel the Blood into the Cavity of the Auricle. ^

A a 2 Befides,

356 neWisDouof GOD PartlL Befides, there is no less Providence and Caution us'd that the Blood, when it is forcibly cast out of the Left Ventricle of the Heart, be not unequally diftributed to the fuperior and inferior Parts j for whereas this Gate or Orifice of the Heart opens right upwards, if that Channel which receives the first Impulfe of the Blood did lead in a ftrait Line up to the Region of the Head, it could not be but that it must be pour'd too fwiftly upon the Brain, and so the inferior Parts of the Body must needs be defrauded of their vital Liquor and Aliment ; which Inconvenience, that the .divine Architedt of the Body might wholly obviate and avoid in Animals, whose Hearts are more ftrongly mov'd, he so artificially contrived the Trunk of the Aortay which is next the Heart, that the Blood runs not diredly into the axillary and carotid Arteries, but doth as it were fetch a Compafs y for in the middle Space between the Ventricle and those Arteries it is very much inflefted or bent -, whence it comes to pass that that crooked Angle fuftains the Force and first Stroke of the ejefted Blood, and diredls the greatest Torrent of it towards the defcending Trunk of the Aorta, which otherwife would rufti too forcibly into the fuperior Branches thereof, diftending them immoderately, and foon opprefs and burden the Head. So far Dr. Lowther.

To elude or evade the Force of all thefc instances, and innumerable others which might be produced, to demonftrate that the Bodies of Men and z all

Part IL in the Creation. 357

all other Animals were the EfFedls of the wisdom and Power of an intelligent and almighty Agent, and the several Parts and Members of them design'd to the Ufes to which now they serve, the Atheift hath one Subterfuge, in which he most confides, 17/2;. that all these Ufes of Parts are no more than what is necessary to the very Exiftence of the Things to whom they belong, and what Tilings made Ufes, and not Ufes Things.

Nil ideo natum est in corpore ut uti

Pojfemus, fed quod natum eji id procreat ufum,

Saith Lucretius^ Lib. 4.

And having inftanc'd in several Members, he concludes,

— Omnia denique membra Antefuere^ ut opinor^ eorum quamfuit ufus,

I shall give you their Senfe, together with the Confutation of it, in Dr. Bentleys Words, borrow'd out of his fifth Ledlure, &c,

these things (say * they) are mi- * rh Atheijis. ftaken for Tokens of Skill and Contrivance, whereas they are but necessary consequences of the prefenc Exiftence of those Creatures to which they belong ; for he that fuppofeth any Animals to fubfift, doth by that very Suppofition allow them every Member and Faculty that are necessary to Subfiftence; and therefore uulefs

A a 3 we

we can prove a priori, and independent on this Ufefulnefs, now that Things are once fuppos'd to have exifted and propagated, that among al~ most infinite Trials and Effays at the beginning of Things, among Millions of monftrous Shapes and imperfeft Formations, a few such Animals as now exift could not pofjibly be produc'd, these after-Confiderations are of very little moment ; because if such Animals could in that way pojfibly be form'd, as might live and move, and propagate their Beings, all this admir'd and applauded Ufefulnefs of their several Fabricks is but a necessary Condition and consequence of their Exiftence and Propagation.

This is the last Pretence and Sophiftry of the Atheijh against the Propofition in my Text \AEis xvii. 27.] that we receiv'd our Life arid Being from a divine wisdom and Power ; and as they cannot juftly accufe me of concealing or baulking their grand Objection, f o I believe these following Confiderations will give them no reason to boaft that it cannot receive a juft and fatiffadory answer,

(i.) Firji^ therefore, we affirm that we can prove, and have done it already by Arguments a friori (which is the Challenge of the Atheijls) that these Animals that now eiift could not pofiibly have been form'd at first by Millions of TriaJs j for feeing they allow by their very Hypothefis (and without llaniing to that Courtefy we have

prov'd

Part I L in the Cke ATio^. 3.59

prov'd it before) that there can be no cafual or Spontaneous motion of the Particles of Matter, it will follow, that every fingle Monfter, among fb many fuppos'd Myriads, must have been mechanically and necelfarily form'd, according to the known Laws of Motion, and the Temperament and Quality of the Matter it was made of, which is sufficient that no such Monfters were or Gpuld have been form'd ; for to denominate themr even Monfters they must have had some rude kind of drganical Bodies, some Stamina of Life, tho' never so clumfy, some Syjlem of Parts, compounded of Solids and Liquids, that executed (tho' but bunglingly) their peculiar Motions and Functions. But we have lately fliewn it impoffible for Nature unaflifted to conftitute such Bodies, whose Strudlure is against the Law of fpecifick Gravity ; so that flie could not make the least Endeavour towards the producing of a Monfter, or of any thing that hath more vital and organ ical Parts than we find in a Rock of Marble or a Fountain of Water. And again, tho' we should not contend with them about* their Monfters and Abortions, yet feeing that they suppose even the perfed: Animals that are still in being to have been form'd mechanically among the rest, and only add some Millions of Monfters to the Reckoning, they are liable to all the Difficulties in the former Explication, and are exprefly refuted thro' the whole preceding Ser?no?i^ where it is abun- . dantly fliewn that a spontaneous Production is against the CathoUck Laws of Motion, and a-

A a 4 gainft

gainft Matter of Fadt, a thing without Example, not only in Man and the nobler Animals, but in the smallest of Infefts and the vileft of Weeds ; tho' the Fertility of the Earth cannot be said to have been impaired since the beginning of the World.

(2.) Secondly, We may observe that this Evafion of the Atbeijt is fitted only to elude such Arguments of' divine wisdom as are taken from Things necessary to the Confervation of the Animal, as the Faculties ofSight, and Motion, and Nutrition, and the like, because such Ufefulnefs is indeed included in a general Suppofuion of the Exlftence of that Animal; but it miferably fails him againit other reasons, from such Members and Powers of, the Body as are not necessary absolutely to living and propagating, but only much conduce to our better Subfiftence and happier Condition. So the most obvious Contemplation of the Frame of our Bodies, as that we all have double Senfories^ two Eyes^ two Ears, two Nofirih, is an effectual Confutation of this atheiflical Sophifm; for a double Organ , of these Senfes. is not at all comprehended in the Notion of bare Exiftence, one of them being fufRcient to have preferv'd Life and continu'd the Species, as common Experience witneffeth. Nay, even the very Nails of our Fingers are an infallible Token of Delign and Contrivance, for they are ufeful and convenient, to give Strength and Firmnefs to those i'arts in the various Funftions they are put to,

and

Part 11. in the Cke AT ION. 361

and to defend the numerous Nerves and Tendonsthat are under them, which have a most exquifite Senfe of Pain, and without that native Armour would continually be expos'd to it j it is manifest therefore that there was a Contrivance and Forefight of the Ufefulnefs of Nails antecedent to their Formation j for the old ftale Pretence of the Atheijis^ that Things were first made fortuitoufly, an(^ afterwards their Ufefulnefs was obferv'd or discover'd, can have no place here, ufilefs Naik were either absolutely requifite to the Exiftence of Mankind, or were found only in some Individuals or some Nations of Men, and so might be afcrib'd to necessity upon one Account, or to Fortune upon another. But from the Atheifls Suppofition, that among the infinite Diverfity of the first terreftrial Productions, thei;e were Animals of all imaginable Shapes and Structures of Body, all of which furviv'd and multiply'd, that by reason of their Make and Fabrick could pofilbly do so. It neceflTarily follows that we should now have some Nations without Nails upon their Fingers, others with one Eye only, as the Poets describe yht Cyclopes in Sicily^ and the Arimafpi in Scythia ; others with one Ear, or with one Noftri], or indeed without any Organ of fmelling, because that Senfe is not necessary to Man's Subfiftence -, others deftitute of the Ufe of Language, feeing that Mutes alfo may live. One People would have the Feet of Goats, as the feign'd Satyrs and Panifci-, another would resemble the liead of Jupiter Ammon, or the horned Statues

of

of Bacchus \ the Sciopedes and EnotocetcCy and other monftrous Nations, would be no longer Fables, but real instances in Nature; and in a word, all the ridiculous and extravagant Shapes that can be imagined, all the Fancies and Whimfies of Poets and Painters, and /Egyptian Idolaters, if so be they are confiftent with Life and Propagation, would be now adually in Being if our Atbeijh Notion were true; which therefore may defervedly pass' for a mere Dream and an Error, till they pleafe to make new Difcoveries in the 'terra iTicognita^ and bring along with them some Savages of all these fabulous and monftrous Configurations. Thus far Dr. Bentley: who adds four Confiderations more to confute this Fancy, ex abunda7itt^ granting the Atheiji all the absurd Suppofitions he «can make ; for which, tho' they be very well worth the reading, yet being too long to tranfcribe, I refer the Reader to the Sermon itself

I shall now farther prove by a notable instance that Ufes made Things, that is to say, that some Things were m-ade defignedly and on purpose for such an Ufe as they serve to ; and that is, the Tendrels or Clafpers of Plants, because they are given only to such Species as have weak and infirm Stalks, and cannot raise up to fupport themfelvesby their own Strength ; we see not so much as one Tree, or Shrub, or Herb, that hath a firm and strong Stem, and that is able to mount up and stand alone without Affiftance, furnifti'd with them ; whereas had they been without Defigi> "

fcatter'd

fcatter'd (as I may say) indifferently and carelefly among Plants, it could not possibly have happen'd but among so many thoufand Species they rauft have fallen to the Lot of some few at least, some one of the strong, and not only of the v^eak ; the same hath been prov'd by the instance of the Power given to the Hedge-hog and Armadillo^ of contracting their Bodies into a globular Figure, and so hiding and fecuring their tender and unarmed Parts.

2. I shall prove by another eminent instance that Things did not make Ufes, because there is a Sort of Creatures which have all the Parts and Organs which are fitted for a certain Aftion, and employed for the Exercife of it by another Sort, and yet make no ufe of them for that purpose ; that is, the Ape-Kind; the Parifian Academijii in their Anatomy of some Animals of this Kind tell us, that the muscles of the Os Hyoides^ Tongue, Larynx and Pharynx, which do most serve to articulate a Word, were wholly like to those of Man; and a great deal more than those of the Handy which neverthelefs the Ape, which speaks not, ufes with as much Perfedion as a Man ; which demonftrates that Speech is an Adlion more peculiar to Man, and which more diftinguiflies him from Brutes than the Hands, which Anaxagoras, Arijiotle and Galen have thought to be the Organ which Nature has given to Man as to the wifeft of all Animals, for want perhaps of this Refiedion j for the Ape is found provided by Natuie

ture of all those marvellous Organs of Speech lyeith so much Exadnefs, that the very three small muscles which do take their Rife from the Apoihefis Styhides are not wanting, altho' this Apo^ tbejts be extremely small -, this Particularity doth likewife shew that there is no reason to think that Agents do perform such and such Adtions because they are found w^ith Organs proper thereunto; for according to these Philofophers Apes {hould speak, feeing that they have all the Inftruments necessary for Speech 5 all this is confirmed and approv'd by the learned and accurate Dr. T'yfon in his Anatomy of the Orang-Outrang or Pigmy y he finding in the Animal he defcrib'd (which was of the Ape-Kind) the whole Strufture of the Larynx and Os Hyoides exadly as it is in Man ; and the Refledion which the Pariftans make upon their observation of these and the neighbouring Parts, he thinks very juft and valuable ; and adds farther, that this is not the only instance which may juftify such an Inference, tho' he thinks it so strong an one as the Atheijis can never answer.

It is farther considerable , and adds to ' the Weight of this instance, that tho' Birds have been taught to imitate human Voice, and to pronounce Words, yea, Sentences; yet Quadrupeds never, tho* they have Organs far more fit for that purpose, and some of them, viz. Dogs and HorfeSy converfe almost perpetually with Men; and others, as Apes, are given naturally to imitate Mens AtUonpj as if Providence had design'd purpofely

to

to confute this fond Conceit of the Atheijisy by denying them the Power to make ufe of these Organs of Speech, which, whether they understand what they said or not, they otherwife might and would have done in Imitation of Man, and that to greater Perfed:ion than Birds do, or are capable of doing.

Earther, To prove that those 72ohI.er Faculties of the Soul, reason and IJnderJianding^ cannot be produced by Matter organiz'd , but must have a higher Principle, * he » Dr. T%for. thus argues : It is an observation of Vefaliuss^ that the Brain of Man, in rcfpedof his Body, is much larger than what is to be met with in any other Animals, exceeding in Bignefs three Oxes Brains ; whence he infers, that as Animals excel in the Largenefs of the Brain, so they do Jikewife in the principal Faculties of the Soul ^ which Inference the Dodor cannot allow.

It is (faith he) a generally receiv'd Opinion, that the Brain is the immediate Seat of the Soui itself ; whence one would be apt to think, tku feeing there is so great a Difparicy between the Soul of a Man and a Brute^ the Organ in which it is plac'd fhculd be very different too ; yet, by comparing the Brain of our Pigmy [the Orang-^ Oiitra?ig, or wild Ma?i\ with that of a Ma72^ and with, the greatest Exad:nefs obferving each Part 'in both, it was very furprizing to me to find (o great a resemblance of the one to the other, as

nothing

366 T6eWisDOM of GOD Part 11,

nothing could be more; and that in proportion to its Body its Brain was alfo as large as a Man's.

Since therefore (he proceeds) the Brain of our Pigmy doth in all Refpeds so exadly resemble a Man's, I might here make the same Reflection the Parijiaiis did upon the Organs of Speech^ that there is no reason to think that Agents do perform such and such Aftions because they are found with Organs proper thereunto, for then our Pigmy might be really a Man; the Organs in animal Bodies are only a regular Compages of Pipes and Veffels for the Fluids to pass thro', and are paffive ; what adtuates them are the Humours and Fluids, and animal Life consists in their due and regular Motion in this organical Body j but those nobler Faculties in the Mind of Man must certainly have a higher Principle, or Matter organizd could never produce them ; for why elfe, where the Organ is the same, should not the ^^/(?w be the same too?

Objeft. Some may here objeB and argue : If the Body of Man be thus perfe^, why did God make any other Animals '? For the mofi perfeB Being, the bejl, an infinitely good Agent ^ which wants neither wisdom 7ior Power, pould (one would think) only produce the mofi perfect.

Anfw, To which I anfwcr : i. That according to this Argumentation one might infer, that God must produce but one Kind of Creature, and that

the

the most perfed: that he is able, which is impoifible ; for he being infinite in all Perfedion, cannot adt ad extremum viriuniy unless he could produce an infinite Creature, that is, another God, which is a Contradidtion ; but whatever he makes must want Degrees of infinite Perfedion, of which he could still (if he pleas'd) add more and more to it.

2. The inferior Creatures are perfed in their Order and Degree, wanting no Quality or Per-r feftion that is necessary or due to their Nature and Condition, their Place, and manner of living; now, why God might not make several fubordinate Ranks and Degrees of Creatures, they being good, I see no reason.

3. these several Ranks and Degrees of Crea^ tures are fubfervient one to another, and the most of them ferviceable, and all some way or other ufeful to Man -, so that he could not well hava been without them.

4. God made these several Orders and Degrees, and in each Degree so many Varieties of Creatures^ for the manifeftation and difplaying of his infinite Power and wisdom ; for we have {hewn before by a familiar instance, that there is more Art and wisdom shewn in contriving and forming a Multitude of different Kinds of Engines than in on? only.

5. Yet do I not think that he made all these Creatures to no other End but to be ferviceable to Man, but alfo to partake themselves of his overflowing goodness, and to enjoy their own Beings, If we admit all other Creatures in this

2 ^ inferior

inferior World befides Man to be mere Machines or Automata^ to have no Life, no Senfe nor Perception of any thing, then I confefs this reason is out of Doors, for being uncapable of pleasure or Pain they can have no Enjoyment ; upon this account aUb, among others, I am less inclinable to that Opinion.

I should now proceed to answer some Objeaions which might be made against the wisdom and goodness of God in the Contrivance and Governance of the World, and all Creatures therein contain d; but that is too great and difficult a Talk for my Weaknefs, and would take up more Time than I have at present to fpare were I qua-

*M Robert ^^^1 ^ ^^^ ^^' ^^^ befides fwell this BurfcQugh of Volume to too great a Bulk ; only I ffotnefs , in {^^11 say fomething to one Particular •^^^^'^* which was fuggefted to me by a learned and pious ^ Friend.

Objeft. A wife Agent a6is for Ends. Now 'what End can there be of creating such a vajl Multitude of Infers as the World is JiWd withy moji of which seem to be ujelefsy and some alfo noxious and pernicious to Man and other Creatures?

Anfw. To this I {hall answer: i. As to the Multitude of Species or Kinds. 2. As to the Number of Individuals in each Kind.

Firjly As to the Multitude of Species (which we must needs acknowledge to be exceeding great, they being not fewer, perchance

more

more than Twenty Thoufand.) I anfvver, there were lb many made,

1. To manifest and difplay the Riches of the Power and wisdom of God, Pfalm civ. 24. The Earth is full of thy Riches, so is the great and wide Seay wherein are Things creeping injiumerable, &c* We should be apt to think too meanly of those Attributes of our Creator, should we be able to come to an End of all his Works, even in this fublunary World ; and therefore I believe never any Man yet did, never any Man shall so long as the World endures, by his utmoft Induftry attain to the Knowledge of all the Species of Nature ; hitherto we have been so far from it, that in Vegetables the Number of those which have been discover'd this last Age hath far exceeded that of all thpfe which were known before j so true is that we quoted before out of Seneca: Fufilla res eji munduSy niji in eo quod qucerat omnis, mundus, habeat. The World is so richly furnifh'd and provided, that Man need not fear want of Employment should he live to the Age of Methujelah, or ten times as long ; but of this, having touch'd it already, I {hall add no more.

2. Another reason why so many Kinds of Creatures were made, might be to exercife the contemplative Faculty of Man, which is in nothing so much pleas'd as in variety of Objects ; we foon grow weary of one Study, and if all the Objects of the World could be comprehended by us, we should with Alexander think the World too little for us, and grow weary of running in a Round of

B b feeing

feeing the same Things ; new Objefts afford us great Delight, especially if found out by our own Induftry. I remember Clufius faith of himself, *' That upon the discovery of a new Plant he " did not less rejoice than if he had found a rich " Treafure/* Thus God is pleas'd, by referving things to be found out by our Pains and Induftry, to provide us Employment most delightful and agreeable to our Natures and Inclinations.

3. Many of these Creatures may be ufeful to us whose Ufes are not yet discover'd, but referv*d for the Generations to come, as the Ufes of some we now know are but of late Invention, and were unknown to our Forefathers ; and this must needs be so, because, as I said before, the World is too great for any Man or Generation of Men, by his or their utmoft Endeavours, to discover and find out all its Store and Furniture, all its Riches and Treafures.

Secondly^ As to the Multitude of Individuals in each Kind of InJeB, I answer :

I. It is design'd to fecure the Continuance and Perpetuity oi the several Species, which if they did not multiply exceedingly, scarce any of them could efcape the Ravine of so many Enemies as continually aifault and prey upon them, but would be in danger to be quite deftray'd and lofl: out of the World.

z 2. This

Part IL in the Creation. 37 i

2. This vast Multitude of Infeds is ufeful to Mankind, if not immediately, yet mediately. It -Cannot be deny'd tlmt Birds are of great tFfe to us, their Flefli affording us a good Part of our Food, and that the molt delicate too, and their other Parts Phyfick, not excepting their very Excrements 'y their Feathers serve to iluff our Beds and Pillows, yielding us soft and warm Lodging, which is no small Convenience and Comfort to us,efpeGlally in these northern Parts of the World ; some of them have alfo been always employed by military Men in Plumes, to adorn their Crefts, and render them formidable to their Enemies ; their Wings and Quills are made ufe of for writing- Pens, and to bru{h and cleanfe our Rooms, and their Furniture ; befides, by their melodious Accents they gratify our Ears ; by their beautiful Shapes and Colours they delight our Eyes, being very ornamental to the World, and rehdring the Countpy, where the Hedges and Woods are full of thenhf, very pleafant and chearly, which without them would be no less lonely and melancholy J not to mention the Exercife, Diveriion and Recreation v^^hich some of them give us.

Now Infedsfupply Land Birds with the chiefeft Part of their Suftenance ; some, as the entire Genu^ of Swallows, live wholly upon them, as I could eafily make out did any Man deny or doubt of it ; and not Swallows alone, but alfo Wood-peckers, if riot wholly, yet chiefly 5 and all other Sorts of Birds partly, especially in Winter-time, as appears by diffedtine their Stomachs.

" B b 2 As

372 iTjeWisDouof GOD Part IL

As for young Birds which are brought up in the Neft by the old, they are fed chiefly if not folely by Infeds ; and therefore for the time when Birds for the most part breed, in the Spring, when there are Multitudes of Caterpillars to be found on all Trees and Hedges -, moreover, it is very remarkable, that of many such Birds as when grown up feed almost wholly upon Grain, the young ones are nourifh'd by Infefts ; for example, Pheafants and Partridges^ which are well known to be granivorous Birds, the Young live only or moftly upon Ants Eggs. Now Birds, being of a hot Nature, are very voracious Creatures, and eat abundantly, and therefore there had need be an infinite Number of Infedls produc'd for their Suftenance,. Neither do Birds alone, but many Sorts ofFifhes, feed upon Infcds, as is well known to Anglers, who bait their Hooks with them -, nay, which is more ftrange, divers Quadrupeds feed upon Infeds, and some live wholly upon them, as two Sorts of "Tamundiius upon Ants, which therefore are call'd in EngliJId Ant-Bears ; the Cnmelion upon Flies -, the Mole upon Earth-worms; the Badger alfo lives chiefly upon Beetles, Worms, and other Infeds.

Here we may take notice by the way, that because so many Creatures live upon Ants and their Eggs, Providence hath so ordered it, that they should be the most: numerous of any Tribe of Iniefts that we know.

Confor-

Conformable to this Particular is the reason my ingenious and inquifitive Friend Mr. Derbmn^ before remember'd, hath given of the Produdlion of such innumerable Multitudes of some aquatick Infed:s.

I have often thought (faith he) that there v^as some more than ordinary Ufe in the Creation for such Infeds as are vaftly numerous, such as the Pulices aquaticiy which are in such Swarms as to difcolour the Waters,and many others ; and therefore I have bent my Enquiries to find out the Ufes of such Creatures, wherein I have so far fucceeded, as to discover, that those vaftly small Ajtimalcula^ not to be seen without a Microfcope, with which the Waters are replete, fcrve for Food to some others of the small Infedts of the Water, particularly to the Nympha Culicaria [Hirjuta it may be call'd] figur'd in S'wammerdam 5 for viewing that Nympha one Day, to observe the motion of its Mouth, and for what purpose it is in such continual motion, whether as Fifh to get Air, or to fuck in Food, or both, I could plainly perceive the Creature to fuck in many of the most minute Animalculay that were fwimming brifkly about in the Water 5 neither yet do these Animalcules serve only for Food to such Nymphce, but alfo to another, to me anonymous Infed of the Waters, of a dark Colour, cleft as it were in funder, and scarce so big as the smallest Pin's Head ; these Inieds hunt these AnunalcideSy and other small Creatures that occur in the Water, and devour them ; and I am apt to think, altho' I have not yet seen it,

B b 3 that

that the Pulex aquaticus arborefcens liveth upon these, or more minute and tender AnimalculeSy and that it is to catch them that it so leaps in the Water.

This to me seems a wonderful Work of God, to provide for the minuteft Creatures of the Waters Food proper for them, that is, minute and tender, and fit for their Organs of fwallowing.

As for noxious Infeds, why there j(hquld be so many of them produc'd, if it be demaj^ded,

I answer, i. That many that are noxipus to us, are falutary to other Creatures i and fomc that are Poifon to us, are Food to them. So we see the Poultry-Kind feed upon Spiders-, nay, there is scarce any noxious Infedt but one Bird or other eats ir, either for Food or Phyfick; for many, nay, most of those Creatures whose Bite or Sting is poifonous, may fafely be taken entire into the Stomach ; and therefore it is no Wonder that not only the Ibis of Egypt, but even Storks and Peacocks, prey upon and deftroy all Sorts of Serpents as well as Locujis and Caterpillars,

2. Some of the most venomous and pernicious of Infedis afford us noble Medicines, as Scorpions, SpiderSy and Cantharides,

3. these Infeds feldom make ufe of their offenfive Weapons, unkfs affaulted or provok'd in their own Defence, or to revenge an Injury i let

them

Part jr. in the CKi^kTio^. 375

them but alone, and annoy them not, nor difturb their Young, and, unless accidentally, you shall feldom suffer by them.

Lajil)\ God is pleased fometimes to make ufe of them as Scourges, to chaftizc or punifli wicked Perfons or Nations, as he did Herod and the Egyptians -, no Creature so mean and contemptibfe, but God can when he pleafes produce such Armies of them, as no human Force is able to conquer or deftroy, but they shall of a fudden confume and devour up all the Fruits of the Earth, and whatever might serve for the Suftenance of Man, as Locujls have often been obferv'd to do.

Did these Creatures serve for no other Ufe, as they do many, yet those that make them an Obje(5llon against the wisdom of God, may (as Dr. Cockhurn well notes) as well upbraid the Prudence and Policy of a State for keeping Forces, which generally are made up of very rude and infolent People, which yet are necessary, either to fupprefs Rebellions, or punifh Rebels, and other diforderly and vicious Perfons, and keep the World in Quiet.

From that Part of this discourse which relates to the Body of Man, I shall make these pradtical Inferences.

B b 4 Infer.

Infer, i. Firji^ Let us give Thanks to Almighty God for the Perfection- and Integrity of our Bodies 5 it would not be amifs to put it into the euchariftical Part of our daily Devotions: We praise thee, O God, for the due Number, Shape, and Ufe of our Limbs and Senfes j and in general, of all the Parts of our Bodies ; we blefs thee for the found and healthful constitution of them, Ffal. X. It is thou that haft made us, and not we ourselves ; in thy Book were all our Members written. The Formation of the Body is the Work of God, and the whole process thereof attributed to him, Pfal cxxix. 13, 14, 15. The Mother that bears the Child in her Womb is not confcious to any thing that is done there, she underftands no more how the Infant is form'd than itself doth ; but if God hath beftow'd upon us any peculiar Gift or Endowment wherein we excel others, as Strength, or Beauty, or Activity, we ought to give him fpecial Thanks for it; but not to think the better of ourselves therefore, or defpife them that want iu

Now because these bodily Perfedions being common Bleffings, we are apt not at all to consider them, or not to set ajuil Value on them; and because the Worth of Things is best difcern*d by their want, it v/ould be ufeful fometimes to imagine or suppose ourselves, by fom^ Accident, to be deprived of one of our Limbs or Senfes, as ii Hand, or a FooCj or an Eye, for then we cannot

not but be sensible that we (hould be in worfe Condition than now we are, and that we should foon find a difference between two Hands and one Hand, two Eyes and one Eye, and that two excel one as much in Worth as they do in Number ; and yet, if we could fpare the Ufe of the loft Part, the Deformity and Unfightlinefs of such a Defedt in the Body would alone be very grievous to us. Again, which is less, suppose we only that our Bodies want of their juft Magnitude, or that they or any of our Members are crooked or diflorted, or difproportionate to the rest, either in Excefs or Defed:; nay, which is least of all, that the due Motion of any one Part be perverted, as, but of the Eyes in fquinting, the Eye-lids in twinkling, the Tongue in ftammering, these things are such Blemifhes and Offences to us, by making us Gazing-ftocks to others, and Objeds of their Scorn or Derifion, that we could be content to part with a good Part of our Eftates to repair such Defeds or heal such Infirmities. these things consider'd, and duly weigh'd, would furely be a great and effectual Motive to excite in us Gratitude for this Integrity of our Bodies, and to efteem it no small Bleffing, I say, a Bleffmg and Favour of God to US; for some there be that want it, and why might not we have been of that Number? God was no way obliged to beflow it upon us.

And

And as we are to give Thanks for the Integrity of our Body, so are we likewife for the Health of it, and found Temper and constitution of all its Parts and Humours; Health being the principal Bleffing of this Life, without which we cannot enjoy or take Comfort in any things befide.

Neither are we to give Thanks alone for the first Collation of these Benefits, but alfo for their Prefervation and Continuance. God preferves our Souls in Life, and defends us from Dangers and fad Accidents, which do so befet us on every iide, that the greatest Circumfpedion in the World could not fecure us, did not his good Providence continually watch over us ; we may be said to walk and converfe in the midft of Snares ; befides, did we but duly consider the Make and Frame of our Bodies, what a multitude of minute Parts and Veffels there are in them, and how an Obftrudion in one redounds to. the Prejudice of the whole, we could not but wonder how so curious an Engine as Man's Body could be kept in Tune one Hour as we ufe it, much less hold out so many Years; how it were possible it should endure such Hardfhips, such Blows, so many Shocks and Concuffions, nay, such Violences and Outrages as are offered it by our frequent ExccfTes, and not be diforder'd and rendered ufclefs; and acknowledge the tranfcendent Art and Skill of him who so put it together, as to render it thus firm and durable.

Infer, z.

Ifjfer, 2. Secondly, Have a care thou doft not by any vicious Pradice deface, marr, or deftroy the Workmanfliip of God ; so ufe this Body as to preferve the Form and Comelinefs, the Health and Vigor of it.

I. For the Form and Beauty of the Body, whiph Mankind generally is fond enough of, and which must be acknowledg'd to be a natural Endowment and Blefiing of God, a thing defirable, which all Men take Complacency in, which renders Perfons gracious and acceptable in the Eyes of others -, of which yet we do not observe that brute beasts take any notice at all : Of this I (hall observe, that outward Beauty is a fign of inward; and that handfome P^erfons are naturally well inclin'd, till they do either debauch themselves, or are corrupted by others, and then with their Manners they marr their Beauty too ; for a Man may observe, and ealily difcern, that as Perfons are better or worfe inclin'd, the very Air of their Vifage.v^ill alter much -, and that vicious Courfes, defacing the inward Pulchritude of the Soul, do cha?2ge even the outward Coun- * Z?r. Morft. tenance into an abhor r d Hue "* ; as is evident in the Vices of Intemperance and Anger, and may, by fagacious Perfons, be obferv'd in others alfo. No better Cofmeticks than a fevere Temperance and Purity, a real and unaffedted -Modedy and Humility, a gracious Temper and

Calmnefs

Calmnefs of Spirit, a fincere and univerfal Charity ; no true Beauty without the Signatures of these Graces in the very Countenance ; they therefore who thro* the contrary Vices do deface and blot out this natural Character and Imprefs, and do Violence to their own Inclinations, that facrifice this Jewel to their Lufts, that rejedt this Gift of God, and undervalue the Favour of Man, aggravate their Sin and Mifery, and purchafe Hell at fomewhat a dearer Rate than others do ; and those that have but a mean Portion of this Gift, are the more obliged by virtuous Practices, not only to preferve, but to improve it. Virtue ( as Cicero observes ) if it; could be ktn with corporeal Eyes, admira-' biles flit Atnores excitaret ; it would excite a wonderful hove oj itjelf, ^y the Signatures it^ there impreffes, it is in some measure visible in the Faces of those that pra.6tife it, and so must needs impart a Beauty and Amiablenefs to them.

T>iogenes Laertius , in the Life of Socrates , tells us , that the Philofopher was wont to advife young Men, (Tuv^'J(2c; •ii^.r^itr^^ic^i-, often to behold themselves in their Looking-Glaffes or Mirrors. Grammercy, Socrates, that is good Coimfel indeed ! will our young Gentlemen and Ladies be ready to say: We like it very well , and we pradlife accordingly : And it seems we are injurioufly tax'd and reprehended

by

by Divines for fpendlng (o much Time between a Comb and a Glafs. Be not over hafty, take what remains along with you : Mark the End for which the Philofopher exhorts this,

^oLfhlct T ^a&^eicw '^^}i^?iv^Tcievy I'hat if they be handfome^ they might appro^ce thcmjehes worthy of their Form ; but if they be otherwife^ they may by Difcipline and Injiitution hide their Z)^- formity ; and so by their virtuous Behaviour compenfate the Hardnefs of their Favour, and by the Pulchritude of their Souls make up what is wanting in the Beauty of their Bodies; and truly I believe a virtuous Soul hath Influence upon its Vehicle, and adds a Luftrc even to the outward Man, (l:iining^ forth in the very Face.

2. So ufe the Body as to preferve the Health and Vigor, and consequently prolong the Life of it ; these are Things that all Men covet ; no more effedlual Means for the Maintenance and Prefervation of them than a regular and virtuous Life. That Health is impaired by Vice, daily Experience fufficiently evinceth ; 1 need not fpend Time to prove what no Man doth or can deny. And as for Length of Days, we find by the same Experience, that intemperate and diforderly Perfons are, for the most part, -(hort-liv'd > moreover, immoderate Cares and Arujciety are obferv'd ^ fuddenly to bring grey

Hairs

Hairs upon Men, which are ufually the Signs and Forerunners of Death j and therefore the way to live long must needs be in all Points to ufe our Bodies so as is most agreeable to the Rules of Temperance, and Purity, and right reason ; every Violence offered to it weakens and impairs it, and renders it less durable and lafting. One Means there is which Phyficians take notice of as very effedtual for the Prefefvation of Health, which I cannot here otnit, that is, a quiet and chearful Mind, not afflifted with violent Paflions , or diftraded with immoderate Cares, for these have a great and ill Influence upon the Body ; now, how a Man can have a quiet and chearful Mind under a great Burden and Load of Guilt, I know not, unless he be very ignorant , or have a feared Confcience ; it concerns us therefore, even^ upon this Account, to be careful of our Converfation, and to keep our Confciences void of Offence both toward God and toward Men.

Infer, 3. "Thirdly^ Did God make the Body ? let him have the Service of it, Rom, xii. i. I be* feech youy Brethren^ by the Mercies of God^ that you present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God y which is your reafonable Service. How we should do that, St. Chryfofiom tells us in his Commentary upon this Place,

fx^Sip yj yXoooSoL XctKivrod alay^uy 5^ "^yve ^ur^ts-

Q\Q'H^u'mfj{^^ &c. Let the Eye behold no evil things and it is made a Sacrifice \ let the Hongue speak no filthy Word^ and it becomes an Oblation ; let the Hand do no unlawful ABion^ and you render it a Holocauft. Tet it is not enough thus to refirain them from Evily but they mufi alfo be employ d and exercisd in doing that which is good 'y the Hand in giving Almsy the tongue in blejfing them that curfe us and defpite fully ufe us ; the Ear in hearkening to divine LeBures aiid Difcourfes, I Cor. vi. 20. Glorify God in your Body^ or with your Body^ and in your Spirit^ which are God's-, and that not by Redemption only, of which the Apoftle there speaks, but by Creation alfo: Rom, vi, 13. Neither yield ye your Members as Inflruments oj Unrighteoujnejs unto Siny but as Infiruments of Righteoufnefs wito God, And again , ver. 1 9, Even jo now yield your Members Servants of Righteoufnejs unto Holinefs, 1 {hall instance in two Members, which are especially to be guarded and reftrain'd from Evil, and employ'd in the Service of God.

Firfiy The Eye, We must turn away our

Eyes from beholding Vanity , as David pray'd

'God would his, Tfal, exix. 37. We muil make a

Covenant with our Eyes^, as Job did, Job xxxi. i.

these

384 ThWisBOM of GOD Partll.

these are the Windows that let in exterior Ob-* jeds to the Soul ; by these the Heart is afFefted ; this way Sin entered first into the World j our first Parent faw that the ^ree and its Fruit was pleafant to the Eyes^ and so was invited to take and eat it. There are four Sins especially for which the Eye is noted, as either difcovering themselves in the Eyes, or whose Temptations enter in by, and so give Denomination to the Eye.

1. There is d, proud Eye, Pro v. xxx. 13. 'Tbere is a Generation, O how lofty are their Eyes I And their Eye4ids are lifted up. Chap. vi. 17. A proud hook is reckoned the first of those fix things that God h^ieSyPfaL xviii. 27. God (the Pfalmiji faith) will bring down proud or high Looks. Pfal. ci. 5. Him that hath a high hook and a proud Heart (faith David) I will not suffer. And in Pfalm cxxxi. I. he faith of himself, that his Heart is not haughty, nor his Eyes lofty. By which Places it appeareth that Pride (heweth forth itself in the Eyes especially, and that they are as it were the Seat or Throne of it.

2. There is a wanton Eye, which the Prophet Ifaiah speaks of in his third Chapter, at the i6th Verfe, because the Daughters of ^erujdlem ivalk with Jlretched-out Necks and wanton Eyes. The Apoftle St. Peter, in his Second Epiftlc, Chap. ii. 24. mentions Eyes full of Adultery ; for by these Cafements enter in such Objeds as

2 may

may provoke and ftir up adulterous Thoughts in the Mind, as they did in David's -, and likewife impure Thoughts conceived in the Heart, may discover themselves by the Motions of the Eye ; and therefore in this refpedt we should do well, with holy Job, to make a Covenant with our Eyes, not to gaze upon any Objedl which may tempt us to any inordinate Appetite or Deiire 5 for our Saviour tells us, it were better to pluck out our Right Eye than that it should be an Offence to us ; which I suppose refers to this Matter , because it immediately follows those Words, He that looketb upon a Woman to luji after her, hath already committed Adultery with her in his Heart,

3. There Is a covetous Eye, By Covetoufnefs I understand, not only a defiring what is another Man*s, which is forbidden in the Tenth Commandment, but alfo an inordinate Delire of Riches, which the Apoftle St. John seems to understand in his first Epiftle, Chap. ii. 16. by the Lu[i of the Eye, And Covetoufnefs may well be call'd the LuJi of the Eye, because, i. The Temptation or tempting Objedl enters by the Eye ; so the feeing the Wedge of Gold and BabyloniJJo Garment ftirr'd up the covetous Defire in Achan, 2. because all the Fruit a Man reaps of Riches, more than will furnifli his Neceffities and Conveniences, is the feeding of his Eye, or the pleasure he takes in the beholding of them, Ecclef, v. 11.

C c When

When Goods increafe^ &c. what Good is there to the Owners thereof^ faving the beholding them with their Eyes ?

4. There is an envious Eyey which by otir Saviour is caird an evil Eye, Matth, xx. 15. Is thine Eye evil because I am good ? That is, envieft thou thy Brother because I am kind to him ? And Chap. vii. 22. one of those evil things v^hich proceed out of the Heart and defile a Man, is an evil Eye, Envy is a repining at the Profperity or Good of another, or Anger and Difpleafure at any Good of another v^hich we want, or any Advantage another hath above us ; as in the Parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard, those that came in firfl envy'd the last, not because they receiv'd more than they> but because they receiv'd equal Wages for less Time ; those that are fubjecSt to this Vice cannot endure to see another Man thrive, and are apt to think his Condition better than theirs, when indeed it is not.

Let us then so govern our Eyes that we discover by them none of these Vices 5 let the Humility and Purity of our Minds appear even in our outward Looks j let neither Pride nor Luft manifest themselves in the posture or Motions of our Eyes J let us have a care that these Members be neither the Inlets nor Outlets of any of the foremention'd Vices, that they neither give Admiffion to the Temptation, nor be expreffive of the

Concep-

Conception of them ; let Us employ them in reading the Word of God and other Books, fpr the Increafe of our Knowledge and Diredion of our Prad:ice ; in diligently viewing and contemplating the Works of the Creation, that we may difcefn and admire the Footfteps of the divine wisdom, eafily to be trac'd in the Formation, disposition, and Defignations of them; let us take notice of any extraordinary Events and EfFeds of God's Providence towards curfelves or others, perfonal or national, that as they are the Iffues of his Mercy or Juftice, they may Ilir up fuicable Affedions in us of Thankfulnefs or Fear • let those fad and miferable Objedls that present them-, selves to our Sight move us to Pity and Commit feration ; and let our Eyes fometimes be exercised in weeping for the Miferies and Calamities of others, but especially for our own and their Sins.

Secondly y Another Member I {l:iall mention is, the To?2guey which as it is the chief Inftrument of Speech, so it may be well or ill employ'd in the Exercife of that Adtion, and therefore stands irt need of Diredlion and Reftraint. I remember I once heard from an m^tmoxxs Aitatomiji oi Padua this observation, that there are but two Members in the Body that have a natural Bridle, both which do very much need it ; the Tongue, and another I shall not name ; the Signification whereof may be, that they are not to be let loofe, but diligently curbed and held in. That the Tongue

C c 2 needs

388 neWisj^ouof GOD Part IL

needs a Bridle, you will readily grant, if you read what .the Apoftle St. James hath written of it. Chap. iii. 6. The Tongue is a fire ^ a world of Iniquity : so is the Tongue among our Members^ that it defileth the whole Body, andjetteth on fire the course of Nature^ and is set on fire of Hell, For every KindofBeaftSy and of Birds ^ and of Serpent Sy and of things in the Sea^ is tamedy and hath been tamed of Mankind \ but the Tongue can no Man tame^ it is an unruly Evil, full of deadly Poifon, For the better Government of the Tongue, I shall note some Vices of Speech which must carefully be avoided ; first of all. Loquacity or Garrulity, this the Contrivance of our Mouths fuggefts to us; our Tongues are fenced and guarded with a double Wall or Mound of Lips and Teeth, that our Words might not rafhly and unadvifedly flip out j then Nature hath furnifh'd us with two Ears and but one Tongue, to intimate that we mufl hear twice so much as we speak. Why Loquacity is to be avoided the wife Man gives us a sufficient reason, Prov, x. 19. In the multitude of words there waiiteth not Sin, And, Ecclef. v. 7. In many words there are divers vanities. To which we may add another, of great Force with most Men, viz, that it hath been always efteem^d an EfFed: and Argument of Folly, Ecclef, v. 3. yf FooPs Voice is hiown by multitude of Words, And on the contrary, to be of few Words is a Sign of wisdom ; and he that is wife enough to be filent, tho' a Fool, may pass undifcover'd j befides all this,

a talkative

Part IL in the Creation. 389

a talkative Perfon must needs be impertinent, and speak many idle Words, and so render himself burdenfome and odious to Company, and may perchance run himself upon great Inconveniences, by blabbing out his own or others Secrets; for a Word once uttered, fuglt irrevocabile^ is irrevocable, whatever the consequence of it be ; great need therefore have we to set a Watch over our Mouths^ and to keep the Door of our hips, Pfal. cxli. 1. and not suffer our *//^^'^>' ^^' longues ^ ^^r^^')^eiv tn<; dtxvpict^ wit. as IJbcrates phrafeth it.

Secondly^ Lying, or falfe fpeaking. There is difference between mentiri and mendaciwn dicere^ that is, lying, and fpeaking of an Untruth, or a thing that is falfe. Mentiri y is contra mentem ire, which, though it be no good Etymology of the Word, is a good Notion of the thing ; that is, to go against one's Mind, or speak what one does not think.

As Homer expreffes it, to conceal one thing in the Mind, and speak another with the Tongue j heuice a Man may speak an Untruth and yet not lie, when he thinks he speaks the Truth j and

C c 3 on

true and yet lie, when he speaks what he thinks not to be true. The Tongue was made to be the J7idex of the Mind, Speech the Interpreter of Thought, therefore there ought to be a perfedt Harmony and Agreement between these twos so that lying is a great Abufe of Speech, and a pervertino- the very End of it, which was to communicate our Thoughts one to another j it hath alfo an ill Principle for the most part, proceeding either from Bafenefs of Spirit^ or Cowardice^ as in them that have committed a Fault, and deny it for fear of Punifliment or Rebuke ; and therefore the ancient Perjians^ as Xenopkon tells us in his Kyp« TTsttS^eia, made it one of the three thingc they diligently taught their Children, which were linT^&iVy 59 To|<^'«r, ?^ aMi^v&tV to Ridc^ to Shoot y and to /peak thel'ruth: Or from Ccvetoufnefs^ as in Tradefmen, who falfly commend their Commodities, that they may vend them for a greater Price; or from Vanity and Vain-glory^ in them who falfly boaft of any Quality or Adion of their own. It is odious both to God and Man ; to God, Trov, vi. 17. A lying Tongue is one of those fix or feven things that are an Abomination to him ; to Men, as Hojner witnelTeth in the Verfe preceding the fore-quoted.

Part 11. ?>/ ^>6^ Creation. 391

^E^^CP^ ;S jLui TteLVQ^ ofjut)^ AiStto 'TTuAmy Sec,

He that tells Lies is as hateful to me as the

Gates of Hell or Death. The Pradice of

lying is a diabolical Exercife, and they that ufe it are the Devil's Children, as our Saviour tells us, yohn viii. 44. Te are of your Father the Devils 6^c. for he is a Liar^ and the Father of it, An4, lastly, it is a Sin that excludes out of Heaven, and depreffes the Soul into Hell. All Liars Jloall have their Part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimjioney which is the fecond Death.

T'hirdlyy Another Vice, or Abufe of Speech, or vicious Adion, to which the Tongue is inftrumental, is Slandering -, that is, raifing a falfe Report of any Man, tending to his Defamation j this might have been comprehended under the former Head, being but a kind of lying, proceeding from Enmity or lU-v^illj it is a very great Injury to our Neighbour, Mens Reputation being as dear to them as Life itself 5 so that it is grown to be a Proverb among the Vulgar, Take away my good Name and take away my Life, And that which enhanfes this Injury is, that it is irreparable ; we cannot, by any contrary Declaration, so clear the Innocency of our Neighbour, as wholly to extirpate the pre-conceiv'd Opinion out of the Minds of those to whom our Confeffion comes 5 and many will remain whom the C c 4 Calumny

Calumny hath reached, to whom the Vindication probably will not extend, the Pravity of Man's Nature being more apt to fpread and divulge an ill Report than to flop and lilence it. I might instance in flattering of others and boafting of ourselves, for two Abufes of Speech^but they may both be referred to lying, the one to pleafe others, and puft them up with Self-conceit, and a falfe Opinion, that they have some excellent Quality or Endowment, which they want, or have not in such a degree, or that they are better thought of by others than indeed they are, and more honoured ; the other, to gain more Honour than is due to ourselves. Neither yet is boafting only of what we have not, but alfo what we have, condemned and difallow'd by God and Men, as being contrary to that Humility and Modefty that ought to be in us, Prov. xxvii. 2. Let aitother Man praise thee^ and not thine own Mouthy a Stranger^ and not thine own Lips, And Mora* lifts proceed so far as to cenfure all unneceflary 'Tn^oLVTXiTKoyict^ that is, talking of a Man's self,

Fourthly, Obfcene and impure Words are another vicious Effe(5t of the Tongue ; those are principally the (toli^^\ Ko')s>iy rotten Speeches the Apoftle speaks of, Eph, v. 29. such ^s chafte Ears abhor, which tend only to the depraving and corrupting the Hearers, and are to be ftudioufly 1 ^ ar\c}

and carefully avoided by all that pretend to Chriftianity, Eph, v. 3. But Fornication^ and all Uncleannejs^ let it not be once nanid among you.

Fifthly^ Curfing, and railing or reviling Words, are alfo a great Abufe of Speech, and outrageous Effeds and Expreflions of Malice and Wickednefs," PfaL x. 7. The Pfalmiji makes it Part of the Character of a wicked Man, that his Mouth is full of Curfing', which Paflage we have quoted by the Apoftle, Roin, iii. 14. whose Mouth is full of Curfing and Bitternefs,

Sixthly, Swearing, and irreverently ufing the Name of God in common discourse and Converfe, is another Abufe of the Tongue 5 to which I might add, vehement AiTeverations upon flight and trivial Occafions. I do not deny, but in a Matter of weight and moment, which will bear out such Atteftation, and where Belief will not be obtain'd without them, and yet it may much. import the Hearer or Speaker that his Words be believ'd, or where the Hearer would not otherwife think the Matter so momentous or important as indeed it is, Proteftations and AiTeverations, yea, Oaths, may lawfully be us'd 3 but to call God to witnefs to an Untruth, or a Lie perhaps^ or to appeal to him on every trivial Occafion in conamon discourse, cuftomarily, without

any

any consideration of what we say, is one of the highefl Indignities and Affronts that dan be offered him, being a Sin to which there is no Temptation ; for it is so far from gaining Belief (which is the only thing that can with any (hew of reason be pleaded for it) that it rather creates Diffidence and Diftruft ; for as multa jidem promijfa levant^ io multa jur amenta too -y it being become a Proverb, lie that willfwear will lye j and good reason there is for it, for he that fcruples not the Breach of one of God's Commands, is not likely to make Confcience of the Violation of another.

Lajily^ (for I will name no more) fcurrilous Words, fcoffing and jeering, flouting and taunting, are to be cenfur'd as vicious Abufes of Speech.

This Scoffing and Derifion proceeds from Contempt, and that of all Injuries Men do most impatiently bear, nothing offends more or wounds deeper ; and therefore what greater Violation of that general Rule of Chriflian Pradlice, to do to ethers a^ we would theyjhould do unto us ? This Injury of being derided the Pfalmijl himself complains of, PfaL Ixix. II, 12. I became a Proverb to them. They that fit in the Gate /peak againji me^ and I was the Song of the Drunkards, And PfaL xxxv. 15. according to the Church Tranflation, The very AbjeBs came together againfl me unawares^ making Mows at me^ and ceafed not. And the

Prophet

Prophet "Jeremy^ Jer. xx. 7. I am in Derifion daily ^ every 07ie mocketh me. And tho' there may be ibme Wit shewn in fcoffing and jefting upon others, yet is it a Pradiice inconfiftent with true wisdom. The Scorner and the Wife Man are frequently opposed in Scripture, Prov, ix. 8. and Chap. xiii. i, <S?r. It is a proverbial Saying, ^he greatejl Clerks are not always the wifejl Men. I thijjk the Saying might as often be verify'd of the greatest B^its, Scorning, in that Gradation in the first Pfalmy is set down as the higheft Step of Wickednefs. And Solomon tells us, that Judgments are prepardfor the Scorners,

You will say to me, how then must our Tongues be employed ? I answer, j. In Praifes and Thankfgiving unto God, PfaL ^xxv, 28. ^nd my Tongue Jhall /peak of thy Righteoufnefs ajid of thy Praifes all the Day long. Parallel whereto is ver, 24. oi PfaL Ixxi. Indeed the Book oiPfalms is in a great measure but an Exercife of or Exhortation to this Duty. 2. We must exercife our Tongues in talking of all his wondrous Works : PfaL cxlv. 5> 6. / mil speak of the glorious Honour of thy Majefy, and of thy wondrous Works, 3. In Prayer to God. 4. In Confeffion of him and his Religion, and publickly owning it before Men, whatever the Hazard be. 5. In teaching, inftrufting, and counfelhng of others, 6. In exhorting them. 7. In comforting them that need it. 8. In reproving them. AIJ w^hich

Parti-

396 Hdc Wisdom o/GOD Part If.

Particulars I might enlarge upon, but because they come in here only as they refer to the Tongue,, it may fuffice to have mentioned them fummarily.

^hirdlyy Let us hence learn duly to prize and value our Souls. Is the Body such a rare Piece, what then is the Soul ? The Body is but the Hufk or Shell, the Soul is the Kernel , the Body is but the Cafk, the Soul the precious Liquor contained in it ', the Body is but the Cabinet, the Soul the Jewel; the Body is but the Ship or Veflel, the Soul the Pilot ; the Body is but the Tabernacle, and a poor Clay Tabernacle or Cottage too, the Soul the Inhabitant; the Body is but the Machine or Engine, the Soul that ov^v 77, that adluates and quickens it ; the Body is but the dark Lantern, the Soul or Spirit is the Candle of the Lord that burns in it: And feeing there is such difference between the Soul and the Body in refped of Excellency, furely our better Part challenges our greatest Care and Diligence to make Provifion for it. Bodily Provifion is but half Provifion, it is but for one Part of a Man, and that the meaner and more ignoble too, if we consider only the Time of this Life ; but if we conlider a future Eftate of endlefs Duratipn after this Life, then bodily Provifion will appear to be, I do not say, quarter Provifion, but no Provifion at all in comparifon, there being no Proportion between

tween so short a Period of Time aad the infinite Ages of Eternity ; let us not then be so foolifh as to employ all our Thoughts and beftow all our Time and Pains about cherifliing, accommodating and gratifying our Bodies, in wakwg Provi- Jion for the Flefi to fulfil the Lujls thereof^ as the Apoftle phrafeth it, and suffer our Souls to lie by negleded in a miferable, and poor, and blind, and paked Condition. Some Philofophers will not allow the Body to be an effential Part of Man, but only the Veflel or Vehicle of the Soul; Anima cujufque ejl quifque \ the Soul is the Man. Tho' I would not be so unequal to it, yet I must needs acknowledge it to be but an inferior Part; it is therefore so to be treated, so dieted and provided, as to render it most calm and compliant with the Soul, most tradable and obfequious to the Didates of reason ; not so pamper'd and indulged, as to encourage it to cast its Rider, and to take the Reins into its own Hand, and ufurp Dominion over the better Part, the td h'}^ujovt}dvy to fink and deprefs it into a fordid Compliance with its own Lufts, Atque affigere humi droinc^ farticulam aura.

This is our Duty ; but alas ! what is our Pradice? Our great Partiality towards our Bodies, and Negled of our Souls, (hews clearly which Part we prefer ; we are careful enough of wounding or maiming our Bodies, but we make bold -to la(h and wound our Souls daily j for every Sin

we

^98 Tl)eWisDoM of GOD Part IL i

we commkj being contrary to its Nature, is a

teal Stripe, yea, a mortal Wound to the Soul j

and we shall find it to be so, if our Confciences

be once awaken'd to feel the Sting and Smart of

it. We are induftrious enough to preferve our

Bodies from Slavery and Thraldom, but we make

nothing of fuffering our Souls to be Slaves and

Drudges to our Lufts, and to live in the vileft

Bondage to the most degenerate of Creatures, the

Devil. We are thrifty and provident enough,

not to part with any thing that may be ferviceable to our Bodies under a good consideration,

and we so efteem them as that we will part with

all we have for the Life of them ; but we make

little Account of what is most beneficial to our

Souls, the Means of Grace and Salvation, the

Word of God, and Duties of his Worfhip and

Service ; nay, we can be content to fell our Souls

themselves for a Trifle, for a thing of nothing,

yea, for what is worfe than nothing, the fatisfying of an inordinate and unreafonable Appetite

or Paffion. We highly efteem and stand much

upon our Nobility, our Birth and Breeding, tho'

we derive nothing from our Anceftors but our

Bodies and corporeal Qualities ; and it is ufeful

so far to value and improve this Advantage, as to

provoke us to imitate the good Examples of our

Progenitors, not to degenerate from them, nor

to do any thing unworthy of our Breeding ; and

yet the divine Original of our Souls, which are

Beams from the Father of Light, and the imme-

I diate

diate OfF-spring of God himself, tS ;^ 3§ yiyo^ idfjiAvy hath little Influence upon us to engage us to walk worthily of our Extraftion, and to do nothing that is bafe or ignoble, and unfuitable to the Dignity of our Birth.

You will say, how shall we manifefl: our Care of our Souls ? What shall we do for them ? I answer, the same we do for our Bodies.

Firjiy We feed our Bodies, our Souls are alfa to be fed ; the Food of the Soul is Knowledge, especially Knowledge in the Things of God, and the Things that concern its eternal Peace and Happinefs; the Dodrine of Chriftianity, the Word of God read and preach'd, i Pet, iL 2. As new born Babes defire the [nicer e Milk of the Word^ that ye may grow thereby^ Heb. v. I2. The Apoftle speaks both of Milk and of strong Meat. Milk he there calls the Principles of the Dodrine of Chrift. And again, i Cor, ii. 3. I have fed you with Milky and not with Meat ; for hitherto ye were not able to bear it. So we see in the Apoftle's Phrafe, feeding of the Flock, is teaching and inftruding of them. Knowledge is the Foundation of Pradice > it is impoffible to do God s Will before we know it ; the Word must be received into an honeft and good Heart, and underftood, before any Fruit can be brought forth.

Secondly,

400 7X^ Wi s D o M of GOD Part IL

Secondly^ We heal and Cure our Bodies, when they are inwardly iick, or outwardly harm'd : Sin is the Sicknefs of the Soul. Matth ix. 12. T^hey that be whole need not a Phyftcian^ but they that be Jick, faith our Saviour by way of Similitude ; which he explains in the next Verfe, / am not come to call the Righteous^ but Sinners to Refentance. For the Cure of this Difeafe, an humble, ferious, hearty Repentance, is the only Phyfick ; not to expiate the Guilt of it, but to qualify us to partake of the Benefit of that Atonement which our Saviour Chrift hath made by the Sacrifice of himself, and reftore us to the Favour of God, which we had forfeited, it being, as much as in us lies, an undoing again what we have done.

Thirdly^ We cloath and adorn our Bodies j indeed too much Time and too many Thoughts we beftow upon that ; our Souls alfo are to be cloath'd with holy and virtuous Habits, and adorn'd with good Works, i Pet, v. 5. Be ye cloath' d with Humility, And in the same Epiftle, Chap. ii. 2. he exhorts Women to adorn themfehes , not with that outward adorning of plaiting the Hair^ and wearing Gold^ &c. but with the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit ^ which is in the Sight of God of great Price :

And.

And in Rev. xix. 8. The Righteoufnefs of the Saints is caird fine Linen. And the Saints are said to be cloath'd in white Raijnent. Matth. xxiii. 1 1. Works of Righteoufnefs and a Converfation becoming the Gofpel is call'd a Wedding Garment, Colojf.'in. 10. Put on the ?iew Ma?i. And again. Put on therefore^ as the EleB of God^ Bowels of Mercy, Meeknefs, &c. On the contrary, vicious Habits and finful A6lions are compar'd to filthy Garments. So, Zech. iii. 3. J of ma the High- Prieft is said to be cloath'd with filthy Garments \ which in the next Verfe are interpreted his Ini-

, quities, either perfonal, or of the People whom he reprefented : / have caufed thy Iniquity to pass

from thee^ and will cloath thee with Change of Raiment,

Fourthly, We arm and defend our Bodies, and our Souls have as much need of Armour as they; for the Life of a Chriftian is a continual Warfare ; and we have potent and vigilant Enemies to encounter withal, the Devil, the World, and this corrupt Flefh we carry about us ; we had need therefore to take to us the Chriftian Panoply, to put on the whole Armour of God, that we may withfand in the evil day, and having done all, may f and \ having our Loins girt with T'ruth, and having on the Br eaf -plate of Righteoifnefi, and our Feet Jhod with the Preparation of the Gofpel oj Peace. 'Above aM, taking the Shield of Faith \ and for an Helmet^ the Hope of Salvation, and the Eword of the Spij'it^ which u the Word of God, Eph. vi. 13, 14.

D d He

He that with this Chriftian Armour manfully fights against and repels the Temptations and Affaults of his fpiritual Enemies ; he that keeps his Garments pure, and his Confcience void of Offence towards God and towards Man, (hall enjoy perfedt Peace here, and Aflurance for ever. T^zcitus faith of the Finnic a northern People> that they were feciiri adverfus homines, feciiri adverfm Deos, They need not fear v>^hat God or Man could do to them, because they were in as bad a Condition as could conlift with living in the World 3 they could not be banifli'd into a worfe Country, nor put into worfe Circumftances than they were in already. I might say of the Man that keeps a good Confcience, that he is fecure against God and Man ; not in that Senfe the Jp//zni were, but fecure of any Evil befalling him from either. God can do him no Harm, not for want of Power, but for want of Will, which is regulated by his Truth and Juftice. He is alfo fecure in refpeft of Men, because he is under the Protedion of the Almighty; and if any there be that would do him Harm, they (hall either be reftrain'd by the divine Providence, or if they be permitted to injure him, it shall tend only to the Exercife and Imiprovement of his Faith and Patience, and enhanfing his future Reward at that great Day, when the Almighty ihall difpenfe Aureohe to those Champions who have fignaliz'd their Valour and Fidelity by heroick Aftions, or patient Sufferings of unworthy things for his fake. 3. A good Confcience not only fecures a Man

from

from God and Men, but from himself tooj there is no Peace to the Wicked ^ faith my Gody no inward Peaces such a Man is at odds with himself ; for the Commandments of God being agreeable to the Nature of Man, and perfedly conformable to the Didlates of right reason,* Man's Judgmenc gives Sentence with the divine Law, and condemns him when he violates any of them -, and so the Sinner becomes an Heauto?2timoriimenos, a Tormentor of himself Prima ejl hac ultio^ quod Je Jiidice nemo nocem abfohitiir. No guilty Perfon is abfolv'd at his own Tribunal, himself being Judge.

Neither let any profligate Perfon, who hath bidden Defiance to his Confcience, and is at War with himself, think to take Sanduary in Atheifm, and because it imports him highly there should be no God, ftoutly deny that there is any. For first, fuppofing that the Exigence of a Deity were not demonftrably or infallibly prov'd (as it most certainly is) yet he cannot be fure of the contrary, that there is none. For 7io Man can he fure df a pure Negative, namely^ that such a thing is noty unless he iiuill either pretend to have a certain Knowledge of all things that are or may be^ than which nothing can be more monjlroufly and ridtcu^ loujly arrcga7it ; or elj'e^ unlcfs he he fure that the being of nsjhat he denies doth imply a ContradiBion^ for which there is not the leaf. Colour in this 'Cafe % the true Notion of God conffiing in this, that he is a Being of all polTible Perfection, that I may borrow my Lord Biihop of Chefers Words, in his discourse of natural Religion, Page 94.

D d 2 ^ Now

Now if he be not fure there is no Deity, he cannot be without son^e Sufpicion and Fear that there may be one.

Secondly, If tloere Jkoidd be a Deity ^ so holy^ and juji^ and powerful, as is Jupposdy what Vengeance and Indigfiation may such vile Mifcreants and Re^ bels expeB, who have made it their Bujinefs to banijh him out of the World, who is the great Creator and Governor of it \ to undermine his Being, and eradicate all Notions of him out of their own and other Mens Minds ; to provoke his Creatures and Vaffals to a Contempt of him, a flighting of his Fear and Worfoip, as being such imaginary Chimaera's as are fit only to keep Fools in awe ? Certainly as this is the higheji Provocation that any Man can be guilty of fojhatl it be punifod with theforefi Vengeance.

Now a flender Sufpicion of the Exiftence of a Being , the Denial whereof is of so fad consequence, must needs difturb the Atheift's Thoughts, and fill him with Fears, and qualify and allay all his Pleafures and Enjoyments, and render him miferable even in this Life.

But on the other side, he that believes and owns a God, if there fdoiild be none, is in no danger of any bad Confequent 5 for all the Inconvenience of this Belief 'will be, that he may be hereby occafion'd to tye himself up tofome needlefs Refiraints during this Jkort T^ime of his hife^ wherein notwithfianding 2 there

Part 11. in the C r e at i o N. 405

there is, as to the present, much Peace, ^liet, a?id Safety ; and as to the future, his Error Jhall die with him, there being none to call him to an Account for his Mijlake. Thus far the Bifhop.

To which I shall add, that he not only suffers no Damage, but reaps a considerable Benefit from this Miftakej for during this Life he enjoys a pleafant Dream or Fancy of a future bleffed State, with the Thoughts and Expedlations whereof he folaces himself and agreeably entertains his Time, and is in no danger of being ever awakened out of it and convinced of his Error and Folly, Death making a full End of him.

FINIS,

Books printed for W. Inn\s and R. Manby.

PHilofophical Letters between the late learned Mr. Kaj and feveralof his ingenious Correfpondents, Natives and Foreigners; to which are added those of Francis IFilloughby Efq; the whole conj&fting of many curious Difcoveries and Improvement«; in the Hillory of Quadrupeds, Rirds, Fifhes, Infeds, Plants, Foffils, Fountains, i^'c. Publifh'd by Mr. D^r>^/7w. ^-vo. 1718.

Three Phyfico-Theological Difcourfes concerning, I. The primitive Chaos and Creation of the World. 11. The general Deluge, its causes and EfFedls. III. The Diflblution of the World, and future Conflagration ; wherein are largely difcufs'd, the Produdlion and Ufe of Mountains, the Original of Fountains, of form'd Stones and Sea-Fifhes Bones and Shells found in the Earth, the Effefts of particular Floods and Inundations of the Sea, the Eruptions of Vulcano's, the Nature and causes of Earthquakes ; alfo an hiilorical Account of those two late remarkable ones in Jamaica ^ind England', with pra6lical Inferences ; illulbated with Copper Plates. By John Ray, late Fellow of the Royal Society. The 5'th Edit. ^vo. 1732.

Joannis Rail Synopfis Methodica Avium & Pifcium ; Opus Poflhumum, quod vivus recenfuit & perfecit ipfe infigniffimus Author: in quo multas species, in ipfius Ornithologia & Itchthyologia defideratas, adjecit : Methodumque fuam Pifcium Naturae magis convenientem reddidit. ^Cum Appendice. & Iconibus. 1713.

Phyfico-Theology : Or, A Demonfiration of the Being and Attributes of God from his Works of Creation ; with large Notes, and many curious observations. By Williafn Derhafn, Re^flor of Vpminfier in EJfex, Canon of Windjor^ and F. R. 5. The Eighth Edition, Svo. 1732.

Aflro-Theology : Or, A Demonftration of the Being and Attributes of God from a Survey of the Heavens ; illuftrated with Copper Plates. The Fifth Edition. By the same Author, S'jo. iyzS.

Philofophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, Audlore Ifaaco Newtono Equite Aurato. Editio terria, au61a & emcndata. 4/^.

Opticks : or, a Treatife of the Refleclicns, Refraftions, Inflexions, and Colours of Light. The Third Edition, correded. By Sir Jfaac NezvtoUy Kt. Svo.

Optice, five de Reflexionibus, Refracffionibus, Inflexionibus, & Coloribus Lucis. Libri tres, Authore Ifaaco Newtono, Equite Aurato. Latine reddidit Samuel Clarke, S. T. P. Editio fecunda au61ior. Szw.

Sir Ifaac Newto?i\ Algebra.

Epiftola ad amicum de Cotefii Tnvenlis, Curvarum ratione, qua2 cum Circulo & Hyperbola comparationem admittunt ; cui additur Appendix, auftore Hen, Pemberton, M. D. R. S. S. 4/^.

Philofophical

Books printed for W. Innys a?t'd R. Manby. ^

Philofophical Tranfacftions, giving some Account of the prefcnt Undertakings, Studies, and Labours of the Ingenious, in many confiderablc Parts of the World, from 1665 to 1727. Continu'd and publilh'd by Dr. Mort'uner. In 37 Vols. \to. N. B. There arc 432 Numbers, molt of which may be had feparate.

Philofophical Experiments and observations of the late eminent Dr. Robert Uookcy S. R. S. and Geom. Prof. Grefh. and eminent Virtuofo's in his Time ; with Copper Plates. Publifh'd by IV. Derham. F. R. S. %vo. \jz6.

The philofophical Works of the honourable Robert Boyle Efq; abridg'd, methodiz'd, and difposM under the general Heads of Phyficks, Staticks, Pneumaticks, Natural Hillory, Chymiftry, and Medicine ; the whole illuitrated with Notes, containing the Improvements made in the several Parts of natural and experimental Knowledge fmcc his Time. By Peter Shaw, M. D. 3 Vols. \to. 1725.

Perfuafive to a holy Life, from the Happinefs which attends it, both in this World and in the World to come. By Mr. Ray.

A Treatife of Algebra, in two Books ; the first treating of ths arithmetical, and the fecond of the geometrical Part. The Second Edition, with Additions. ^-^ Philip Ronayne, Gent. %vo. 1727.

EkxTicnta Arithmeticae Numerofas & Speciofae, in ufum Juventutis Academics, Audtore Edv. Wells, S. T. P. Editio altera Auflior, ^vo, 1726.

Introdu(flio ad Veram Phyficam. Authore Joanne Keill, M. D. Aftr. Prof. Sav. R. S. S. Editio quarta, %vo. 1719.

A new mathematical Didionary ; wherein is contain'd, not only the Explanation of the bare Terms, but likewife a Hiitory of thc- Rife, progress , State, Properties, ^c. of Things, both in pure Mathematicks and natural Philofophy, so far as it comes under a mathematical consideration, '^vo. 1726.

An EfTiy on Perfpe^tive. By W. J. 'sGravefande, ^c. 2>vo. 1724.

The religious Philofopher ; or the right Ufe of contemplating the Works of the Creator, ly?, In the wonderful Structure of animal Bodies, and in particular Man. zdly. In the no less wonderful and wife Formation of the Elements, tlieir various Effeds upon animal and vegetable Bodies. And, 3^/)', In the molt amazing Structure of the Heavens, with all its Furniture, design'd for the ConviAion of Atheifls and Infidels. By that learned Mathematician Dr. Neuwentyt : To which is preiix'd a Letter to the Tranflator, by the Reverend J T. Defaguliers, L. L. D. F. R. S. The Fourth Edition, adorn'd with Cuts. 3 Vols. '^vo.

An a^nalytick Treatife of conic Sedions, and their Ufe, for refolding ot Equations in determinate and indeterminate Problems, being jhe pofthumcus Works of the Marquis de rtiofpital, ^io. 1723.

The great and wonderful Worlds oi God humbly reprefented, and the jult and equal Diitributions of Providence demonltrated i with an Appendix concerning St. Paul. By an ancient Doftor oi Phyiiek. Zvo. 1727.

Allrono-

Books printed for W. Innys and R. Manby.

Aflronomical Principles of Religion, natural and revealM, in ninff Parts. I. Lemmata : Or, the known Laws of Matter and Motion. II. A particular Account of the Syftem of the Univerfe. III. The Truth of that Syilem briefly demonftrated. IV. Certain observations drawn from that Syftem. V. Probable Conjedlarcs of the Nature and Ufes of the several celeftial Bodies contain'd in the same Syftem. VI. Important Principles of natural Religion demonftrated from the foregoing observations. VII. Important Principles of divine Revelation conlirm'd from the foregoing Conjeflures. VIII. Such Inferences shewn to be the common Voice of Nature and reason, from the Teftimonies of the most considerable Perfons of all Ages. IX. A Recapitulation of the whole, with a large and ferious Addrefs to all, especially the Scepticks and Unbelievers of our Agei together with a Preface, of the Temper of Mind necefiarv for the discovery of divine Truth, and of the degree of Evidence that ought to be expe£led in divine Matters. By William WhiJioHy M. A. fometime Profeflbr of the Mathematicks in the Univerfity of Cambridge. Sz/o. 1725. .

Religion of Nature delineated. 4/^.

An Introduction to natural Philofophy, or philofophical Le(5lures read in the Univerfity of Oxford, A. D. 1 700. To which are added, the Demonftrations of Monfieur Huygens\ Theorems, concerning the centrifugal Force and circular Motion. By John Keill, M. D. Savilian Profeflbr of Aftronomy, F. R. S. The Second Edition. %v'o. 1726.

Dr. Robert Hook's pofthumous Works, in which the present Deficiency of natural Philofophy is difcours'd of, with the Methods of xendring it more certain and beneficial, ^c, Publifli'd by Richard Waller £fq; I olio.

Johannis Seldeni Jurifconfulti Opera omnia, tarn edita quam incdita, in tribus Voluminibus, collegit ac recenfuit, Vitam Auftoris, Prsefationes & Indices adjecit David Wilkim, S. T. P. Archidiaconus Sufl'olcienfis, Canonicus Cantuarienfis, Reverendiflimo in Chrifto Patri ac Domino Gulielmo, Divina Providentia Archiepifcopo Cantuarienfi, ^r. a Sacris Domefticis. In 6 Tom. Fol. Lo?id. 1726.

The philofophical Tranfaftions (from the Year 1720 to the Year J 732) abridg'd, and difpos'd under general Heads, by Mr. Rei d znd John Gray, A. M. F. R.'S. In two Volumes; being a Continuation of the Abridgment done by Mr. Lowtharp, Jones, and Motte.

^TF* ouf:

m

m^'

^isi»yi-^ »-